Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Process Systems Tools for the
               Development and Management of Environmentally and Economically Conscious
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9528675

Award Number: 9528675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Venkatasubramanian   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph F. Pekny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis J. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gintaras V. Reklaitis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9197,ECDM,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528675  Venkatasubramanian  Purdue Univ.      The chemical processing industry
              (CPI) constitutes one of the major competitive strengths of the US
              manufacturing sector, but it is also the source of the of the majority of the
              total US industrial output of hazardous wastes.  In order to maintain and
              enhance the global competitiveness of the CPI while ensuring a safe, clean, and
              sustainable environment, waste minimization and processing measures need to be
              fully integrated within the overall design and operation of future chemical
              manufacturing facilities.    The goal of this work is to develop and
              demonstrate computing based modeling, optimization and intelligent control
              methodologies which will facilitate such integrated designs and operations. 
              The work is aimed at the key issues which are characteristic of the batch
              thrust, the PI's plan to investigate model and optimization based process
              design methodology which takes into account a variety of relevant issues. 
              Under the continuous process thrust, they will develop tools and approaches
              which facilitate joint consideration of design and operational decisions and
              the monitoring and diagnosis of control systems.  The technical work includes
              development of efficient methods for the formulation and solution of highly
              structured mixed integer linear programming (MILP) systems, control relevant
              metrics suitable for inclusion into steady state design methodology,
              mathematical programming based approaches to large scale model predictive
              control (MPC), and the formulation of control systems performance monitoring
              problems in terms of a hierarchical, qualitative shape analysis formalism.  The
              key outcomes of this project will be a set of prototype tools demonstrated on a
              set of industrial benchmark problems which, it is hoped, will energize the
              industry to pursue environmentally sustainable designs and plant operations.
