Title       : Travel Support for A Plant Membrane Biology Meeting to be held in Regensburg,
               Germany, August 6-11, 1995.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9528101

Award Number: 9528101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heven Sze HS29@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9528101  Sze    Plant membrane transport is undergoing rapid changes.  Plant 
              membrane transport is a central feature of our understanding  of plant growth,
              development and metabolism. Young  scientists, trained in excellent labs, are
              bringing new  technologies to the field, such as expression of channels in 
              Xenopus oocytes to study transport, patch clamping, laser  surgery of plant
              cells to allow patch clamping, and use of  transgenic technologies to discover
              transporters through  complementation of transport defects in yeast mutants.
              Since  the young scientists are in many ways driving the field,  they provided
              travel money for this international meeting in  plant membrane biology held
              this year in Regensburg,  Germany.  This is a seminal meeting in this area of
              research  and was held last time, three years ago in California.  There has
              been many new approaches and discoveries made  since that time and this is one
              of the few platforms where  these researchers can meet together as a community.
               No  similar meetings have been held during the three years.  %%%  Plant
              membrane transport is undergoing rapid changes. Plant  membrane transport is a
              central feature of our understanding  of plant growth, development and
              metabolism. Young  scientists, trained in excellent labs, are bringing new 
              technologies to the field, such as expression of channels in  Xenopus oocytes
              to study transport, patch clamping, laser  surgery of plant cells to allow
              patch clamping, and use of  transgenic technologies to discover transporters
              through  complementation of transport defects in yeast mutants. Since  the
              young scientists are in many ways driving the field,  they provided travel
              money for this international meeting in  plant membrane biology held this year
              in Regensburg,  Germany.  This is a seminal meeting in this area of research 
              and was held last time, three years ago in California.  There has been many new
              approaches and discoveries made  since that time and this is one of the few
              platforms where  these rese archers can meet together as a community.  No 
              similar meetings have been held during the three years.  ***
