Title       : RUI: A Novel Dependence Analyzer for Parallelizing Compilers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9528330

Award Number: 9528330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65027              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kleanthis Psarris psarris@cs.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Psarris  9528330  In the past decade much progress has been made in developing 
              high  performance large scale parallel architectures.  The  development  of
              fast restructuring compilers for the automatic  parallelization  of sequential
              programs requires efficient data dependence  analysis techniques in order to
              obtain exact data dependence  information. The proposed techniques in data
              dependence  analysis  fall into two categories, either efficient and
              approximate  tests  or exact and exponential.  The proposed research will 
              attempt to  show, though, that exact data dependence information can be 
              computed efficiently in practice.  The GCD test and the  Banerjee  inequality
              are the two tests most widely used to detect data  dependencies between pairs
              of array references inside loop  nests.  These tests are approximate in the
              sense that they are  necessary  but not sufficient conditions for data
              dependence and,  therefore,  they may introduce artificial dependences which
              limit  parallelization.  Their major advantages is their low  computation 
              cost.    A recent study provided necessary and sufficient conditions  for  the
              accuracy of the GCD and Banerjee tests.  This study has  also  led to the
              development of the I (Interval) test, an improved  dependence analysis test. 
              The I Test is more accurate than  a  combination of the GCD and Banerjee tests
              and is able to  provide  exact data dependence information in practice, unlike
              the  classic  tests, at no additional computation cost.  The original work 
              considered only the case of loops with constant loop limits.  In  scientific
              applications though, inner loop limits may be  linear  functions of the outer
              loop iteration variables (these  iteration  spaces are termed trapezoidal
              regions).                This project develops an efficient and accurate
              dependence  analyzer.  The research has four objectives.  The first  objective 
              is to derive conditions for the accuracy of the GCD and  Banerjee  tests in
              general trapezoidal regions and perform an  empi rical  study of how often
              these conditions occur in practice. The  second  objective is to extend the I
              test to the general trapezoidal  regions and to assess its performance benefits
              on a suite of  benchmark codes.  The third objective is an analytical and 
              empirical comparison of the I test with all the other tests,  such  as the
              Omega test, Power test, etc.  An analytical and  experimental evaluation of all
              the data dependence analysis  test's is essential to determining which tests
              should be  performed in practice.  The fourth and principal objective  is to 
              integrate the above research work and develop an improved  dependence analyzer
              as a part of the Paraphrase-2  parallelizing  compiler.    It is expected that
              the completion of the proposed research  will  improve the understanding of
              data dependence analysis,  demonstrate the effectiveness and practical
              importance of  the  proposed techniques, and significantly improve the state of
               the  art in parallelizing compilers.  By providing efficient and  exact 
              dependence analysis techniques a number of compiler  optimizations  for high
              performance computer architectures can be performed  in  practice.  ***
