Title       : ECM: Reducing the Use of Environmentally Hazardous Fluids in Grinding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9528679

Award Number: 9528679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrienne G. Lavine lavine@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9153,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9528679  Lavine          The fluids used in grinding present an environmental
              hazard.  They adversely affect the health of personnel in the machine room, and
              used grinding fluid containing metal chips is a source of pollution which must
              be properly disposed of.  The objective of this research is to develop a
              variety of strategies for enabling dry or reduced fluid grinding which will
              work in different situations.  Research approaches are to include: (1)
              improving the wheel design, e.g., Cubic Boron Nitride wheels with optimal grain
              size and spacing, enhanced thermal conductivity bonds; (2) optimizing the
              grinding conditions with the goal of reducing fluid usage; (3) using
              alternative cooling strategies, e.g. "cold air guns" based on vortex tubes,
              evaporative cooling, internal wheel cooling, and other approaches.  These
              strategies are to be explored experimentally and analytically.  The results of
              the experiments will be twofold:  (a) quantify the efficacy of the various
              strategies in eliminating or reducing fluid usage, and (b) provide the data
              needed as input to, and validation of, the model.  The analytical model will
              predict temperatures, given the measured grinding power.  With this
              information, the model can be used in guiding the selection of wheel designs,
              explaining the experimental results, suggesting new experimental conditions to
              explore, and thus ultimately, guiding industrial process design.  The final
              phase of the project will be the "proof of concept," in which the most
              favorable strategies are used and optimized for a realistic grinding
              application, chosen in cooperation with the industrial partners, for reducing
              the environmental impact of the grinding process.          Grinding fluids
              containing metal chips pose a disposable problem and hence added manufacturing
              cost.  If the use of grinding fluids can be reduced without adverse performance
              impact via alternate cooling strategies, recovery of "dry" metal chips can be
              facilitated.  If successful, the grinding industry could be on e less
              contributor to the environmental problems.
