Title       : Adaptive and Robust Nonlinear Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9528370

Award Number: 9528370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar V. Kokotovic petar@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528370  Kokotovic    This is a proposal for continuation of our NSF Grant
              #ECS-9203491  which expires on August 31, 1995.  Part one of the proposal 
              summarizes the results under our current grant which have been  presented in a
              550-page monograph, and in over 20 refereed  journal papers and more numerous
              conference papers.  Among our  major accomplishments are new recursive adaptive
              and robust  design procedures ("backstepping") for nonlinear systems with 
              parametric and functional uncertainties.  For our adaptive  designs we  have
              derived performance bounds which, in the case of  linear systems, show that
              they outperform traditional adaptive  schemes.    Although our current results
              have been extremely well received by  the research community and have also
              stimulated interest in  applications, our critical examination of their
              limitations has  motivated the main topics of this proposal: first, to continue
              to  the development from feasible to implementable designs, and,  second, to
              develop new design procedures for larger classes of  systems.  We also propose
              to initiate an in-depth study of  structure-specific robustness properties of
              nonlinear feedback  loops, especially those diagnosed by our adaptive
              procedures.    To make our recursive procedures more attractive for 
              applications, we propose to develop lean backstepping designs  which avoid
              wasteful cancellations and reduce control effort.   For this purpose we will
              further develop our inverse-optimal  designs.  To extend the classes of
              systems, we plan to develop  new forwarding procedures as upper-triangular
              analogs of  backstepping.  We will extend characterizations of uncertainties 
              by application-motivated "shape" uncertainties and develop  "shape-robust"
              controllers.  Our robustness studies will quantify  performance-robustness
              trade-offs and develop redesigns to  enhance robustness while minimizing the
              loss of performance.    Our NSF-supported research provides a theoretical base
              for, and  is motivated by, our industrial cooperation  with United 
              Technologies, Ford Motor Company and Rockwell International.  ***
