Title       : Metallization and Contact Formation for Silicon Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9528391

Award Number: 9528391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380713             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Mayer james.mayer@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Silvanus S. Lau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    9528391  Mayer    This collaborative multidisciplinary research project 
              addresses metallization and contact formation in silicon-  based systems:
              investigation of the properties of Ag films  as interconnecting metallization
              in comparison with Cu, and  silicide formation for shallow contacts to Si on 
              insulator(SOI) structures.  The objective is to investigate  the fundamental
              properties of Ag-based formation of self-  passivating layers, adhesion, and
              diffusion barriers  utilizing refractory metal additions in comparison with an 
              extensive series of investigations of Cu metallization with  Ti addition
              conducted previously.  Silicide formation on Si  on insulator(SOI) structures
              has stringent materials  requirements for the self-aligned-silicide(SALICIDE) 
              technology, and the objective of this study is to  investigate the
              CoSix(x>1)/Ti system to bypass the formation  CoSi, thus reducing void
              formation, to investigate the use  of Pd rather than Ti as an interposing thin
              layer to form  epitaxial CoSi2 layers, and to investigate the stress in 
              thinner layers of the Si epi-layers in the SOI structure.  Transmission
              electron microscopy, ion beam analysis(RBS and  channeling), and electrical
              diagnostics will all be employed  routinely to characterize films and
              structures synthesized  and fabricated during the course of the research.  %%% 
              The proposed basic investigations of metallization and  contact formation are
              expected to contribute basic materials  science knowledge of technological
              relevance to advanced  microelectronic devices and circuits.  The knowledge and
               understanding gained from this research project is expected  to contribute in
              a general way to improving the performance  of advanced devices and circuits
              used in computing,  information processing, and telecommunications by providing
               a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and  producing improved
              materials.  An important feature of the  program is the integration of research
              and education through  the training of st udents in a fundamentally and 
              technologically significant area.  ***
