Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Morphological Integration in the Hominid Cranial
               Base
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9528921

Award Number: 9528921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10252              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick E. Grine fgrine@epo.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The research proposed here will evaluate the functional morphology of the
              hominid cranial base,  and its role in reconstructing patterns of early human
              evolution (i.e., patterns of hominid  phylogeny). This research is significant
              because it will critically examine the functional and  phylogenetic
              relationships of an anatomical region that has been the subject of debate for
              most  of this century. In the process of doing so, it will collect quantitative
              postural data that will vastly  improve our ability to relate primate
              positional behavior and morphology. Finally, it will propose an  approach
              whereby functional and structural inferences may be used in phylogenetic
              analysis.  Namely, anatomical features that are functionally or stucturally
              related to each other will be  grouped into complexes, and will then be treated
              as a unit (i.e., weighted as a single feature) in a  cladistic analysis (a
              method of phylogeny reconstruction). This approach is relevant to cladistic 
              analyses in all fields of biology, regardless of the organism or anatomical
              region that is under  investigation.  The cranial base is an appropriate
              anatomical focus for functional and phylogenetic research.  From the standpoint
              of functional morphology, a wide range of factors may influence basicranial 
              form. Such factors include brain size, posture, vocalization, mastication, and
              facial architecture.  Consequently, there are many functional hypotheses
              available for testing. From a phylogenetic  standpoint, basicranial traits play
              a vital role in the controversey surrounding patterns of early  human
              evolution. Early members of our own genus (e.g., Homo habilis, Homo erectus)
              share a  number of advanced basicranial features with some australopiothecine
              species. These features  either indicate a close evolutionary relationship
              between these species and the ancestral  members of our genus, or that advanced
              basicranial characters evolved independently in two or  more lineages of early
              humans. Finally, the cranial base is important from an historical  perspective.
              It has long been recognized that the cranial base of humans is distinct from
              that of  other primates. As a result, a basicranial feature was among those
              used to identify the first  recovered australopithecine skull as being a human
              ancestor.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
