Title       : Recycleable Elastomers: Properties of Stereoblock Polypropylene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9528636

Award Number: 9528636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Waymouth waymouth@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9153,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9528636  Waymouth    This research investigates an innovative new strategy for 
              the synthesis of elastomeric polypropylene.  The objective  of the proposed
              studies is to investigate the structure and  properties of thermoplastic
              elastomers based upon propylene  homopolymers.  These materials offer an
              environmentally  attractive alternative to conventional vulcanized  elastomers,
              but little is known about their properties.  Specific aims are:  (i) to
              establish the relationship  between molecular structure, solid-state
              organization, and  physical and mechanical properties, (ii) to prepare a series
               of elastomeric polypropylenes with systematic variations in  polymer
              microstructure, and (iii) to investigate how changes  in the microstructure of
              elastomeric polypropylenes  influence solid-state structure and organization. 
              The  experimental approach includes characterization of  elastomeric
              polypropylene to probe the structure of these  materials over a range of length
              scales, from  the atomic  length scale (microstructure) to length scales
              appropriate  for characterizing  isotactic helix lengths, crystallite 
              dimensions and large scale morphological features.  A  complementary set of
              experiments will investigate how  changes in microstructure influence the solid
              state  organization, structure and properties of these materials.  %%% 
              Thermoplastic elastomeric polypropylene has the properties  of a vulcanized
              rubber, but the production and processing  advantages of polyolefin
              thermoplastics.  The development of  this new material should enable the
              substitution of less  environmentally attractive vulcanized rubbers.  The 
              environmental benefit of elastomeric polypropylene derives  from the high
              efficiency in manufacturing, processing, and  recyclability.  The ability to
              flow upon heating and  solidify on cooling allows manufacturers to produce
              rubber-  like materials using melt-extruders, blow molders and other 
              energy-efficient thermoplastic processing equipment.  Expensive, wasteful, and
              energy-inte nsive compounding and  vulcanizing steps can be avoided and scrap
              from molded  articles can be re-used.  These materials can be  manufactured
              with minimal waste to give materials that have  elastomeric properties yet the
              recycling characteristics of  polyolefins.  Elastomeric polypropylene should be
              readily  incorporated into normal polypropylene recycling streams.  An
              important feature of the program is the training of  graduate and undergraduate
              students in a fundamentally and  technologically significant area.  ***
