Title       : Guerrero Accelerograph Network: Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9528517

Award Number: 9528517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Anderson jga@seismo.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuehua Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9528517  Anderson  The primary goal of this project is to predict the strong
              ground  motions which will result from future earthquakes, with  sufficient
              precision to be reliable for engineering applications;  and equally important,
              to develop a system in which this  capability will be readily available to
              anyone.  Data from the US-  Mexico strong motion array in Guerrero, Mexico
              provides one  important means to calibrate the method, since it covers a large 
              range of magnitudes and distances with stations on rock.  Calibrations are also
              made with other data from throughout the  world. The first year addresses the
              system for stations on rock;  the second year concentrates on predictions for
              stations on  sediments, including nonlinear effects; while the third year 
              focuses on implementing 2D and 3D basin effects into the  predictions. The aim
              is to make the system very easy for the  user.    Predicted strong motions are
              to be in the form of very realistic  synthetic seismograms. The seismogram
              provides a link between the  seismologist and the engineer; the numerous
              parameters that  describe aspects of strong earthquake ground motions are all 
              derived from accelerograms. A goal of this project is to work  toward the time
              when regression analysis will be replaced by the  generation of suites of
              synthetic accelerograms that are  appropriate for the magnitude, distance,
              region, and site of  interest, and which are closely calibrated by
              observations. These  suites of accelerograms are used to obtain the mean and
              the  variability of the desired ground motion parameter for the  application of
              interest.    This process will be made easily available to anyone with 
              Internet access to the World Wide Web (WWW). The WWW page will be  set up so
              that anyone accessing it can generate synthetic  accelerograms. The user will
              be guided through a set of questions  which will specify the necessary input,
              generate one or many  seismograms, and retrieve the complete time series or
              commonly  used parameters (such as peak  acceleration or spectral amplitude) 
              specified.    Some state-of-the-art projects on seismic hazard are already 
              using synthetic seismograms. These same techniques will be  available to any
              design project, leading to improved earthquake-  resistant designs at all
              levels.  ***
