Title       : SBIR Phase II: Reconstituted Skin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9528878

Award Number: 9528878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Livesey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LifeCell Corporation
	      3606-A Research Forest Drive
	      The Woodlands, TX  77380    713/367-5368

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5345,5373,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9528878  Livesey   The skin performs a number of functions essential to the
              existence of mammalian organisms.  The goal of this Small Business Innovation
              Research Phase II project from LifeCell Corporation is to produce a full
              thickness replacement, a graft composed of both dermis and epidermis, for
              damaged human skin.  The current standard treatment for full thickness injuries
              requires the use of split-thickness skin autografts (STSG), if available, or
              application of the more recently developed cultured epithelial autografts
              (CEA).  These two techniques have significant draw backs including: 1) the need
              to reharvest STSG donor sites in large surface area burn victims, 2) scarring
              and contracture of STSG donor sites, 3) delays in treatment while awaiting the
              production of CEA, 4) poor take rates for CEA requiring repeated applications
              and 5) grafting with CEA alone leaves a deficit at the graft site due to
              absence of dermis.  The ideal graft for full thickness wounds would have the
              following characteristics:  It would  1) replace both lost dermis and
              epidermis, 2) not require extensive in vitro cell culture to produce, 3)
              deliver a persistent dermis and epidermis, and 4) require only one surgery,
              thereby decreasing patient morbidity and mortality and reducing costs as a
              result of shorter hospital stays.  During the studies of the first phase of the
              research, LifeCell developed the tools and approaches necessary to achieve a
              practical, cost-effective configuration capable of delivering these
              characteristics.  The ultimate goal of this program is to enable grafting of
              full thickness skin wounds with a reconstituted skin (human keratinocytes
              delivered with an acellular dermal matrix), thereby replacing the need for
              extensive STSG harvesting and avoiding the morbidity associated with skin graft
              donor sites.  ThisI research will focus on the identification, tagging,
              isolation and transfer of epidermal stem cells to Liefecell's commercially
              available dermal transplant, AlloDerm.  The epidermal stem ce ll is responsible
              for all cell replacement in the continually renewing epidermis.  The absence of
              these cells in a composite graft will lead to epithelial breakdown and loss of
              effective wound coverage requiring repeat surgeries and longer hospital stays. 
              Successful application of the technology described here would lead to a
              fundamental change in the way patients requiring skin grafting are treated 
              This approach would enable reproducible immediate application of reconstituted
              skin in a cost-effective manner.   Commercial applications include clinical
              situations involving full-thickness skin loss.  This includes burns and
              reconstructive surgery.  In addition, guided tissue regeneration may be
              assisted by a reconstituted skin system including application to periodontal
              surgery and epidermolysis bullosa for which there is no current effective
              therapy.  Additional applications include chronic ulcers or growth factor
              deficient wounds of a variety of etiologies including venous stasis, diabetes
              ,and decubitus or pressure ulcers.  This composite could also have applications
              as a model system for testing of pharmaceutical agents such as skin patches and
              transdermal agents.
