Title       : Organic Reactions and Interactions in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1997   
File        : a9528027

Award Number: 9528027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488200             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Jorgensen william.jorgensen@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              William Jorgensen is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue his research involving  
              theoretical simulations of organic reaction mechanisms in solution.  This  
              work involves the use of ab initio MO theory to obtain information   regarding
              the gas phase potential energy surface for organic reactions.    This
              information is then used in conjunction with Monte Carlo simulation  
              techniques to simulate the chemical reaction in solution.  The   combination of
              these methodologies provides  estimates of the solvated   free energy changes
              involved in a chemical reaction, and provides   important background
              information on the role which solvation plays in   chemical reactions.  These
              methodologies are being applied to various   important reaction mechanisms
              including the (2+2) cycloaddition, oxy-Cope   rearrangements, and alkoxide
              alkylations.  Simulations of host-guest   systems are also being performed with
              an emphasis on predicting binding   preferences of importance in the design of
              catenanes and rotaxanes which   show promise as the basis for molecular
              devices.  Computer-assisted   design of catalytic hosts using transition state
              geometries and charges   obtained from ab initio calculations is also being
              pursued.  This research is important for the elucidation of molecular-level
              effects   of solvation on reaction rates, intermolecular interactions and  
              host-guest binding in solution, and the influence of solvation on the  
              structures of molecules.  The theoretical studies closely parallel and  
              complement experimental work on the optimization of organic reactions and   on
              the development of catalysts, selective receptors for organic   molecules
              including drugs and metabolites, materials with novel   properties, and
              molecular devices.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
