Title       : Gated Electron Transfer in Copper(II)/(I) Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9528831

Award Number: 9528831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Rorabacher dbr@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9183,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With this award, the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Chemistry
              Program provides support for a collaborative research project   involving Drs.
              David B. Rorabacher and Ronald R. Schroeder of the   Chemistry Department,
              Wayne State University, and Dr. Leo A. Ochrymowycz   of the Chemistry
              Department, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire.  They   will synthesize a
              series of copper thiaether, thiaamine, and thiapyridine   complexes in which
              both copper (I) and copper(II) oxidation states are   accessible.  The
              thirty-one macrocyclic ligands targeted for study are   specifically designed
              to impose differing types of constraints within the   ligand framwork.  Using
              cyclic voltammetry, stopped-flow kinetics, NMR   line broadening studies, and
              selected structural determinations, they   will investigate the relationship
              between ligand geometric changes and   transfer of electrons to and from the
              copper centers in these complexes.     Under some conditions, the rate of the
              reaction in one direction will be   `gated` by the requirement for the
              intermediate to undergo a   conformational change. Molecular mechanical
              calculations will be used to   compare the energies of reaction intermediates
              generated during the   electron transfer step and develop some predictive
              capability.  Complexes of copper(I) and copper(II) are known to have different 
               geometries, so that upon oxidation or reduction it is likely that  
              conformational changes will occur.  A conformational change creates an   energy
              barrier to electron transfer.  If this energy barrier can be   controlled, then
              it becomes possible for electron transfer to occur in   one direction, that is,
              to be `gated.`  This topic is of considerable   current interest in biological
              chemistry, because it may be important in   the reactions of metalloproteins. 
              This research will help answer   questions about the extent to which
              conformational changes in the   proteins or around the metal binding site are
              involved in natural   systems, as well as point the way to design of specific
              catalysts.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
