Title       : The Arctic Outflow Campaign: A Measurement Study to Characterize the Composition
               and Photochemistry of Arctic Air Transported Southward During Spring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9528031

Award Number: 9528031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Honrath reh@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528031  Honrath     This project consists of a multi-investigator measurement
              campaign studying the springtime outflow of arctic air toward the North
              Atlantic. During winter and spring, levels of photochemically active pollutants
              are elevated in the remote arctic troposphere. Recent work indicates that
              transport through the Arctic provides a substantial flux of total reactive
              nitrogen (NOy) and non-methane hydrocarbons to the temperate North Atlantic
              region. This process may play a significant role in the tropospheric ozone
              budget of this and other remote regions. Current understanding of these effects
              is limited by an absence of measurements of the relevant compounds in
              southward-transported arctic air.   The ground-based measurement campaign will
              take place during January-April, 1996, at a site in Newfoundland, within the
              dominant pathway of springtime arctic air flow. Measurements will include
              ozone, nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, peroxyacetic nitric anhydride,
              peroxypropionic nitric anhydride, alkyl nitrates, total reactive nitrogen,
              non-methane hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, plus standard meteorological
              parameters and radiometer-based nitrogen dioxide photodissociation rates.
              Real-time isentropic back-trajectory forecasts and meteorological analyses will
              be used to guide the sampling frequency to ensure adequate coverage during
              outflow events. An archive of back-trajectories will assist in data
              interpretation. The results of this study will be used to assess the impact of
              the winter-spring arctic reservoir on the levels and speciation of NOx, NOy,
              and non-methane hydrocarbons at lower latitudes. Impacts on the local ozone
              formation/destruction rate and budget will be estimated using a photochemical
              box model.
