Title       : Meteorological Research in Oxidants and Aerosols over the North Atlantic: AEROCE
               Phase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9528907

Award Number: 9528907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482519             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Merrill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528907  Merrill    The goal of this research is an understanding of the role of
               meteorological influences on the oxidizing capacity of the  atmosphere.  In
              collaboration with a team of atmospheric chemists  and modelers we will study
              the chemical behavior of the North  Atlantic Ocean atmosphere using
              surface-based measurements,  ozonedonse, aircraft and remote sensing
              techniques.  Our work  entails analysis to quantify the continuous and dynamic
              influence  of transport and removal processes on ozone and a number of 
              chemical tracers.  Pulses of high surface ozone on Bermuda are  often
              associated with the passage of cold fronts.  During the  spring of 1995 we will
              observe the meteorological and chemical  properties across fronts from aircraft
              and ozonesondes and assess  the relative contributions of different sources. 
              In conjunction  with the field intensives proposed for AEROCE phase III, we
              will  provide extensive operational meteorological support.  In addition,  we
              will be responsible for integration of the resulting  meteorological and
              chemical observations and will collaborate with  other AEROCE PI's in their
              interpretation.  A series of high-  altitude aircraft flights are proposed for
              spring of 1996 and we  will provide meteorological information to differentiate
              the  relative importance of natural and anthropogenic sources.  We will  use
              potential vorticity analyses to assess the importance of  transport from the
              stratosphere and upper troposphere into the  middle and lower troposphere.  We
              will prepare isentropic  trajectory analysis and combine these with the
              chemical  observations using cluster analysis to filter the data and identify 
              data collected under similar large scale motion.  These will allow  us to
              prepare chemical climatologies not only for 03, but for CO  and other tracers. 
              With several years of ozone data, we will  determine the extent to which
              large-scale atmospheric motion  controls the interannual variability over the
              NAO.  Finally, we  will develop detailed case s tudies for selected periods of 
              meteorological interest, as well as during the groundbased and  airborne
              intensives.  For these times we will make use of remotely-  sensed rainfall and
              other meteorological data.  Results from these  investigations will help to
              resolve questions regarding the  meteorological processes controlling ozone
              cycling over the NAO.
