Title       : Spectroscopic Studies of Blue Copper and Iron Sulfur Electron Transfer Active
               Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1998  
File        : a9528250

Award Number: 9528250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $567694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. Solomon Edward.Solomon@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9184,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Solomon of Stanford University will conduct studies on  
              metal-containing active sites which have unique spectral features   relative to
              small molecule complexes of the same ion.  The general goal   is to understand
              these features in terms of the active site geometric and   electronic
              structural contributions to the reactivity of these sites in   biology.  The
              proteins of interest are the blue copper and iron-sulfur   centers which occur
              in biological electron transfer. The unique spectral   features of these
              systems in their natural state reflect novel electronic   structures which
              affect the reduction potentials and the kinetics of   electron transfer. 
              Specifically, the studies are directed at `perturbed`   blue copper sites which
              occur naturally or in mutated proteins and have   significant spectral and
              reactivity differences relative to classic blue   copper sites, and at a
              thorough understanding of the complete orbital   pathway for electron coupling
              over the blue copper-Cys-His-Type 2 (or   Type 3) unit involved in
              intramolecular electron transfer in nitrite   reductase and the multicopper
              oxidases. The iron-sulfur studies will   focus on the contribution of the
              electronics to the redox properties of   the rubredoxin iron-sulfur center, and
              extension to 2- and 4-iron sulfur   centers and to heterometal clusters.  The
              ultimate goal in these studies   is to experimentally determine the changes in
              electronic structure   associated with coupling to additional metal centers and
              to understand   the contributions of electron delocalization to the reduction
              potentials   and electron transfer reactivity.  A diverse array of
              sophisticated spectroscopic techniques will be used to   learn about the
              bonding at the active sites of two classes of   metal-containing proteins.
              These proteins contain either copper-sulfur or   iron-sulfur centers, are found
              in most organisms, and function in the   physiological electron transport
              chains.  The approach to be taken will   entail detailed experimental and
              theoretical study of simple models of   the active sites, as well as
              experimental study of a series of modified   copper proteins.  The information
              obtained will lead to an understanding   of how the bonding at the metal sites
              controls the rates and energetics   of reactions of these proteins.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
