Title       : Study on Criteria for Federal Support of Research and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9528889

Award Number: 9528889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rolf Piekarz                            
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Metzger nmetzge@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 0300      GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                   DPG                               SEPTEMBER
              26, 1995      Present:   A. Petersen, J. Bordogna, M. Cehelsky, M. Clutter, K.
              Erb, W. Harris, J.  Kull, W. Lester, C. Marrett, C. McLindon, K. Rison, C.
              Sullivan, L. Sundro, J. Sunley,  L. Williams      Dr. Petersen briefed DPG on
              the September 12 SMIG meeting.  Topics included 1)  presentation by J. Moore on
              plans for the 1996 National Science and Technology  Week and a proposed new
              "youth challenge" program; 2) P. Young briefed the group  on NSF's evolving
              plans for the future of supercomputing; and 3) M. Clutter  summarized the
              efforts to develop a federal research agency-wide young  investigators program.
               SMIG agenda topics for today's meeting includes: PFF; FY  1997 OMB Budget
              submission; October NSB meeting; and the FY 96 Opportunity  Fund.     On
              September 13, Drs. Petersen and Erb met with Bruce Alberts, President, National
               Academy of Sciences, and others to discuss the Seventh Annual Symposium on 
              Frontiers of Science scheduled for November 2-4, 1995 at the NAS.  B. Harris 
              encouraged DPG to attend the upcoming symposium as an excellent mechanism to 
              meet and talk with young investigators.  He reported that Germany held its
              first  symposium this summer which was modeled after the NAS symposium.    It
              is  expected that NAS will submit a proposal to NSF, as well as other agencies,
              for  future symposia.    Dr. Petersen reported that NSF's Proposal Review
              Process Forum held on  September 15.  The meeting went well and overall the
              comments were very positive.   Participants included members of all NSF
              Advisory Committees, with representatives  from academia and industry.  The
              group emphasized the importance of NSF program  directors in the proposal
              process and encouraged NSF to continue recruiting the most  talented
              scientists.  They also suggested that a study be done on mail review vis a  vis
              panel reviews.  A summary of the meeting will be made available when complete. 
                Drs. Petersen and Sullivan reporte d on their September 20-23 trip to Alaska.
               Visits  included the Anchorage School District, University of Alaska,
              Anchorage,  visit to  Ilisagvik College, the North Slope Borough School
              District in Barrow and a tour of  NOAA's monitoring station including the UV
              monitor, the Barrow Environmental  Observatory and the ITEX Site.  Meetings
              were also held with President J. Kitka of  the Alaska Federation of Natives,
              the Presidential Awardees for Excellence in  Science and Mathematics Education.
               Drs. Watson, Broadbent and Pyle also attend  the site visits.          Action:
               OPP to provide DPG with Fairbanks newspaper article.    Drs. Clutter and
              Harris led a presentation on budget flexibility and the 6 month  proposal
              processing 6 month rule.    Budget Allocations:  M. Clutter reviewed the
              current practice at NSF that at the  beginning of each fiscal year, BFA
              provides, for each line item, 75% of the previous  year's operating plan.  M.
              Clutter and B. Harris provided comments on the importance  of allowing maximum
              flexibility to make allocations based on scientific needs.  They  stressed the
              point that in order to maintain flexibility at the cluster level, division
              level,  and directorate level, managers need the capability to allocate at
              those levels and the  ability to establish reserves.   Suggestions on ways to
              allow for the maximum  flexibility included: 1) BFA provide allocations for
              continuing commitments at the line  item level and the balance of the
              allocation be done at the Division or Directorate  level; 2) lower mortgage -
              lower out year commitments, i.e. reduce out year  commitments to 50-55% instead
              of 65% - make more standard awards; 3) establish  divisional/directorate
              reserves; and 4) establish independent office with 5% of  directorate budget
              from which only standard grants would be made.       Proposal Processing - 6
              month rule:  Dr. Petersen reminded the group that the six  month rule has been
              published as part of NSF's customer service guidelines.    It  may be that the
              6 months  is not appropriate for some actions and that we should not  be
              looking at average by unit but looking at percent where we expect to achieve 6 
              months processing times.  She stated that what we don't want to do is short cut
               quality in those cases where it is difficult to obtain adequate review in 6
              months.      B. Harris reported that MPS applies the 6 month rule to all
              unsolicited proposals and  that they have made a commitment to have all
              decisions finalized in 6 months.  In  those rare case when the 6 month rule
              cannot be met, programs are required to  provide an explanation.  In addition,
              where taking longer than 6 months would result  in a funding gap for renewal
              proposals, programs are required to provide  supplemental funding in order to
              eliminate any gaps.  This practice was announced to  the community in the MPS
              June 96 Newsletter.  Harris reviewed the data base which  has been developed in
              MPS to track all actions and to provide "what if" scenarios.   Efforts are
              ongoing in MPS to use best practices and have staff work as teams.  The 
              allocation of S&E funds has been tied to performance at the Division level.  M.
              Clutter  reported that BIO was within the 6 month rule although they had not
              instituted any  special procedures.  She works with Division Directors in this
              area and program  directors are no longer holding proposals over for possible
              future funding.    Drs. Lane and Bordogna reported on their attendance at the
              Learning and Intelligent  Systems Workshop held on September 17-19.      M.
              Clutter reported on the Neuroinformatics Workshop held September 19 and 20.  
              She also reported on the U.S. - European Commission Task Force on Biotechnology
               Research meeting held on September 21 and 22.  Clutter co-chairs the task
              force  with P. Fasella, Director General for the Joint Research Center for the
              Directorate  General 12, Science Research and Development of the European
              Commission.              Action:  M. Clutter to provide summary of meeting to
              DPG.    L. Williams announced that t he NSTC's Committee on Education and
              Training report,  "A Strategic Planning Document for Meeting the 21st Century"
              has been released.   Copies will be provided to DPG.  He distributed a copy of
              the Alliances for Minority  Participation publication entitled, Demonstrating
              ACCOUNTABILITY in a Diverse  Scientific and Technological Workforce.  This is
              the first time this information has  been assembled.  Statistical information
              is provided on pages 6, 7, 10, 11 and 12.    L. Williams reported on the 1995
              National Conference on Diversity held September  22-24, 1995.  The conference
              was attended by over 800 students.  In an effort to find  a way to involve more
              students this year's conference was modeled  with the idea of  concurrent
              regional conferences which worked fairly well.    L. Williams reported that
              legislation on GOALS 2000 will likely have minimal effect on  NSF programs
              because many of the states have already developed a statewide  systemic plan
              for science and math.      L. Williams distributed a draft agenda for NSF's
              conference, Women & Science:  Celebrating Achievements, Charting Challenges to
              be held December 13-15, 1995.  A  panel of Assistant Directors, chaired by Dr.
              Lane will be held on Friday, December  15, 1995.    M. Cehelsky distributed and
              reviewed the agenda for the October 4-6, 1995 NSB  meeting.  Dr. Anita Jones
              will join the NSB for lunch on Thursday.  Dr. Mary Good  and Mr. William Golden
              will join NSB for dinner on Thursday evening.  DPG is invited  to both events. 
                J. Kull reported that NSF Bulletin 95-13, Guidance for NSF Awardees in the
              Event of  an NSF Shutdown, has been issued.  A question and answer session is
              scheduled for  Wednesday, September 27 at 2:00 pm in room 380.    C. McLindon
              reported that a notice would be released on Friday to staff regarding 
              reporting to work on Monday, with or without a continuing resolution.    C.
              Marrett r
