Title       : Collaborative Research: Use of NEXRAD Data to Estimate Rainfall Rate and
               Rainfall Kinetic Energy Flux
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9528886

Award Number: 9528886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292975             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Smith jsmith@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528886  Smith    The proposed research will focus on describing aspects of
              precipitation and its erosivity. The work will show how to make use of radar to
              provide rainfall rate and rainfall kinetic energy concurrently, while covering
              a large area with high spatial and temporal resolution.  Rainfall intensity and
              kinetic energy characterize the aspects of precipitation relevant to soil
              erosion and have to be monitored accurately to obtain improved soil loss
              estimates.  Relatively sparse networks of raingauges have been used to estimate
              long-term soil loss.   One of the largest potential benefits of using radar is
              augmenting such sparse gauge networks to provide comprehensive coverage for
              areas that are subject to erosion.  Improved estimation and greater flexibility
              are likely to be gained and research opportunities created by making use of the
              newly available radar information provided by the Next Generation Weather Radar
              (NEXRAD) network of WSR-88D (Weather Surveillance Radar - 1988 Doppler).  We
              will explore in depth the usefulness and limitations of radar for soil erosion
              studies and investigate and spatial and temporal distributions of rain rate and
              rainfall kinetic energy.  Detailed comparisons will be made to test the
              performance of the radar-based approach to estimate precipitation erosivity 
              versus present practice which depends exclusively on raingauge records.  The
              study will be made on the basis of data collected in the Goodwin Creek research
              watershed in northern Mississippi.  This watershed is under radar coverage from
              two NEXRAD WSR-88Ds, Memphis (Tennessee) and Little Rock (Arkansas).  We will
              use data from the Memphis radar because of its proximity to the catchment.  In
              addition to the existing raingauges in the already highly instrumented Goodwin
              Creek watershed, we will deploy a disdrometer for the automated measurement of
              raindrop size Distributions.
