Title       : SGER: DNA Thermal Profiling: A New Technique in Conservation Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9528152

Award Number: 9528152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa D. Brooks                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Perlin mhperl01@athena.louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shylaja R. Akkaraju  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9528152  PERLIN     For purposes of wildlife conservation it is important to be
              able to identify individual animals to be used in captive breeding programs and
              to assess populations of endangered species. Several methods have been
              developed to produce molecular "fingerprints" for such analyses. With the rapid
              decrease of biodiversity, quick and effective methods of assaying biological
              molecules (such as DNA) are important.   Dr. Perlin has developed a simple
              technique called DNA thermal profiling. The technique employs analysis of how
              an organism's DNA melts.  Initial evidence indicates that each individual or
              species may have a unique melting profile. This technique circumvents the more
              tedious and costly methods currently in use in many labs. The new method is
              also technically simpler and data can be generated in less time.  Furthermore,
              the amount of DNA required is small (100-200 ng) and total genomic  DNA is used
              as opposed to small, selected portions. Thus, it has the advantage of detecting
              and utilizing microheterogeneities throughout the test organisms' genomes. It
              may thus produce a true DNA "fingerprint" of the organism.    Dr. Perlin has
              applied DNA thermal profiling to the study of redwing blackbirds, Cuban
              crocodiles, and alligators.  He proposes to determine the genetic basis of the
              technique and thereby further strengthen its validity. The data obtained from
              animals with well-established pedigrees (e.g., racehorses and beagles) will be
              examined for Mendelian patterns of inheritance. In addition, populations of
              endangered animals maintained in zoos or breeding facilities will be studied to
              determine whether this technique can be used effectively for such population
              analyses. As much as possible, all data obtained with DNA thermal profiling
              will be compared with that obtained by already-established methods for DNA
              fingerprinting and population studies.  Dr. Perlin is primarily interested in
              studying the limits of this new and potentially exciting method in
              environmental biology. If  the method is robust, the results of this study
              could demonstrate that DNA thermal profiling is a quick and simple method for
              DNA fingerprinting with particular significance for conservation biologists and
              captive breeding programs.
