Title       : Predictability of Short Term Climate Variations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9528183

Award Number: 9528183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1088378            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagadish Shukla   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1324,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    ATM-9321354    Shukla, Jagadish  Schneider, Edwin K.  Kinter, James
              L.  Straus, David M.    George Mason University    Title: Predictability and
              Variability of the Present Climate        This research encompasses a number of
              closely related projects  which are aimed  at understanding the low frequency
              (monthly to  decadal) variations of the  coupled climate system consisting of
              the  atmosphere, hydrosphere, land  biosystems, oceans and ice, primarily  in
              the present climatic regime.  Goals  include both the ability to  simulate
              these low frequency variations with complex  numerical  models of the
              individual and coupled systems, and to estimate the   degree to which these
              variations are predictable.  The methods to  be used will  involve extensive
              experimentation with existing  numerical models and schemes to  couple them,
              and extensive  diagnosis and analysis of observational data from  both existing
               records and from the retrospective assimilation of atmospheric  data  planned
              by the major operational centers of the world for the near  future.   In
              addition to the intrinsic importance of understanding  and predicting the low 
              frequency variability of the climate system,   this work will help to define
              the  accuracy and coverage  requirements for current and future climate
              observing  systems in  order to adequately monitor the current behavior of the
              climate   system.         1. Predictability of the coupled
              ocean-land-atmosphere system.    The predictability of this system on both the
              seasonal and  interannual time  scales will be systematically explored, the
              former  by a large number of seasonal  atmospheric simulations, and the  latter
              from integrations of the fully coupled  system.         2. Land-surface-climate
              interactions.  The importance of   vegetation change, albedo feedback and the
              global boundary  conditions in the  Sahel drought will be explored.  The
              potential  impacts of man's activity on  climate through the (hypothetical) 
              doubling of the world's deserts, global  de forestati   on and the  desiccation
              of the Aral Sea region will be addressed.         3.  Climate diagnostics. 
              Diagnostics of the planned  reassimilation of atmospheric  data includes a
              detailed examination  of the hydrological cycle, and global  energy cycle and
              the critical  tropical-extratropical interactions.  These  efforts will be
              aided  by the availability of consistent estimates of the subtle   quantities
              of divergence, specific humidity and diabetic heating.         4.  Simulation
              of the present climate.  To test the ability of  numerical models to  simulate
              the observed low frequency anomalies,  the PIs plan an integration of  the
              atmospheric model dor about 100  years using observed boundary conditions.  
              Similarly, they will  integrate the coupled climate system model for several 
              hundred  years in order to test the realism of its overall statistical 
              behavior.          5. Climate observing system simulation.  The PIs will
              estimate  the  sensitivity of the atmospheric circulation to many types of 
              changes in the  boundary conditions.  They will "observe"  numerically modelled
              climate system  using methods similar to the  current (and future) observing
              systems for the real  climate to  explore their sampling and accuracy
              characteristics systematically.     This research is important because it seeks
              to enhance knowledge  about climate  processes and improvements in predicting
              climate  variation and change.    Part  of this research is funded under the
              USGCRP CMAP project.
