Title       : Cooperative Research: Local Tsunami Effects and Their Mitigation Measures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9528054

Award Number: 9528054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70191              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Preuss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Urban Regional Research
	      1809 7th Avenue-Suite 1000
	      Seattle, WA  981011313    206/624-1669

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9102,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9614120  Yeh  Earthquakes which occur on ocean floors set in motion the  entire
              water column above the region of tectonic plate  motion, generating a tsunami
              (seismic sea wave). Such waves,  when approaching shore, can reach a height of
              more than 10  meters and can cause extensive flooding, property damage,  and
              the loss of human lives. This action is to support a  comprehensive research
              program to understand local tsunami  effects on man-made and natural
              structures. Particular  emphasis is placed on understanding tsunami-structure 
              interactions that can lead to effective damage mitigation  measures.    The
              program includes computational, experimental, and  mitigation components
              conducted by research teams at  Southern Methodist University, the University
              of Washington,  and Urban Regional Research, respectively. The new robust 
              method for the numerical simulation of waves and their  interaction with
              structures developed at Southern Methodist  University is used to simulate
              transient tsunami flows over  and around coastal structures. The highly
              sensitive  capacitance-type wave gage, and the optical water-surface  profiler
              developed at the University of Washington is used  to conduct tsunami
              experiments in a specialized three-  dimensional wave basin. The direct field
              experience of Urban  Regional Research in the assessment of tsunami damage and 
              the identification of vulnerability patterns guides the  computational and
              experimental research. The collaborative  effort enables the development of
              tsunami mitigation  measures.    The set of laboratory experiments and
              numerical simulations  are sufficiently simple that the basic physics of
              tsunami  actions on structures can be explored. At the same time, the 
              experimental set-up and choice of problems is realistic, so  that the results
              provide the means for the design and  modification of shoreline structures.
              Throughout the  research, full advantage is taken of the multi-disciplinary 
              nature of the research team. The analyses of actual tsunami  even ts guides the
              numerical and experimental efforts by  focusing the proposed investigations on
              the most practical  and relevant problems for tsunami hazard reduction.    The
              intended, primary impact of the proposed research is the  mitigation of the
              devastating consequences of tsunami  events, including loss of human life,
              destruction of  property, damage to the environment, economic disruption,  and
              social dislocation.  ***
