Title       : Dissertation Research: An Investigation of Land, Water Use, and Social
               Organization at Guijarral, NW Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1995  
File        : a9528428

Award Number: 9528428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Wyllys Andrews wandrews@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Willis Andrews, Mr. Paul Hughbanks will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Hughbanks has conducted two field
              seasons of archaeological research at Guijarral, a Mayan site located in
              Northwestern Belize. Excavations to date indicate that it was occupied during
              the Classic Mayan period. The site itself is located in the head of a small
              watershed and contains numerous landscape features apparently related to water
              management. These include both contour terracing and small scale cross-channel
              terraces. Earth/stone ridges which run both parallel and across slope contours
              appear constructed to channel water flow and an apparent reservoir has also
              been located. With support from the National Science Foundation Mr. Hughbanks
              will conduct an additional field season to complete this mapping work and to
              excavate a series of habitation structures. He wishes to determine the social
              context within which water control occurred and through excavation and analysis
              of artifacts collected, he can both determine the relative status of household
              inhabitants and the relationship between status and water control.  
              Archaeologists who wish to understand how complex societies developed have
              often focused on the relationship between social organization and the control
              of scarce resources. It has been postulated that in the Near East the rise of
              early civilizations is intimately associated with the development of irrigation
              systems and that the central function of the high status priestly class was to
              control water distribution. In many parts of Middle America water is a scarce
              resource and water related features such as those observed at Guijarral are
              present. Mr. Hughbanks wants to determine through spatial analysis of the site
              the extent to which household status and water management are related. Because
              the site is relatively small, covering ca. 45 hectares, it provides an
              excellent context for this kind of study.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
              will shed new light on human-environment interactions and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
