Title       : SGER: The Taxonomic Distribution of Middle-Repetitive DNA Families: Homoplasy
               Free Phylogenetic Data?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1995 
File        : a9528964

Award Number: 9528964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Marshall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528964  MARSHALL   In the past ten to fifteen years molecular sequence data
              have provided powerful tools for investigating the phylogenetic relationships
              or associations of lineages in many diverse groups of organisms.  Such data
              have often helped to resolve relationships where classical morphological data
              were insufficient or suggested alternative and conflicting results.  Yet, just
              as morphological data includes convergent/parallel derived features, the same
              molecular sequence can arise independently.  Such convergent or parallel
              features, known as homoplasies, can be very problematic if they are
              unrecognized and thus unwittingly used to associate taxa.  This project seeks
              to develop a methodology for eliminating homoplasies from molecular data by
              drawing only from "middle-repetitive sequences", thereby selectively utilizing
              rare genomic events.  Recognizable assemblages of these ("families") will be
              unique to a lineage and therefore "homoplasy-free" data will be available for
              phylogenetic reconstruction.  This methodology will be developed and tested
              with DNA sequence data from nine species of sea urchins.  If the investigator's
              suppositions are bore out with this test case, the results of this research may
              have very broad applicability and utility for numerous molecular systematists. 
               This award is made under NSF's Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER)
              Program, which is designed to fund innovative, high-risk research with the
              potential, if successful, for major discovery or contribution to future
              research directions.  If successful with this particular project for developing
              a refined methodology for obtaining informative molecular sequence data, Dr.
              Marshall will have made a contribution of potential utility to systematists
              working with a broad diversity of organisms with radiations in the Cenozoic.  A
              more efficient and reliable means of deriving reliable molecular phylogenies
              can offer great savings in both time and research funds.
