Title       : Environmentally Benign Semiconductor Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9528813

Award Number: 9528813
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5115500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhang Shadman shadman@erc.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9197,9215,EGCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528813  Shadman     The National Science Foundation and the Semiconductor
              Research Corporation have entered into a partnership to jointly select,
              support, and provide oversight  for this new Engineering Research Center in
              Environmentally Benign Semiconductor Manufacturing.  The University of Arizona
              is the lead institution along with Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
              Stanford University and the University of California at Berkeley.  The award is
              for five years with the possibility of renewal for an additional five years." 
              The vision of the proposed ERC is to create a unique multi-disciplinary culture
              to educate a new generation of engineering leaders and to produce critical
              pre-competitive science and technology for environmentally benign semiconductor
              manufacturing.  The goals of the center  are: (1) to advance the fundamental
              science and technology needed  to reduce the water usage, the waste and
              hazardous chemicals discharge, and the use of energy and chemicals, through
              source reduction, process alternatives/modifications, and emission abatement, 
              (2) to develop a fundamental integrated approach to the design of
              environmentally benign processes,  (3) to develop new educational programs for
              teaching environmental concepts to students who plan to work in the
              semiconductor industry, and  (4) to establish a pre-competitive and pro-active
              partnership between industry, government, and academic communities.  One of the
              major results from this center will be engineers and scientists educated in
              several disciplines who will be capable of incorporating environmental concerns
              into semiconductor manufacture from the inception of process design.     The
              research is organized within the following six thrust areas:  (a) plasma
              processes,  (b) non-plasma etch, clean and rinse processes,  (c) integrated
              chemical mechanical polishing and clean processes,  (d) water and aqueous
              chemicals,  (e) metrology and sensors for environmental applications, and  (f)
              exploratory areas for future thrusts.     For the  semiconductor manufacturing
              industry to remain competitive and socially responsible, environmentally
              friendly processes must be engineered from inception since it is too costly and
              impractical to retrofit existing billion dollar fabrication facilities.  This
              center can create the urgently needed focus, momentum and visibility to make a
              major impact on the semiconductor industry.  Unlike other areas in this
              industry, the proposed work is unlikely to be realized except through a
              coordinated investment of public and private funds. The environmental
              acceptability and efficient use of chemicals in manufacturing will increasingly
              influence the cost of the technology, and thusly the rate of technological
              development.
