Title       : Deep Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9528806

Award Number: 9528806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266923             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Smethie bsmeth@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1326,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528806  Smethie         The proposed project is part of a multi-institutional 
              integrated study of the outflow of newly formed bottom water from  the Weddell
              Sea and its dispersion into the South Atlantic Ocean.  It builds upon earlier
              successful studies of the inflow of  intermediate water masses into the Eastern
              Weddell Sea, their  modification within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction
              with  bottom water formation processes in the western Weddell Sea.  The  study
              is called Deep Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic  Intermediate Layers
              (DOVETAIL) and includes six components  involving hydrographic measurements,
              natural tracer experiments,  and modeling studies.  The study will be centered
              east of the  Drake Passage where water masses from the Weddell Sea and the 
              Scotia Sea come together in the Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and  will be carried
              out in cooperation with the national antarctic  programs of Germany and Spain. 
              This particular component  concerns the measurement of the chlorofluorocarbon
              concentration  as a tracer of residence time and movement of Weddell Gyre
              water.       The study has four related objectives.  The first is to  assess
              the quantity and the physical and chemical characteristics  of  Weddell Sea
              source waters for the confluence.  The second is  to describe the dominant
              processes associated with spreading and  sinking of dense antarctic waters
              within the Weddell-Scotia  Confluence.  The third is to estimate the
              ventilation rate of the  world ocean, and the fourth is to estimate seasonal
              fluctuations  in the regional ocean transport and hydrographic structure and to
               assess the likely influence of seasonal to interannual  variability on rates
              of ventilation by Weddell Sea waters.       Ventilation of the deep ocean --
              the rising of sub-surface  water masses to the surface to be recharged with
              atmospheric  gases and to give up heat to the atmosphere -- is a uniquely 
              antarctic phenomenon that has significant consequences for global  change by
              affecting the global reser voir of carbon dioxide, and  by modulating the
              amount and extent of seasonal sea ice in the  southern hemisphere.       This
              component will make measurements of three species of  chlorofluorocarbons (also
              known as freons or CFC's):  F-11, F-12,  and F-113.  Since the atmospheric
              concentration of these  anthropogenic gases has been tracked quite precisely
              for almost  fifty years, their oceanic values, and the ratios of their values 
              can be used to provide accurate estimates of the time since a  given water
              sample was last exposed to the atmosphere, and to  infer the time scales of
              water mass modification and mixing  processes in the Weddell Sea.  ***
