Title       : LTREB: Evaluation of Geothermally-modified Runoff and Nutrient Cycling in a
               Lowland Tropical Stream
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9528434

Award Number: 9528434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine M. Pringle pringle@sparc.ecology.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Triska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528434  Pringle  Previous research focused on the linkage between
              geothermally-introduced solutes and stream ecology in lowland rain forests of
              Costa Rica. Results indicated that phosphorus-rich streams exist 'side-by-side'
              with phosphorus poor streams. The source of the high phosphorus is
              geothermally-modified groundwater that creates a high spatial variability in
              stream solute chemistry. These findings represent patterns among streams
              draining much of the volcanic spine of Central America. This research will
              build on these previous findings. The current project will evaluate stream
              solute chemistry and incorporate important geomorphic features associated with
              local watershed runoff and geothermal inputs along two major stream drainages
              in Costa Rica. The hypothesis to be tested states that spatial and temporal
              patterns in solute chemistry of surface- and ground-water are related to three
              major geomorphic features of the volcanic landscape.    Process oriented
              studies in one of the study drainages will allow the linkage of stream solute
              chemistry and transport to ecosystem- and landscape-level processes.
              Experiments and stream monitoring will test the hypothesis that spatial and
              temporal patterns in nutrient limitation of algal growth and leaf litter
              decomposition in surface waters are controlled by the presence or absence of
              geothermally-introduced phosphorus, along with physical/hydrological
              characteristics of the stream channel.    Results from this project will
              comprise the only long-term data set on stream solute chemistry for primarily
              lowland tropical rainforest in Central America. Stream solute chemistry and
              process-oriented data are of fundamental importance to scientists seeking to
              understand and manage tropical forests and to predict the effects of regional
              environmental change on these threatened ecosystems.
