Title       : UV Photobiology of the Developmental Planktonic Stages of Antarctic Benthic
               Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9528089

Award Number: 9528089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isidro M. Bosch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528089  Bosch  Recently documented global decreases in stratospheric ozone have
               brought attention to the potential ecological consequences of  increased
              ultraviolet-B (UVB) radiation in marine communities.  Even without ozone
              depletion, UVB radiation penetrating into  surface waters of the ocean
              represents a biological hazard to  many marine organisms. The most extensive
              destruction of ozone  has been occurring over the Antarctic continent and
              Southern  Ocean, where over 50% depletion is recorded each spring.  A major 
              obstacle in assessing UV effects is that very little is known  about the UV
              photobiology of individual species.  In the  Antarctic, some of the more
              ecologically dominant benthic  invertebrate species occupy intertidal and
              shallow subtidal  depths where biological effects of UVB have already been 
              documented. Many of these species have planktonic development and  their
              spawning season coincides with the period when ozone  depletion is occurring;
              thus their microscopic embryos and  larvae are exposed to increasingly higher
              levels of UVB.  At  present there is no information on the potential short- or
              long-  term effects of increased UVB levels on populations of Antarctic 
              benthic invertebrates.    The research proposed here will focus on the UV
              photobiology of  three important Antarctic invertebrate species that inhabit 
              intertidal and subtidal areas in the region of Palmer Station,  Anvers Island,
              Antarctic Peninsula.  These species are the limpet  Nacella concinna, the sea
              urchin Sterechinus neumayeri and the  sea star Odontaster validus. The adults
              of these species are  dominant members of Antarctic intertidal and shallow
              subtidal  benthic communities, and their embryos and larvae develop for  months
              in surface waters from late austral winter through summer.  This study will
              evaluate the impact of ambient UVB on early  stages (gametes, embryos and
              larvae) of the life histories of  these species by 1) examining potential UV
              exposure levels, 2)  assessing differential sensitivit ies, 3) identifying
              molecular,  chromosomal and morphological UVBinduced damage, and 4)  evaluating
              potential protection and recovery from UVB exposure.  Since these species have
              taxonomic equivalents at both temperate  and tropical latitudes, this work will
              provide important  biological parameters for increasing our knowledge about UV 
              effects on both local and global scales.
