Title       : Synthesis and Properties of Narrow-band Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9528826

Award Number: 9528826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $461956             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Goodenough jgoodenough@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9528826  Goodenough    Previous studies of the evolution of electronic
              properties  have revealed that nature accommodates the first-order  character
              of the cross-overs in a variety of ways: from  localized to itinerant
              electronic behavior, from primarily  ionic to primarily covalent metal-oxygen
              bonding in mixed-  metal oxides, from Curie-Weiss to Pauli paramagnetism in 
              both single-valent and mixed-valent systems.  Classical  phase segregation,
              charge-density waves, or ferroelectric  displacements represent static
              accommodations that are well-  studied. This research addresses the more subtle
              problem of  dynamic accommodations. Initially, a major emphasis will be  placed
              on oxides with perovskite-related structures. An ABO3  perovskite contains a
              BO3 array of corner-shared BO6  octahedra. A mismatch between the A-O and B-O
              equilibrium  bond lengths may be relieved by a cooperative rotation of  the BO6
              octahedra that bend the B-O-B bond angle from 180 .  Perovskites with
              transition-metal B cations may contain,  depending on the strength of the B-O-B
              interactions, either  B-cation redox couples or narrow, antibonding bands with 
              energies close to or overlapping the Fermi energy. The  strength of a B-O-B
              interaction and therefore the bandwidth  and the band occupancy of the BO3
              array may be varied by  isovalent and/or aliovalent substitution on the A
              sites.  Moreover, the ca 180  B-O-B bond may accommodate the  coexistence of
              different B-O bond strengths within the same  crystallographic structure by the
              displacement of a bridging  atom toward one B atom and away from the other on
              the  opposite side. These displacements are generally cooperative  and may be
              either static or dynamic. The phenomenon of high-  temperature
              superconductivity appears to be one example of a  dynamic accommodation.
              Another is the apparent coexistence  of Mott-Hubbard and Fermi-liquid states in
              the perovskite  system Srl-xCaxV03 where spectral weight is transferred from 
              the latter to the former.  Several techniques are de veloped  for synthesizing
              these marginally stable oxides, and  measuring the temperature dependence of
              resistance, magnetic  susceptibility, and Seebeck coefficient under pressure. 
              These probes can give important, if indirect, information on  dynamic
              processes.  %%%  This research is motivated by three fundamental questions:  1)
              What is the underlying physical process responsible for  the phenomenon of
              high-TC superconductivity? 2) How can one  use the understanding of this
              phenomenon as a guide in the  design of improved high-TC materials? 3) What are
              the  different ways by which nature accommodates the transition  from localized
              to itinerant electronic behavior in solids?  Initial emphasis will be placed on
              the study of oxides with  perovskite-related structures.
