Title       : CRB: Africa's Savanna Parks: Natural Islands or Interdependent Communities?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9200020

Award Number: 9200020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taber D. Allison                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Georgiadis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wildlife Conservation Soc
	      185th Street & Southern Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  104601099    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                   The fate of most of Africa's savanna parks is to become                   
              islands in a sea of humanity.  The effects of park isolation n                 
              community dynamics will depend fundamentally on the degree to                  
              which wildlife populations are naturally linked by dispersal and               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              gene flow.  I propose to address an issue that will affect the                 
              future management of the large herbivores that to a great extent               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              are characterize and justify these protected areas:  To what                   
              extent are Africa's savanna parks already conserving naturally                 
              isolated lineages, and by implication, dynamically independent                 
              populations?                                                                   
              Since all parks and species cannot be studied, a framework for                 
              predicting the gross population structure of a given species is                
                                                                                             
              required.  This is provided by the 'Resource Use Hypothesis'                   
              (RUH) which states that vegetation and geographic discontinuities              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              form barriers to gene flow for species that are habitat                        
              'specialists', but not for species that are habitat                            
              'generalists'.  While ecological and macroevolutionary evidence                
                                                                                             
              supports the RUH, the microevolutionary component of the                       
              hypothesis has not been examined.  The RUH will be tested by                   
              examining the population structure of six large herbivore species              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              (elephant, buffalo, impala, zebra, giraffe, and wildebeest) that               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              are common to three savanna parks in Tanzania (Serengeti and                   
              Tarangire) and Botswana (Chobe).  These species were chosen                    
              because they have strongly contrasting food and habitat                        
              preferences.  These savanna parks were chosen because they have                
                                                                                             
              similar large mammal communities and, most important, because                  
              their geographical attributes create an ideal setting to test the              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              RUH.  If the RUh is supported it will provide a mechanistic model              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              for prediction the population structure of species with known                  
              habitat requirements within a region of known habitat                          
              characteristics.
