Title       : NSF/AID: Terrestrial Vertebrate Faunas of the Humid Montane Forests of Oaxaca:
               An Intensive Biological Survey and Geographic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1992 
File        : a9200863

Award Number: 9200863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169341             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Townsend Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar F. Villela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor S. Cordero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adolfoo G. Siguenza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1198,
Abstract    :
                   The study consists of an analysis of patterns of                          
              distribution, diversity and endemism in the terrestrial                        
              vertebrate fauna (amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals) of                 
              humid montane forests in the state of Oaxaca in southern Mexico.               
              Two years will be spent exploring the four mountain ranges in the              
              state that are least well known faunistically: the Sierra de                   
              Miahuatlan, Sierra de Yucuyacua, Sierra de Huautla, and various                
              mountains in the Chimalapas region.  Information from other                    
              recent explorations, as well as historical records, will be added              
              in a geographic information system (GIS) data base.  The GIS will              
              allow analysis of the faunistic data in relation to physical                   
              geographic features, economic characteristics, and political                   
              limits.  This study is a collaborative effort between the Field                
              Museum of Natural History and the Universidad Nacional Autonoma                
              de Mexico, and will result in the training of seven young Mexican              
              biologists in techniques for biological inventories, data                      
              management, specimen curation, and analysis of conservation                    
              priorities.
