Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Embeddings and Immersions in S3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1994     
File        : a9200881

Award Number: 9200881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86600              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Menasco menasco@tait.math.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The theme of this project is understanding how certain types              
              of surfaces and 2-dimensional objects can be embedded, immersed,               
              and, in general, positioned in the 3-dimensional sphere.  Three                
              ongoing collaborative projects and one individual one are involved,            
              concerning (1) links represented by closed braids, with Joan S.                
              Birman of Columbia University, (2) planar surfaces and the cabling             
              conjecture, with Abigail A. Thompson of the University of                      
              California, Davis, (3) embeddings and immersions in highly                     
              alternating link exteriors, with Morwen B. Thistlethwaite of the               
              University of Tennessee, and (4) the Milnor-Bennequin conjecture               
              and unknotting number.  (1) seeks better ways of calculating about             
              such links, possibly leading to a more efficient effective                     
              algorithm than Haken's for distinguishing oriented links.  (3)                 
              builds upon a recent joint triumph in settling the hundred-year-old            
              Tait flyping conjecture.                                                       
                   Knots and their generalization, links, are rather elementary              
              geometric objects whose really interesting properties are                      
              topological.  By this we mean that two geometric knots do not                  
              differ in an interesting way if one of them can be transformed to              
              look just like the other without cutting or untying it, just by                
              pushing its string about to rearrange the crossings.  Topologists              
              say that they are two different geometric realizations of the same             
              topological knot.  Nevertheless, it is not a trivial matter to                 
              recognize when one complicated geometric knot is topologically                 
              different from another, rather than just a different geometric                 
              realization.  This problem can be addressed by computing certain               
              numbers or polynomials which are called "topological invariants,"              
              meaning that they always have the same value for different                     
              geometric realizations of the same topological knot.  The problem              
              would be reduced to pure algebra if there were one invariant which             
              also always had different values for geometric realizations of                 
              different topological knots, but life is not so simple -- no single            
              invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all the known invariants               
              taken together.  It is therefore valuable to investigate new                   
              invariants, some of the most useful being those inspired in recent             
              years by ideas from quantum physics.  The investigator has been in             
              the thick of this activity and has been particularly successful in             
              applying some new polynomial invariants to settle old questions                
              about alternating knots.  He will continue to exploit these                    
              techniques as well as some more geometric ones.
