Title       : U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research: Sodium and Sulfur Volatilization, Capture,
               and Aerosol Processes in Combustionand Gasification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9200224

Award Number: 9200224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W.  J. Frederick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5935      FINLAND
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor W. J. Frederick and                              
              members of his research group at Oregon State                                  
              University to collaborate in chemical engineering                              
              research with two groups of engineers from Finland.                            
              The objectives of their cooperative research are to                            
              provide basic experimental data and fundamental models                         
              for the processes involved in sodium aerosol formation                         
              and deposition and also sulfur volatilization and                              
              capture in the combustion and gasification of high                             
              sodium and/or sulfur content fuels.  Their research                            
              plan links the complementary expertise and                                     
              experimental capabilities of three research groups: 1)                         
              Dr. Frederick's group in the Chemical Engineering                              
              Department of Oregon State University, with expertise                          
              in rate processes and combustion of high sulfur/sodium                         
              fuels; 2) the Combustion Chemistry Group led by Dr. M.                         
              M. Hupa at the Abo Academy University, in Turku,                               
              Finland, which offers expertise in combustion                                  
              chemistry; and 3) the Aerosol Technology Group of the                          
              Technical Research Center of Finland, in Espoo, led by                         
              E. I. Kauppinen, which brings particularly strong                              
              theoretical and experimental capabilities in aerosol                           
              science.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The high sodium and sulfur content fuels being studied                         
              in this project are of industrial importance to both                           
              the U.S. and Finland.  This is reflected in the                                
              development of fluidized bed and pressurized                                   
              gasification processes for coal and spent pulping                              
              liquors in both countries.  The results of the                                 
              proposed research are expected to be useful in the                             
              design of new processes such as pressurized                                    
              gasification of high-sulfur coals or spent pulping                             
              liquors as well as in the optimization of existing                             
              technologies.
