Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Basic Mechanisms and Engineering Issues for the
               Fabrication of Smooth Diamond andCubic Boron Nitride Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1992     
File        : a9200869

Award Number: 9200869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yonhua Tzeng tzengy@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1456,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a long-term research visit by Professor                
              Yonhua Tzeng, Department of Electrical Engineering, Auburn                     
              University in Alabama to Japan for a cooperative research project              
              with Professor Masanori Yoshikawa, Department of Mechanical                    
              Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology.  The researchers plan              
              to undertake a study on diamond film synthesis by arc discharge                
              plasma jets and the polishing of deposited diamond films by                    
              mechanical and chemical means.  During his visit to Japan                      
              Professor Tzeng will also be visiting Professors Masao Murakawa                
              and Y. Hirose in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the               
              Nippon Institute of Technology in Saitama.  During these visits                
              they will be performing research on ion plating of cubic boron                 
              nitride films and flame CD of diamond films.                                   
                                                                                             
              The research results have the potential of achieving high-rate                 
              deposition and cost-effective polishing of diamond and cubic                   
              boron nitride films which are crucial to practical applications                
              of these high performance materials to electronic, optical,                    
              thermal, and mechanical devices and systems.  Professors                       
              Yoshikawa, Murakawa and Hirose are all recognized experts and                  
              their laboratories are world leaders in the areas of diamond and               
              cubic boron nitride films.  Their previous experience, coupled                 
              with Professor Tzeng's expertise in the field should provide a                 
              fruitful collaboration.  It is expected that collaborations                    
              between the researchers will continue even after the formal                    
              agreement has terminated.
