Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Undergraduate Geologic Research in
               Pennsylvania: A Consortial REU Site Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9200221

Award Number: 9200221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence L. Malinconico, Jr.   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                    The Geology Departments of Bryn Mawr College, Bucknell                   
              University, Lafayette College, and Lehigh University have                      
              successfully formed a consortium fostering undergraduate geologic              
              research.  Important research opportunities in Pennsylvania and                
              surrounding areas will be undertaken by undergraduates from these              
              institutions in subjects as diverse as tectonics and hydrogeology.             
                    To comprehend fully how a research project is conceived and              
              conducted, students will generate a proposal, conduct field work,              
              sampling, and/or laboratory studies, as appropriate, and                       
              periodically report on their research progress.  Ultimately they               
              will present their results formally to faculty and colleagues at               
              a Consortium symposium.  Independent, undergraduate research begins            
              with close supervision and guidance by one or more faculty members             
              and may evolve into senior theses or projects that reflect original            
              and individual student effort.  These projects are materially                  
              improved by discussion and interaction with other students, working            
              on allied problems.                                                            
                     Follow up activities will focus on revision of the student              
              reports in preparation for presentation of the findings in a                   
              symposium session, involving students and faculty, not only from               
              the Consortium Schools, but also from non-participating schools.               
              Special efforts will be made to invite students and faculty from               
              schools with large proportions of underrepresented students, both              
              to promote the efforts of the previous student projects and also               
              to recruit potential student/faculty pairs for the following year's            
              projects.
