Title       : Institutional Support for Innovations in Econometric and Statistical Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9200649

Award Number: 9200649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. McFadden mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leo Breiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The last two decades have seen an explosion in computational                   
              capacity, and a corresponding reorientation of statistics and                  
              econometrics toward making intensive use of computation to reveal              
              more about data and sharpen the inferences drawn.  Statistical                 
              examples are the development of robust estimation methods,                     
              graphical interfaces for data examination, and bootstrap and                   
              other resampling techniques to sharpen finite-sample inferences.               
              Econometrics examples are the development of semiparametric                    
              methods, nonlinear time series techniques, and simulation methods              
              for inference.  Incorporation of these methods into econometrics               
              courses and applied econometrics software has been uneven,                     
              particularly for methods developed primarily in statistics.  This              
              grant supports research and teaching conferences on statistical                
              computation and econometric applications in order to address this              
              problem.  The activities planned under this project promote the                
              use of current statistical methods and UNIX workstation software               
              in econometrics, encourage the augmentation of statistical                     
              software systems (such as the S language) with the procedures and              
              modules needed for many standard econometric procedures,                       
              familiarize statisticians with some of the methodological and                  
              computational problems encouraged in econometrics applications,                
              and encourage joint developments of computational methods.                     
                                                                                             
              Three research conferences are planned, one in each year of the                
              proposal.  The conferences deal with current issues in computer-               
              intensive methods in statistics and econometrics.  Three teaching              
              conferences will be held, again one in each year.  These                       
              conferences are designed to provide an intensive introduction in               
              methods and issues in statistical computation to groups of                     
              graduate students nominated by Departments of Economics and                    
              Statistics around the country.   These activities are coordinated              
              to achieve the objectives of (1) providing a statistical                       
              computing environment that integrates statistical and econometric              
              software, with documentation and tutorials that encourage more                 
              effective use of existing software by econometrics and statistics              
              faculty and graduate students, (2) identifying productive areas                
              for research and development on statistical algorithms, and                    
              suggesting standards for econometric software, (3) encouraging                 
              the implementation of new algorithms in "open look" software, and              
              (4) providing "how to" materials to the econometric research                   
              community on setting up and operating a statistical computing                  
              environment for research and teaching, and on econometric                      
              software standards.
