Title       : A Latitudinal Survey of Freshwater Ascomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9200885

Award Number: 9200885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Shearer carolshe@UIUC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Leland Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A survey will be conducted for three years to collect,                    
              identify and isolate Ascomycetes (fungi) from freshwater                       
              habitats.  Ascomycetes will be collected from submerged aquatic                
              macrophytes and woody debris in both lentic and lotic habitats                 
              along two latitudinal gradients in North America.  Identified                  
              specimens will be deposited in major herbaria; cultures will be                
              screened for the production of asexual states and novel                        
              antibiotics, and deposited at the American Type Culture                        
              Collection.  Descriptions of new or noteworthy species will be                 
              published in international journals and a monograph with                       
              descriptions, illustrations and a key will be prepared.  Data                  
              from this study will contribute to our understanding of                        
              phylogenetic relationships among Ascomycetes, the influence of                 
              latitude on fungal diversity and composition, teleomorph-anamorph              
              relationships, and the morphological adaption of Ascomycetes to                
              freshwater habitats.  Cultures obtained during this study                      
              represent a new source of secondary compounds and provide                      
              material to mycologists for further study in systematic,                       
              developmental, physiological, molecular, and ecological studies.               
              This project will provide training to graduate student sin                     
              ascomycete systematics, preparing and depositing herbarium                     
              specimens, identifying and describing taxa, isolating fungi and                
              depositing cultures, and manipulating a large taxonomic database.
