Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduate Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9200510

Award Number: 9200510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Murhammer murham@engineering.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor G. J. Rodgers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              The University of Iowa has a two year REU site in the Department               
              of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering.  Students are matched with            
              one of six faculty advisors that conduct research in an area most              
              closely related to their interests.  The individual projects are               
              in research areas of expertise of the supervising REU faculty to               
              ensure direct scientific interaction between the REU students and              
              graduate students of each research group.  A close student-faculty             
              interaction will be developed during daily discussions about the               
              progress of the particular project and other research related                  
              issues.  In addition, weekly seminars on research-related issues               
              and many social events will be held.  The summer's program will                
              conclude with an "in-house" research conference during which the               
              REU students will present their research results.  It is expected              
              that significant guidance by the REU advisor will be necessary                 
              during the early stages of the research.  All of these programs and            
              activities are planned to achieve the goal of making                           
              underrepresented groups more aware of graduate research                        
              opportunities in chemical and biochemical engineering to increase              
              the number of minorities and women pursuing advanced engineering               
              degrees.
