Title       : Symposium on Higher Fungal Classification: A Contemporary Overview; Tomales Bay,
               CA; August, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9200724

Award Number: 9200724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don R. Reynolds dreynold@bcf.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1173,
Abstract    :
              In the present classification for fungi, the Basidiomycota and                 
              Ascomycota are classified on the basis of the "whole fungus" (i.e.,            
              the vegetative and reproductive structures, with the latter                    
              weighted) whereas the Deuteromycota were form taxa based on                    
              relatively few, usually artificial, characters.  This problem,                 
              which will be addressed  in the workshop, "Higher Fungal                       
              Classification," was clearly enunciated by Thomas Bruns, "If all               
              fungi can be compared through their nucleic acids and placed on a              
              single phylogenetic tree, do we need to maintain the                           
              Deuteromycetes?"  Clearly from a scientific perspective the answer             
              is an unqualified "yes.  This taxonomic solution for these asexual             
              forms will be most feasible and practical if the phylogeny of the              
              basidiomycetes and ascomycetes has been solidly based on rigorous              
              methods of data collection and analysis.  Various laboratories in              
              the U.S.A. have initiated studies that incorporate detailed                    
              analyses of macro- and microcharacters of the phenotype, molecular             
              sequence data, and cladistic algorithms to develop those                       
              phylogenies; however, it appears that protocol has not spread as               
              widely as is necessary to complete this endeavor.  Therefore, this             
              workshop could have a secondary effect---the continued spread of               
              molecular techniques in the study of phylogenetic relationships                
              within the fungal kingdom.
