Title       : Tolerance Synthesis for Design and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1992 
File        : a9200900

Award Number: 9200900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43568              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsu-Pin (Ben) Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   Tolerance synthesis is a major task of product and process                
              design and is in a period of extensive study due both to increased             
              demands for quality products and to increasing automation of                   
              machining and assembly.  Optimum tolerance design and synthesis                
              ensures good quality product at low cost.  The primary goal of this            
              research project is to develop an analytical methodology for                   
              concurrent optimization of design and manufacturing tolerance                  
              syntheses to enhance product manufacturability, quality and cost               
              effectiveness.  Based on a more complete understanding of the                  
              relationships between dimensional tolerance and machining cost,                
              process capability and tolerance, mathematical models for these                
              relationships are to be formulated.  As its objective function the             
              minimum manufacturing cost, and optimization model for concurrent              
              tolerance syntheses will then be developed based on the above                  
              relationships.  The project will extend and augment previous                   
              research on the development of solution procedures for the                     
              tolerance optimization model.  In particular, simulated annealing              
              algorithm and discrete optimization techniques will be investigated            
              and implement.                                                                 
                    This research project will tie together disparate efforts                
              that tend to treat design tolerance synthesis and manufacturing                
              tolerance allocation as separate problems.  The goal is to achieve             
              more economical manufacturing                                                  
              through tolerance optimization.
