Title       : REU Site: Summer Research Institute in Experimental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9200624

Award Number: 9200624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92060              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Coleman colemanj@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin K. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Poulson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Psychology at The               
              University of South Carolina to support ten undergraduate students             
              in a program called Summer Research Institute in Experimental                  
              Psychology.   The program provides a forum for educating                       
              undergraduate students about he field of experimental psychology.              
              The current appeal of applied psychology is drawing far more                   
              applicants to those programs, particularly among minority students.            
                                                                                             
              The Institute focuses student interest and enthusiasm on the basic             
              science areas of psychology.  The eight week USC Summer Research               
              Institute will permit well qualified minority and non-minority                 
              undergraduate students majoring in behavioral science, an                      
              experience in graduate level research including an opportunity to              
              formulate and conduct an experiment with individual guidance from              
              energetic and supportive research faculty.  The student will                   
              experience major phases of experimental research including                     
              literature review, hypothesis generation, data collection, data                
              organization, statistical analysis, and writing a report in the                
              style of the American Psychological Association.  Student                      
              experience will be enriched by weekly research seminars where                  
              assigned readings are discussed, and by-weekly sessions on problems            
              of research design and statistics in experimental psychology.                  
              Students receive gratis course credit for their work.  This program            
              emphasis is much needed, as the U.S. is perceived as the leader in             
              the field of experimental psychology, but our universities must be             
              able to motivate and train the best students for future careers in             
              the vital areas of behavioral science.  This Summer Institute                  
              provides one vehicle to enhance these goals.
