Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Elliptic Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1992     
File        : a9200781

Award Number: 9200781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54474              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill C. Pipher jpipher@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports mathematical research focusing on three               
              areas of analysis and partial differential equations.  The first               
              concerns the solvability of the Neumann problem for general                    
              second order elliptic operators with bounded measurable                        
              coefficients.  The essential feature here is the lack of                       
              smoothness assumed on the coefficients which brings the research               
              closer to representations of problems occurring in the physical                
              world.  Successful work has already been done on such questions                
              for the Dirichlet problem.  In the present context one is                      
              interested in specifying the boundary flux rather than the                     
              boundary values of the solution.                                               
                   The second area will concentrate on the solvability of                    
              boundary value problems for higher order elliptic equations in                 
              domains with less than smooth boundaries.  That is, boundaries                 
              with corners and nondifferentiable edges.  This problem also                   
              relates to problems arising in more concrete applications.                     
              Progress has been made on the Dirichlet problem with constant                  
              coefficients and on finding sharp conditions on the domain which               
              allow for solvability of the Neumann problem.  Work remains to be              
              done in classifying solutions of homogeneous problems with                     
              boundary data in the Besov or Sobolev spaces.                                  
                   The third problem concerns the existence of a convex lower                
              bound for the first eigenvalue of the Laplace Beltrami operator                
              on the sphere minus a polar cap.  Numerical estimates have been                
              obtained on the value of the eigenvalue as a function of the size              
              of the cap.  Sharper, analytic estimates will provide estimates                
              for the growth of subharmonic functions as well as have important              
              consequences for free boundary problems.
