Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Thermistor Problems and Interfacial Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1992        
File        : a9200459

Award Number: 9200459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinfu Chen Xinfu+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project contains two research areas: (1) thermistor                       
              modeling, which involves a nonlinear system of two degenerate                  
              elliptic partial differential equations, and (2) interfacial                   
              dynamics which involves the motion of hypersurfaces, the motion                
              of level sets of solutions of parabolic partial differential                   
              equations, and the relations between these two motions.  For the               
              first problem, the investigator plans to use the classical                     
              analysis of elliptic partial differential equations, variational               
              inequalities, free boundary analysis, and some complex analysis                
              to establish the existence, uniqueness, and regularity of the                  
              solutions and to provide numerical schemes for the calculation of              
              the solutions and the fundamental relations between the voltage                
              (or current) applied to the thermistor and its total resistivity,              
              which is essential for designing and testing thermistors.  For                 
              the interfacial dynamics problem, the investigator will use                    
              singular perturbation methods, viscosity methods, functional                   
              analysis, etc., to establish some physically based criteria for                
              the motion of the interfaces, and to provide some mathematical                 
              justification on the uniformity between the modern models and the              
              classical models in solidification theory and related areas.                   
                   A thermistor is a heat sensitive electrical resistor which                
              has  been widely used in current regulation, switching, gas                    
              detection, control and alarms, etc.  The investigator will use                 
              mathematical tools to find relations among the characteristics of              
              thermistors, thereby providing guidelines for practical design                 
              and testing.  Interface, in the solidification case, is the                    
              boundary between solid and liquid.  Motion of the interface is                 
              essential to the solidification theory.  Many good models                      
              concerning the motion of interfaces have been proposed.  The                   
              investigator plans to justify rigorously these relations,                      
              especially the common aspects of various models, and find                      
              physically based criteria for the motion of the interfaces where               
              the current models give multiple choices.
