Title       : Undergraduate Research at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9200040

Award Number: 9200040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Lohr slohr@crestedbutte.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Schlessman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to continue a successful Research                    
              Experiences for Undergraduates Site at The Rocky Mountain                      
              Biological Laboratory.  Ten undergraduate students per year for                
              three years, will be supported to participate in research focusing             
              on field biology studies.  The RMBL has a strong tradition of field            
              research and education, and has been providing undergraduate                   
              research opportunities for 64 years.  Each student will attend the             
              RMBL for 10 weeks.  Guidance will be provided in scientific design,            
              project selection and initiation, and project completion.  A ratio             
              of one supervising research mentor for each student will be                    
              maintained.  Students will be encouraged to participate in the many            
              research opportunities available at the RMBL, such as formal and               
              informal seminars, interactions with visiting scientists, and                  
              exposure to all levels of a field biology community.  The                      
              intellectual progress of each student will be monitored carefully              
              by the Program Coordinator and by each research mentor, as the                 
              summer proceeds and students move from relative dependence to                  
              relative independence in their research pursuits.  The RMBL is                 
              particularly proud of its success in educating women interested in             
              field biology, and in attracting senior female scientists.  Plans              
              for increasing minority student participation are included in this             
              award.
