Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Fluid Inclusion- Deformation
               Microstructure Interactions from Naturally- Deformed Quartz
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1992    
File        : a9200658

Award Number: 9200658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 5950      SWITZERLAND
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1573,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Eric L. Johnson of Central                       
              Michigan University to collaborate in geological research with                 
              Professor Neil Mancktelow of the Geological Institute of the                   
              Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich.  The objective                  
              of their research is to gain a better understanding of the                     
              relationships between the microstructural development of a                     
              quartz-rich rock and the fluid contained in that rock.  They                   
              will carry out a systematic study of the interaction of grain                  
              boundary fluids and fluid inclusions during the progressive                    
              deformation of quartz-dominated rocks and veins from the                       
              Simplon Fault Zone (SFZ) in southwestern Switzerland and                       
              northern Italy.  Their research objective requires an                          
              interdisciplinary approach which is well served by their                       
              complementary expertise in structural geology (Mancktelow) and                 
              metamorphic petrology (Johnson.)  The SFZ is an ideal natural                  
              laboratory for the proposed research since it contains an                      
              unusually wide range of rock deformation types that have                       
              already been quantitatively studied by Mancktelow.                             
                                                                                             
              The use of fluid inclusion data from naturally deformed rocks                  
              is complicated by the unknown effects of deformation on the                    
              compositions and densities of fluid inclusions.  During                        
              deformation, the modification, genesis, and annihilation of                    
              fluid inclusions is intimately tied to the formation and                       
              migration of grain boundaries and the distribution,                            
              composition and physical properties of the grain boundary                      
              fluid(s).  The observations and models to be obtained in this                  
              international collaborative project will provide a basis for                   
              the meaningful use of fluid inclusion data from deformed                       
              rocks.
