Title       : CRB: Analysis of the Regeneration Niche of Six Herbaceous Perennials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9200511

Award Number: 9200511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Hendrix Stephen-Hendrix@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Cruden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
              Restoration of degraded communities is an important tool for                   
              basic research as it provides an acid test of our understanding                
              of ecological processes.  Successful restoration of communities                
              requires a thorough understanding of successful establishment and              
              persistance of plant species (i.e. their regeneration niche).                  
              Current hypotheses that explain why species may vary in their                  
              ability to colonize and persist in communities are few and have                
              not been adequately tested.  In this study we will analyze and                 
              compare important regeneration niche characteristics of eight                  
              species of perennial, prairie forbs which vary in establishment                
              success in restoration projects.  Using degraded remnant                       
              populations of different sizes, density, and dispersion, we will               
              analyze pollination success, fecundity, predispersal seed                      
              predation and herbivory of each species.  We also analyze                      
              germination patterns of seeds from the remnants.  Experimental                 
              field studies will be used to determine seed longevity in the                  
              soil bank and the effects of disturbance and cover type on                     
              seedling emergence and survivorship.  The type of study we                     
              propose is essential to understanding successful establishment                 
              and persistance of perennials in complex communities as well as                
              developing successful restoration and management plans.
