Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9200634

Award Number: 9200634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Wainger wainger@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Seeger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9232,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work supported by this award will focus on several areas of               
              mathematical analysis related to singular integral operators,                  
              averages over curves and surfaces, maximal functions, Fourier                  
              integral operators, and Fourier multipliers on compact and                     
              noncompact manifolds. One of the central problems in mathematical              
              analysis is that of recovering a function through various                      
              differentiation techniques applied to integrals of the function                
              restricted to curves or surfaces.  Although there is now a                     
              considerable body of literature on this subject, the curves have               
              always been confined to those satisfying strong curvature                      
              conditions. Efforts to obtain more general information will                    
              require local maximal function estimates on compact sets.  The                 
              thrust of the research will be to find these estimates first.                  
              This work, in turn, has close connections with singular integral               
              operators of Calderon-Zygmund type.  One of the obstructions is                
              the dependence of past arguments on the Fourier transform.  There              
              is now some evidence that progress is possible which will bypass               
              this impediment. Other work will concentrate on local smoothing                
              properties for wave equations.  The general idea behind local                  
              smoothing is one of establishing measurement of the size of a                  
              solution of a wave equation for time periods rather than for a                 
              fixed instant of time.  The measurements are given in terms of                 
              the boundary values associated with the equation.  Some local                  
              smoothing results have been obtained, especially in higher                     
              dimensions.  The most difficult cases are spatial dimensions two               
              and three. Ultimately, one must establish variants of the Kakeya-              
              maximal operator and control of its p-th power norm.                           
                   Work on estimates of degenerate Fourier integral operators,               
              radial Fourier multipliers on noncompact Riemannian manifolds and              
              estimates of the Szego kernel for pseudoconvex domains will                    
              continue.  Mathematical research in harmonic analysis seeks to                 
              study the fine structure of mathematical functions and their                   
              underlying domains of definition.  The tools developed by this                 
              work bring out hidden relationships not ordinarily detected by                 
              more classical methods.
