Title       : RUI: Vortex Arrays in Superconducting Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9200267

Award Number: 9200267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47400              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Garner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              RUI:  Vortex Arrays in Superconducting Multilayers - in the current            
              context, a vortex is a tube of magnetic field which penetrates the             
              bulk of a superconducting material.  The structure, distribution,              
              and elastic properties of vortices in superconducting multilayer               
              materials is of fundamental importance to both their physical                  
              characterization and to their potential for technological                      
              applications.  Vortex arrays play a role in determining the upper              
              and lower critical magnetic fields for multilayer superconductors.             
              Intrinsic and extrinsic pinning of vortices due to layering or to              
              defects at interfaces is likely to be of great importance for                  
              understanding of superconducting multilayers.  Similar issues, such            
              as the flow and creep of vortices in the presence of a transport               
              current and the melting of a flux lattice, currently limit the                 
              application of high-Tc superconductors.  The proposal is to study              
              the effects vortices have on Josephson-coupled multilayers                     
              consisting of alternating layers of superconducting sheets and                 
              insulating layers.  Using Ginzburg-Landau theory, the properties               
              listed above will be studied for real materials in realistic                   
              environments.  The results are expected to be relevent to high-Tc              
              materials.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Superconductors are of particular interest to materials science                
              because they represent both a splendid example of a quantum                    
              mechanical phase transition and a unique class of materials having             
              many potential applications.  Under conditions of high magnetic                
              field (or high current density), some superconductors become                   
              threaded by small tubular regions of normal material, called                   
              vortices.  One class of superconducting materials which admits                 
              vortices consists of thin layers of superconductor separated by                
              thin layers of normal material.  This is a common configuration for            
              superconducting materials intended for real-world applications.                
              Understanding the properties of such materials well enough to                  
              predict and utilize their special nature is crucial to developing              
              applications for both typical and the high-Tc superconductors.                 
              This is the goal of the current study.
