Title       : Survey and Inventory of Selected Arthropods in the MidSouth Coastal Plain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9200856

Award Number: 9200856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry D. Corpus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence L. Schiefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Unique and threatened habitats in the midsouth Coastal Plain              
              will be surveyed for mites, Microlepidoptera (moths), and                      
              caddisflies, which are major components of the biodiversity                    
              present in soil and aquatic microhabitats and on plant hosts.                  
              Unique habitats to be surveyed in Alabama, Louisiana, and                      
              Mississippi include inland and coastal prairies, coastal                       
              savannahs and dunes, bottomland hardwood forest, mesophytic                    
              forests on loessal hills, and selected streams and other aquatic               
              habitats.  These habitats are threatened by urbanization, clear-               
              cutting of forests, agricultural practices, proposed placement of              
              regional hazardous waste dumps, and stream channelization and                  
              pollution.  Four senior researchers from Mississippi State                     
              University will be assisted by collaborators to document the                   
              fauna with use of a wide array of collecting methods.  Larvae of               
              leafminers and stem-root borers will be reared to obtain data on               
              host plants and life histories.  The survey will result in                     
              publications that document morphology, ecology, biogeography, and              
              systematics of mites, microlepidoptera, and Trichoptera in the                 
              midsouth.  The survey also will provide biodiversity data for                  
              documenting the need for habitat conservation.
