Title       : System Support for High Performance Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9200832

Award Number: 9200832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1599262            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward D. Lazowska lazowska@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry M. Levy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Zahorjan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2876,9139,9148,9194,9215,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                       The fundamental issue addressed in this work is the structuring  of
              operating systems to take advantage of multiprocessors so as to  yield the best
              possible application performance.  The division of  labor between the kernel
              and the user level is different on a  multiprocessor than on a uniprocessor. 
              On a uniprocessor, the kernel  is responsible for address spaces,
              communication, resource allocation,  threads, and thread scheduling.  On a
              shared memory multiprocessor,  the kernel iis left in charge of address spaces
              and resource  allocation, but communication, threads, and thread scheduling are
               implemented at user level through runtime support in each address  space. 
              Furthermore, each address space is in direct control  over certain key aspects
              of virtual memory management and file  management.  It is important to
              understand that while ``micro-kernel'' designs such  as Mach 3.0 take the
              important step of moving the file system, the  virtual memory system, etc., out
              of the kernel to user-level  servers, they leave cross-address space
              communication, threads, and  thread scheduling in the kernel.  There are
              structural differences  between these monolithic kernels, micro-kernel designs
              and the ``nano-kernel''  advocated here.  In experimental work over the past
              several years, the researchers have  constructed proof-of-concept prototypes in
              most of the essential areas  that must be addressed:  locking protocols,
              user-level threads,  cross-address space communication, the kernel interface,
              processor  allocation policies, and user-level virtual memory management.  The 
              objectives in this work are of two kinds, direct and indirect.  Direct
              objectives include:  (1) integrating these proof-of-concept prototypes into a
              single  system, convincingly demonstrating the viability of the  overall
              approach; and  (2) solving the problems that stand in the way of this 
              integration, some of which are known and some of which  can only be discovered
              by undertaking the task.  Indirect objectives include:  (a) using the ``core''
              of the resulting system to study a number  of important policy questions
              (thread scheduling,  processor allocation, virtual memory management) that can 
              only be explored given such an experimental testbed, and  (b) using this core
              as a base for exploring high performance  system support for more advanced
              architectures,  specifically large scale machines with distributed  memory,
              distributed/parallel programming using high band-width  low-latency networks,
              and wide-address machines.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
