Title       : Young Scholars Program/Summer Research Participation Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1993     
File        : a9200032

Award Number: 9200032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin A. Mirand   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur M. Michalek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roswell Pk Cancer Inst
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  142630001    /   -

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Roswell Park Cancer Institute to              
              sponsor 12 undergraduate students in the Institute's Research                  
              Participation Program in Science for Undergraduate College                     
              Students.  The program offers college undergraduates opportunities             
              to experience laboratory research in preparation for their career              
              development, particularly in molecular biology and cell biology.               
              Participants in the program are given intense laboratory                       
              experiences with a senior investigator on a one to one basis for               
              ten weeks from June to August.  This laboratory experience nurtures            
              the participant's research interests and develops their skills in              
              cell and molecular biology.  The experience should also exert an               
              influence on their career development leading many to do graduate              
              work in this area.  Since 1953, the program has had approximately              
              3,000 participants.  Follow-up data show that 40% of undergraduates            
              went on to pursue doctoral degrees and many have gone on to                    
              distinguished careers as research scientists.  The Institute staff             
              is not required to participate in the Undergraduate Research                   
              Program, but they look forward to selecting talented students,                 
              particularly minority students, who are seriously inclined to                  
              develop careers in science.  While scientists acquaint students                
              with the theory and methodologies involved with their research,                
              they also assist students in their development of independence and             
              self motivation.  At weekly seminars, conducted by senior staff and            
              graduate students, participants are required to describe their                 
              progress on their laboratory work among their peers.  This                     
              encourages discussion and broadens their horizons in other areas of            
              science.  At the end of the program, each student has to write a               
              short description of their project and give a presentation before              
              senior staff, guests and peers at a scientific mini-conference.
