Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Matching and Empirical Discrepancy Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9200656

Award Number: 9200656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Yukich Joseph.Yukich@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator plans to continue research on stochastic                 
              matching and empirical discrepancy problems in Euclidean and                   
              general metric spaces.  Current research is directed towards                   
              understanding the stochastic behavior of matching functionals.                 
              This involves finding tight non-asymptotic bounds, limiting                    
              distributions, and exponential type moment bounds.  This would                 
              add to the understanding of several combinatorial optimization                 
              problems as well as empirical discrepancy problems, notably                    
              finding the rate of convergence of the empirical to the true                   
              distribution.  Results of this type are useful in stochastic                   
              bin-packing as well as statistical physics.  Concerning                        
              discrepancy problems in mathematical statistics, research is also              
              directed towards further enlarging the collection of known                     
              Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) classes of sets.  This involves                       
              establishing general connections between VC classes of positivity              
              sets, quantifier elimination theorems, and semi-algebraic                      
              geometry.                                                                      
                   The proposed research will focus heavily on the theoretical               
              and mathematical aspects of the well-known transportation problem              
              as well as some of its generalizations.  This problem has                      
              received wide attention over the years and it is recognized that               
              a full understanding of its mathematical complexities will lead                
              to more efficient and perhaps simpler ways to solve optimization               
              problems ranging from the shipping of goods, to the routing of                 
              airplanes and the study of statistical mechanics. In its simplest              
              and most elementary form the problem may be stated as follows.                 
              Suppose that one is given n oil wells and n refineries and wishes              
              to efficiently pair off wells and refineries, so as to minimize                
              the sum of the matching distances.  It is easy to see that there               
              are n| different possible matchings.  The transportation problem               
              is to determine the most efficient matching, i.e., to determine                
              that matching which will minimize the sum of the distances. The                
              proposed research will consider variations on this and related                 
              problems.
