Title       : Stable Isotopic Applications to Great Plains Ecology, Paleoecology, Archeology,
               and Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9200345

Award Number: 9200345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Tieszen tieszen@inst.augie.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen R. Diggins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Augustana College
	      29th and Summit
	      Sioux Falls, SD  57197    605/336-0770

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to continue support for another year in              
              the Department of Biology at Augustana College.  The program will              
              support undergraduate participation in a focused research program              
              which integrates the research activities of ten investigators from             
              Augustana College (6), Univ. Nebraska (1), The Nature Conservancy              
              (1), South Dakota State Univ. (1), and Black Hills State Univ. (1).            
              The projects are integrated at the scientific level because of the             
              common interests in prairie ecology and paleoecology, and because              
              aspects of each project benefit from the applications of the stable            
              isotopes of C and N to the research methodology.  A coherent group             
              and a unique methodology will be used to continue ecological and               
              archeological reconstructions in a geographic area of rich                     
              ecological resources and to encompass growing interest in diets and            
              physiology.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Ten students (half women, half from off-campus) will study field               
              and laboratory problems with a common focus.  They will be expected            
              to gain some mastery of the theoretical basis for their study as               
              well as the experimental design and ultimate interpretation.                   
              Weekly seminars and workshops will review each project's                       
              theoretical basis and research design; enhance the students'                   
              library, laboratory, data handling, and scientific writing skills;             
              and broaden their understanding of the related projects.  The ten-             
              week summer program and academic year independent study will                   
              culminate in an REU Symposium in which each student will present               
              his/her interpreted results and conclusions and help develop the               
              hypotheses and research designs for next summer's projects.                    
              Outstanding women in the field will be selected as seminar speakers            
              and serve as role models for all students and faculty.  We will                
              invite 20 high schools to select an outstanding woman student to               
              attend the REU Symposium and return for one day in the summer.
