Title       : Analysis of the Dynamical Forcing of Persistent Anomaly Life Cycles in a General
               Circulation Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1994   
File        : a9200245

Award Number: 9200245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Branscome Branscome@rcf.rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Environ Dynamics Res Inc
	      7338 155th Pl North
	      Palm Beach Gardens, FL  334187442    407/744-5098

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Investigations of persistent atmospheric flow anomalies have              
              found that high frequency transient eddies play an important role              
              in maintaining anomalies against downstream propagation.  The                  
              precise way in which these transient eddies affect the onset and               
              decay of the anomalous patterns remains a question.  For example,              
              the onset of anomalies is often associated the upstream                        
              intensification of synoptic-scale disturbance )storms), but it is              
              not clear whether this intensification occurs in a background                  
              environment neutral or stable with respect to large-scale eddies or            
              as a consequence of large-scale instability.                                   
                   A diagnostic technique has been developed that allows                     
              examination of the forcing of the slowly-varying large-scale flow              
              in terms of both low frequency and high-frequency transient eddy               
              processes.  It has been applied to perpetual January data from a               
              two level general circulation model.  Results indicate that the low            
              frequency processes typically, thought not always, determine the               
              local growth or decay of anomalies.                                            
                   Under this award, the principal investigators will apply this             
              diagnostic technique to the output form a sophisticated model, the             
              Community Climate Model of the National Center for Atmospheric                 
              Research, and compare the results with those of the previous study.            
              This research will enhance our understanding of the causes of                  
              intraseasonal climate variability.
