Title       : REU: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Atmospheric Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1993       
File        : a9200636

Award Number: 9200636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl J. Popp vpaa@admin.nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Schery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   The PIs plan to continue a Research Experiences for                       
              Undergraduates site in the area of atmospheric sciences.                       
              Proposed participants include Professor Donald K. Brandvold,                   
              Chair, "Chemistry Department, Dr. James Jones, Physics                         
              Department,Professor Carl J. Popp (PI), Professor David J.                     
              Raymond, Chair,Physics Department, Professor William Rison,                    
              Department of Electrical Engineering, Professor Stephen D. Schery              
              (Co-PI), Professor Ronald Thomas, Department of Electrical                     
              Engineering, andProfessor William P. Winn, Physics Department and              
              Chair, Langmuir Laboratory.  The Departments of Chemistry and                  
              Physics at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology have              
              maintained an REU site for five years.  NMIMT has ongoing                      
              programs in studies of atmospheric electricity, atmospheric                    
              chemistry, and acid deposition centered around facilities                      
              available at the Irving Langmuir Laboratory for Atmospheric                    
              Research located near Socorro, New Mexico and the physics and                  
              chemistry laboratories on the NMIMT campus.  The PIs plan to                   
              support eight students to participate in the REU site, and they                
              intend to allocate six of the eight awards to students outside of              
              the NMIMT through a formal application procedure.  Additionally,               
              they plan to involve minority students in the program.  Students               
              will have the opportunity to participate in the following                      
              studies:  1) The role of large liquid drops in precipitation                   
              development (Prof. Blyth); 2) Chemistry of N2O in lightning and                
              corona:  field and laboratory experiments (Prof. Brandvold); 3)                
              Convection and Precipitation/Electrification Experiment data                   
              analysis (Dr. Jones); 4) Distribution, sources, and effects of                 
              acidic precipitation in New Mexico (Prof. Popp); 5) Rainwater                  
              chemistry associated with lightning discharges; 6)Cloud                        
              physics and mesoscale convective systems (Prof. Raymond); 7)                   
              Lightning (Prof. Rison); 8) Atmospheric Radioactivity (Prof.                   
              Schery); 9) Remote atmospheric and ionospheric detection system                
              (Prof. Thomas); and 10) Electrical structure of thunderstorms                  
              (Prof. Winn).
