Title       : Experiences for Undergraduates in Ecology and Conservation Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1992     
File        : a9200415

Award Number: 9200415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45514              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy J. Hatch hatch@umbsky.cc.umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biology at the                  
              University of Massachusetts at Boston to give ten undergraduate                
              students the opportunity to participate in research projects in                
              ecology and conservation biology.  Students will be recruited                  
              intensively in the Boston area and also elsewhere in New England.              
              The two major components of the program are complementary:  1) a               
              series of lectures/discussions for all the students, and 2)                    
              individual research projects in which each student is closely                  
              associated with an advisor/mentor.                                             
                                                                                             
              Initial group meetings that address the theory and practice of                 
              research continue as weekly meetings at which students focus on                
              topics that relate to the conduct of research or its implications.             
              Students will also visit one or more field sites and learn directly            
              about each others' projects.  A small hands-on workshop on                     
              molecular techniques will show the great potential of such methods             
              for ecology.  An end-of-session retreat at the University Field                
              Station will serve to articulate impressions and explore                       
              philosophical issues.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Seven potential research topics will be suggested, some of which               
              can effectively involve two or more undergraduates.  The topics are            
              focussed on issues of biodiversity and conservation ecology but are            
              intentionally diverse to illustrate several approaches.  They                  
              include three on the behavioral ecology of rare/endangered                     
              vertebrates, and others on the physiological ecology of hawkmoths,             
              the diversity of naphthalene-degrading bacteria, the genetics of               
              endangered plants, and the genetic diversity of deep-sea molluses.             
              At the end of the session each student will prepare a written                  
              report and present a short paper in a mini-conference.
