Title       : Unemployment Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9511916

Award Number: 9511916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy P. Greenwood gree@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergio T. Rebelo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511916  Greenwood    This project addresses the question: Why is there
              unemployment?  The relationship between the adoption of new technologies and
              the abandonment of old ones, one the one hand, and creation of new jobs and the
              destruction of old ones, on the other, by constructing a model with vintage
              physical and human capital.  The goal is to construct a model that can usefully
              organize the existing evidence on structural unemployment obtained from
              cross-national comparisons, as well as suggest further testable implications. 
              This model is used to evaluate the effects of the policies that are frequently
              used to reduce the distributional effects of structural unemployment. 
              Particular emphasis will be placed on discussing the effects on unemployment of
              social protection programs such as those implemented in European countries, and
              of new industrial policies aimed at encouraging investment in new technologies.
               The project also analyzes frictional unemployment in a business cycle setting.
               The analysis will be aimed at explaining the cyclical properties of labor
              market aggregates.  The last model explores the dynamics of investment in a
              setting in which firms face a non-trivial financing decision between the use of
              internal and external funds.  The model is consistent with the observation that
              firms tend to utilize external financing in large lumps at infrequent
              intervals.  Additionally, the model can potentially explain the more intensive
              use of external finance by large, as compared to small, firms.  This framework
              is used to study the relationship between intermediation on the one hand, and
              growth and business cycles on the other.        ??
