Title       : Barbara McClintock, Cytogenetics and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1995   
File        : a9511866

Award Number: 9511866
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80004              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee B. Kass lbk7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Provine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lee B. Kass and William B. Provine:  " Barbara McClintock, Cytogenetics and
              Evolution"    Certain figures in science develop an aura around them that is
              difficult to displace.  Mythologies build up so that the truth of how they fit
              into and transformed scientific traditions are lost.  Linus Pauling, Margaret
              Mead, Albert Einstein, Jonas Salk are examples.   Barbara McClintock, Nobel
              Prize Winner in biology, is one of these mythological figures.  As myth would
              have it, she was a lonely researcher who pursued her study of the genetics of
              corn for decades before the rest of the biological community came to realize
              the importance of her work.  That her work was important is undeniable: her
              so-called "jumping genes" brought about by the exchange of genetic material
              between organisms and their parasites has been replicated in what is now the
              foundation of our contemporary biotechnology industry.  But what about the myth
              of the solitary scientist whose work was ignored?  This is what Drs. Kass and
              Provine are examining in their study of Barbara McClintock.  This study is
              important for our understanding of the development of science:  how does a
              genius such as McClintock transform a research tradition?  Surely it is not as
              a solitary worker with no followers.  Transformations of a tradition are
              brought about by researchers engaged in the active development of a field.  How
              McClintock accomplished this is the purpose of this study.    Kass and Provine
              hope to demonstrate in this research how McClintock's work on genetic exchange
              grew understandably from her earlier work on cytogenetics of corn beginning
              when she was a graduate student at Cornell.  They are tracing the influences of
              advisors, colleagues, institutions and culture on the development of her
              science.  Their sources include extensive archival collections at every
              institution where McClintock worked, extensive interviews they conducted with
              her before her death, and interviews with those who knew and worked with her. 
              The result of this researc h should be a major biogra hy of this near mythical
              figure in the history of contemporary biology.
