Title       : Economic Literacy, Education, and Financial Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9511321

Award Number: 9511321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149290             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Douglas Bernheim bernheim@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Scholz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0510201   Domestic Economic Modeling              
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is supported by the Joint NSF/Private Sector  Initiative and
              focuses on the following two closely related  questions:  Do individuals make
              reasonable financial  decisions for savings and retirement?  How do various
              forms  of financial education affect financial behavior?  The  cooperating
              organization is the Smith Richardson Foundation.  Numerous previous authors
              have documented the poor quality  of personal financial decisions, and several
              studies have,  in particular, found that Americans save too little for 
              retirement.  The adequacy of saving for retirement among  younger Americans
              has, however, proven controversial, in  large part beaause pertinent economic
              developments over the  next 30 to 40 years are highly uncertain, and may
              profoundly  affect retirement prospects.  Previous research has also  shed
              considerable light on the general public's level of  economic and financial
              literacy.  However, few determinants  of economic literacy have been studies
              (aside from formal  education among high school students).  The determinants of
               financial knowledge among adults are essentially unexplored,  and virtually
              nothing is known about the effects of  knowledge on financial behavior. 
              Finally, the existing  literature has not systematically considered the effects
              of  financial education on financial decisions; nor has it  evaluated the
              various mechanisms (knowledge, comfort, or  habituation) through which
              financial education may affect  behavior.  Thus, a central objective of this
              research is to  examine financial education as an important dimension of  human
              capital accumulation.  The study will focus on the  analysis of three extremely
              promising and previously  unexploited data sources.  The first is a series of 
              household survey sponsored by Merrill Lynch; the second is a  series of unique
              employer surveys undertaken by KPMG Peat  Marwick; and the third is an
              extensive 401(k) database  compiled by Hewitt Associates.  The research is of
              direct  relevance to private firms interested  in using education to  alter the
              behavior of participants in contributory  retirement plans.  Indeed, it bears
              on the continued  viability of 401(k) plans, and the relative merits of 
              defined benefit and defined contribution plans.  In  addition, the research has
              potentially important  implications for national economic policy, including 
              strategies for promoting national saving, the design and  implementation of
              education curricula, pension policy,  information policy, and securities
              regulation.
