Title       : The Sustainability of Democracy: The Experience of Latin America, 1945-1994
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9511509

Award Number: 9511509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Remmer remmer@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511509  Remmer    By focusing upon the relationship between institutional 
              arrangements and regime sustainability, this project is designed  to bridge the
              gap separating older macrosocial understanding of  political democracy from
              more contemporary work stressing  indeterminacy, conjunctural conditions, and
              contingent choice.   This study reevaluates the conventional wisdom concerning
              the  dependence of democratic stability upon economic performance and  test a
              theoretical alternative that takes into account the  differential strengths and
              weaknesses of political democracy and  authoritarianism as well as
              institutional variations among  democratic regimes.  The overarching conception
              is that  institutions matter as contextual determinants of behavior  mediating
              between systemic and structural forces, on the one  hand, and individual
              political actors on the other.    The project involves three major components. 
              First the research  entails the development and analysis of a data base on
              political  institutions, electoral outcomes, and economic performance in  Latin
              America for the period 1945-1994, which will be shared with  other interested
              researchers.  Second, the study elaborates and  tests a set of cross-sectional
              regression models linking regime  durability with three major sets of
              variables:  international  political context, domestic economic performance,
              and political  institutions.  The models will address outstanding questions 
              regarding the relative fragility of authoritarian and democratic  political
              orders and establish a basis for estimating the  relative contribution of
              economic and institutional forces to the  sustainability of political
              democracy.  Third, the research  utilizes survival analysis to explore the ways
              in which  fluctuation in international conditions, economic performance,  and
              changes in the rules of the political game over the lifetimes  of individual
              regimes have shaped the risk of regime breakdown.    The results of this
              research address the long-standing  theo retical debate over the breakdown and
              consolidation of  political democracy as well as issues of relevance to the
              policy  community concerned with the contemporary political dynamics of 
              Eastern Europe and Latin America.  ***
