Title       : Androgenic Regulation of Epididymal Sperm Binding Proteins: Role of RNA-binding
               Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9511822

Award Number: 9511822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9511822  Hall      In all male mammalian species, including man, spermatozoa
              that leave the testis are infertile and immobile. The acquisition of
              fertilizing capacity and motility by spermatozoa occurs in an organ called the
              epididymis and the overall process is often referred to as "sperm maturation".
              It is now well accepted in reproductive biology and biochemistry that
              spermatozoan maturation is mediated by proteins and glycoproteins called
              fertility antigens. These fertility antigens are secreted by the epididymis
              under the control of the male hormone, testosterone. Using the rat as an
              experimental model, Dr. Hall has identified a key fertility antigen that is
              secreted by the epididymis and binds to the sperm plasma membrane. This sperm
              plasma membrane antigen which is synthesized by the epididymis plays a key
              physiological role in plasma membrane changes on the surface spermatozoa that
              accompany the development of fertilizing capacity and motility in mammals. An
              initial step toward elucidating the basic causes of male infertility or
              developing compounds as potential male contraceptives is to understand how
              these fertility antigens are regulated in the mammalian epididymis. Thus, the
              broad, long-term objective of the present study is to provide a basic
              understanding of how fertility antigens are regulated. A working model for the
              androgen-dependent synthesis of this fertility antigen is proposed in this
              study. A unique feature of the model is that the synthesis of this fertility
              antigen may be regulated at the level of its own messenger RNA (mRNA). He
              further hypothesizes that the rate at which this fertility antigen is
              synthesized in cells of the epididymis is controlled by proteins that bind to
              its mRNA. If this hypothesis proves correct, it may be possible in the near
              future to develop a compound that can selectively block (contraceptive) or
              enhance (conception) the synthesis of the fertility antigen.  ***
