Title       : Does Market Structure Affect the Conduct and Performance of Educational
               Institutions?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9511343

Award Number: 9511343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104423             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline M. Hoxby choxby@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511343  Hoxby  This project empirically examines three topics in the economics 
              of education.  The first part of the project employs natural  variation in
              cohort size within school districts to analyze the  effects of class size on
              student performance in this way avoiding  many criticisms of the existing
              literature on the productivity of  school inputs.  The second part of the
              project extends a  substantial literature on the effects of school finance 
              centralizations on average public school per-pupil spending in a   state in a
              new direction.  This project examines the effect of  centralization on school
              productivity, or student performance and  per-pupil inputs.  This new line of
              research is timely and  important because from 1972-92, 36 states centralized
              school  finance to some degree, twelve by court order. The third and  final
              part of the project studies how the emergence of a national  college market,
              with schools drawing students from across the  nation or within a several-state
              region, affects the  characteristics of the college attended by a given student
              and  the value of the student s college degree.    School-based results on the
              effects of alass size typically  suffer from an omitted variables problem: the
              student-teacher  ratio is endogenous to unobserved student characteristics.  
              Results based on aggregate (state-wide) data have untenable  identifying
              restrictions and suffer from aggregation bias.  The  first part of this project
              makes use of the fact that school  districts with populations under 25,000 have
              natural year-to-year  variation in cohort size.  Because teachers are
              relatively  indivisible and grade-specific, schools cannot perfectly re- 
              allocate resources so as to equalize class sizes between  different sized
              cohorts.  The strategy uses panel data on  Connecticut school districts, and
              instruments for the change in  class size between succeeding cohorts with the
              change in cohort  size.      The second part of the project analyzes sixteen
              recent (1977-87)   reforms th at increase school finance centralization at the
              state   level.  For each district, Census of Governments data are used to 
              categorize the change in the tax-price of marginal local school  spending as a
              result of the reform.  These vary from no change to  extremely large increases
              in the case of districts that have  reached maximum spending levels in their
              states.  The project  develops and tests empirically a model in which a high
              tax-price   of local school spending decreases school productivity (student 
              performance for inputs) because it weakens mechanisms by which  less productive
              schools are made more productive.
