Title       : Coupled Elastic Surface Waves in Curved Structures, US-Pakistan Cooperative
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9511686

Award Number: 9511686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27172              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description:   This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist,
              Dr. John Harris, from the Department of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, at
              the University of Illinois, Urbana, and Dr. Saleem Asghar, Department of
              Mathematics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.  The research aims
              at investigating, with mathematical models, the propagation of a surface wave,
              that glides over a curved elastic surface, where it clings closely to the
              surface and decays into the interior.  The coupling of waves from one surface
              to another will be studied.  In addition. scattering of such waves as they
              strike a small crack breaking an interior surface or encounter a patch of
              roughness along that surface will be studied.  Scope:  This project allows
              cooperation of two well known scientists whose capabilities complement each
              other to do important scientific work; and it helps understand properties of
              surface waves that are important in detecting problems or potential problems in
              many curved structures such as pipelines.  The Pakistani scientist is in one of
              that country's most important universities for graduate education and research.
               He has expertise in the radiation of sound from fluid-loaded plates, while the
              US scientist has expertise in the area of high-frequency surface wave
              propagation. A US graduate student of Dr. Harris is expected to participate in
              this work. This project meets a number of important objectives of the Division
              of International Programs.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
