Title       : Biochemistry of Hemoglobins and Oxygen Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9511759

Award Number: 9511759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Austen F. Riggs riggs@uts.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9511759  Riggs  A problem of major importance in biochemistry is the
              determination of the mechanisms by which different parts of proteins
              communicate with one another. The interactions between subunits that give rise
              to cooperative ligand binding in vertebrate hemoglobins (Hbs) have been
              intensely  studied for many years and have become relatively well understood.
              Although not widely recognized, additional ligand-dependent interactions
              between tetramers are widespread in many avian reptilian and amphibian Hbs. 
              This project seeks to determine both the structural basis and functional
              consequences of these interactions between Hb tetramers by means of
              site-directed mutagenesis, functional analysis, and X-ray crystallography.
              These tetramer-tetramer complexes have novel subunit contacts that perturb the
              heme-pockets in such a way that the oxygen affinity is greatly reduced. The
              ligand-linked dissociation to a higher affinity tetramer forms the basis for a
              new mechanism of cooperativity of ligand binding. We seek to determine the
              structural basis of these properties because they are of considerable
              physiological importance: they make possible delivery of oxygen to the tissues
              at higher pressures than would otherwise be possible. Site-directed mutagenesis
              will be used to construct human Hb mutants to have similar properties.
              Additional studies include the Hbs of the lamprey (vertebrate), an echinoderm,
              Caudina, and the diving beetle, Buenoa, all of which comprise monomers which
              undergo either mixed or self-association on ligand removal. Each of these
              systems possesses unique features that together with the self-associating
              tetrameric Hbs, will be used to generate the general rules that dictate how
              ligand binding is linked to dissociation. The long-term goal is to understand
              fully the structural and energetic basis for these ligand-linked dissociation
              processes that comprise important models for understanding allosteric
              regulation.   %%%          Many physiological processes, including oxygen
              transpor t, are mediated by  proteins that are composed of two or more
              subunits.  Self-association of these proteins to larger structures or
              dissociation into subunits often greatly changes the functional properties of
              the proteins.  The control of these changes comprises an important way in which
              the properties of these proteins can be changed to meet changing physiological
              requirements.  This proposal is designed to measure the self-association of
              bird and lamprey hemoglobins.  The efficiency of oxygen transport from lungs to
              tissues in birds is depends on this self-association which makes it possible
              for bird hemoglobins to deliver up to 30% more oxygen than is possible with
              human hemoglobin.   This is an evolutionary adaptation to meet the stringent
              evolutionary adaptation of flight.   This proposal aims to use procedures of
              DNA technology to determine exactly which amino acids in the protein structure
              are important for these unusual physiological properties.  Mutant hemoglobins
              will be constructed with amino acid changes in order to understand the
              self-association.  ***
