Title       : Behavioral Ecology of Monkey Spatial Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9511642

Award Number: 9511642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Janson janson@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Non-technical Summary: Janson, C.  Proposal IBN-9511642:          
              'Behavioral Ecology of Monkey Spatial Movements'         The goal of this
              project is to understand the rules animals  use to decide where to move  within
              a known home range.  Much  evidence from studies of animal foraging suggests
              that they  attempt to maximize food intake relative to foraging costs.  When 
              costs are proportional to distance moved between known resources,  the problem
              is essentially similar to the human 'Traveling  Salesman Problem' , in which
              the goal is to travel among N known  cities in the shortest possible distance. 
              This problem has  resisted precise mathematical solution despite great efforts,
              and  thus the possible rules that animals might use are far from  obvious --
              even the approximate solutions to this problem offered  in the economics
              literature typically involve vast numbers of  calculations on powerful
              computers.  Do animals use simple or  complex rules, do they 'look ahead' to
              more than the next  immediate goal, how closely do their rules approach the
              best  possible solutions available on computers today?       A wild population
              of fruit-eating primates (capuchin  monkeys) were chosen as the study animals
              because they need to  solve such spatial problems every day.  Their major
              resources,  fruit trees, are scarce and fixed in space, while the cost of 
              traveling between fruit patches in rainforests is very high  compared to moving
              on level ground or flying.  Some data in  captivity suggest that fruit-eating
              primates can learn and  remember the locations of large numbers of hidden food
              sources,  so it is plausible that they can use such abilities to solve  spatial
              foraging problems in the wild.  In addition, primate  groups can be followed
              continuously for long periods (weeks),  thus allowing for large sample sizes of
              natural spatial  movements.  However, because human researchers can rarely know
               everything (such as location, productivity, and palatability)  about all the
              food patches available  to a primate group, the  results of previous
              observational studies are not easy to  interpret.  To reduce these problems of
              interpretation, this  project uses a field-experimental approach in which fruit
               (tangerines) is provided on a series of  wooden platforms  suspended from
              trees --  the investigator can completely control  the location, amount of food
              reward, and food type on the  platforms.  Confounding influences of other,
              natural food sources  are minimized in this subtropical Argentine study site by
              working  only in winter, when nearly all natural fruit production stops.      
              The spatial locations of the platforms are chosen (using a  computer program)
              so that the sequences of movement choices from  one platform to the next will
              differ depending on the possible  decision rules used.  The specific rules
              tested will include ones  that (1) place differing amounts of emphasis on
              delayed vs.  immediate rewards, (2) trade off distance vs. amount of food, and 
              (3) examine rewards individually by platform or integrate over  the entire
              spatial array of platforms.   Investigating the rules  capuchins use to move
              between known resources will help us to  understand (1) a largely neglected
              aspect of foraging behavior,  (2) the likely mental organization of spatial
              knowledge in  primates and possibly humans, and (3) what aspects of the 
              resource base of an animal species may favor the evolution of  complex mental
              maps, which have been implicated in the evolution  of intelligence in man's
              ancestors.  The knowledge about spatial  decisions of these monkeys will also
              provide important  information about their spatial needs and how they may react
              to  habitat disturbance, results which may help in conserving this  species in
              the wild as increasing numbers are taken for  laboratory use.
