Title       : The Place of Natural Values, Ecology and Technology in Restoration Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1995      
File        : a9511599

Award Number: 9511599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael V. McGinnis mcginnis@lifesci.lscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Woolley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ecological restorations involve human attempts to return physical sites to some
              state preceding some human disturbances.  There are more and more restoration
              efforts underway; a shift to ecological restoration at the biogeographical
              level in the Pacific Northwest represents the largest effort in the world. 
              However, scientists have shown it is rarely possible to know what these sites
              may have looked like or how they function.  Restoration policy then lies in the
              domain of `transcience,` involving the intermingling of facts and values.  An
              understanding of the influence of restoration values will add to the
              advancement and development of  effective and responsible restoration
              strategies.  This project will assess the place of natural values, science, and
              technology in restoration policy development.  The researchers will examine two
              research questions central to the issue of large scale ecological restoration
              taking place in the Pacific Northwest.  First, what are the specific values and
              ethical positions of individuals and institutions currently involved in large
              scale restoration efforts?  Second, what is the role of scientific
              decision-making in ecological restoration?  The investigators speculate that
              the capability of participants to restore severely damaged ecosystems and wild
              species is predicated on collective and shared values about the landscape,
              their sense of place in it, their perceived relationship to nature, and their
              beliefs in the ability of science and technology to restore ecosystems.  The
              investigation will employ both document analysis and a survey questionnaire to
              persons involved in restoration efforts in the Pacitic Northwest, to develop
              profiles of individual and institutional orientations to the range of potential
              restoration values.  The analysis will be extended by comparative case study of
              three large-scale restoration efforts.  Results will be disseminated among
              scholarly and professional audiences in presentations and journal articles.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
