Title       : Active, Low-Frequency Vibration Isolation System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9511940

Award Number: 9511940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $605151             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Faller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter L. Bender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin T. Stebbins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A system based on three cascaded stages, each capable of  providing about two
              orders of magnitude of isolation in six  degrees of freedom, is being
              developed.  Each stage utilizes  active and passive isolation to achieve the
              performance  goals.  The preliminary stage is operational, and the two  main
              stages are under construction.  Early measurements have  been made on the first
              main stage.  The preliminary, single  stage, vibration isolation system
              provides more isolation at  1 Hz than any other research or commercial
              isolation system.  When complete, the three-stage system will provide the 
              quietest terrestrial environment ever achieved.  The  continuum thermal noise
              in suspension pendulums, like those  planned for gravitational wave
              interferometers, will be  measured by hanging a matched pair of them from the
              ultra  quiet second main stage and determining their relative  motion.    This
              advanced active vibration isolation system is being  developed to shield
              sensitive measurement instruments from  the effects of seismic and man-made
              vibration noise at  frequencies down to 1 Hz.  The objective of this work is to
               develop techniques which can help reduce the effects of the  direct mechanical
              coupling of ground motions and other  vibration on the test masses of
              gravitational wave  interferometers down to the level of the gravitational 
              coupling of disturbances to the test masses over as wide a  frequency range as
              possible.  During the third year of work,  a conceptual design will be
              developed for an active  vibration isolation system which could be used in
              advanced  low-frequency LIGO detectors.  This will include a numerical  model
              of the expected performance.  Improved performance at  frequencies down to 1 Hz
              would permit searches for signals  which terminate at frequencies of 10 Hz or
              less.
