Title       : Institutional and Legal Sources of Presidential Power: Policy Making Through
               Executive Orders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9511444

Award Number: 9511444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60005              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Mayer kmayer@polisci.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511444  Mayer    This research investigates the nature and extent of
              independent  presidential policy making authority embodied in executive orders 
              and administrative directives.  Much of the literature on the  presidency
              suggests that presidents cannot make substantive  policy without congressional
              cooperation.  Executive orders that  are issued under the president's statutory
              or constitutional  powers as chief executive are, according to this framework,
              an  insignificant source of presidential power.  At the same time,  however,
              presidents have on a number of occasions issued  unilateral orders with
              profound political and social  consequences, and policy makers themselves
              recognize the  potential for independent presidential action.  The issue of how
               much independent authority presidents have remains a basic  empirical question
              that is not adequately addressed in the  presidency literature.    The starting
              point of the study is that if presidents use orders  and directives for
              strategic purposes, then their use should vary  predictably according to a
              president's strategic situation and  political context.  To investigate this
              phenomenon, the project  analyzes three separate types of data on executive
              orders and  administrative directives:  1) a time series analysis of all 
              executive orders and administrative directives issued since 1935,  with the
              goal of uncovering statistical patterns in how, and  under what circumstances,
              orders are issued; 2) a random sample  drawn from the universe of orders and
              directives.  This sample is  coded to identify those orders which have
              substantive policy or  political significance (a result that, by inference, may
              be  applied to the entire population of orders).  This subsample of  important
              orders is in turn subjected to analysis to determine  what aspects of a
              presidents strategic situation and political  context affect their use; 3) case
              studies of approximately 10 of  the most important executive orders.    The
              project sill substantially enhance the un derstanding of  executive authority
              and the balance of policy making power  between the Presidency and Congress. 
              It also advances the state  of presidency research, by moving beyond a
              "president"-centered  focus to a more general conception of presidential
              behavior that  cuts across administrations.  ***
