Title       : The Impact of Democratization on Russian Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9511736

Award Number: 9511736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148223             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana Vannoy dana.vannoy@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of sex equality, gender attitudes and quality of relationship
              in Russian marriages, interviewing a random sample of 1400 households in Moscow
              and its rural environs.  Russia today presents a curious mix of ideology and
              attitudes making it an important setting for research on changing power
              relationships between the sexes.  The contradictory factors include: the
              heritage of the Communist regime which supposed gender equality; the presence
              of an entrenched patriarchy and general lack of awareness of socially
              constructed elements of gender difference; and the recent return to subjugating
              women in the family.  The theory to be tested predicts that when spouses have
              traditional gender attitudes and wife's occupational prestige, educational
              achievement or income are equal or superior to husband's, partners will
              experience lower marital quality and the wife will be more at risk for abuse. 
              If the spouses have liberal gender attitudes, the theory predicts, equal or
              superior wife status will not diminish their marital quality.  In addition to
              testing this and related theories, the project will provide baseline
              information about the quality of Russian marriages that will be valuable for
              future studies.  %%%   The large-scale processes of democratization and market
              transition occurring in Russia and many other nations have serious consequences
              on the small scale of family units.  It may be the case that greater democracy
              at the level of the society produces, at least for the duration of a transition
              period, less democracy within families.  Or, it may be that the short-term
              consequences for families of democratization may depend in large part upon the
              attitudes that family members bring to their relationships with each other. 
              Thus, this study will test general scientific theories about the effect of
              great social stress on families, as well as providing a much clearer picture of
              Russian marriages in this time of great challenge for their society.
