Title       : Evaluating Public Participation Processes by Combining Perspectives from
               Planners, Participants, and Normative Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9511840

Award Number: 9511840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Webler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental challenge of democracy is to make public decisions in a manner
              that protects the rights of individuals, but is responsive to the shared needs
              of all.  This requires participation of affected parties.  However, many
              important environmental policy issues have become increasingly disputatious and
              difficult to resolve by traditional methods.  Recently, governmental agencies
              have been experimenting with new forms of participation, but too little
              attention has been paid to careful examination of how well participation
              opportunities meet the process related needs of decision makers and affected
              parties.  This project will refine and test a process evaluation methodology,
              and use it to improve understanding of peoples' expectations for public
              decision making processes.  The methodology integrates perspectives of
              planners, participants, and normative theory, using a `real world` case, based
              on recently completed activities of the Northern Forest Lands council (NFLC). 
              The method consists of four steps:  characterization of the public
              participation process as it occurred; interviews of planners and participants
              and construction of value-trees to represent how they evaluate the process; 
              evaluation of the process using a normative framework for public participation
              developed in prior research; and comparison of the evaluations made by the
              various parties and derived from the framework.  The focus is on how promising
              this methodology for systematic process evaluation is in understanding how
              particular processes incorporate and integrate values.  Concise descriptions of
              differences among parties who participated in the NFLC process can link the
              differences to specific design attributes of the process and enable the
              investigators to draw conclusions about designs that can incorporate and
              integrate values from multiple perspectives.  Tools from this research will be
              applicable to the study of other experiments in participation and the results
              will contribute to ongoing work in the development of normative theory for
              public participation in environmental decision making.  The investigators will
              make presentations at conferences and  prepare articles for submission to
              professional and practitioner journals.  Copies of their reports will be
              available to federal and New England natural resource policy agencies and
              regional community development organizations.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
