Title       : Studies of Relativistic Heavy Ion Collisions at CERN and RHIC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9511850

Award Number: 9511850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $792558             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Humanic humanic@mps.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evan R. Sugarbaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511850  Humanic       Research will be carried out in relativistic heavy ion 
              nuclear physics. Experiments will be conducted at the CERN, AGS,  and RHIC
              heavy ion accelerators.  The main goal of these  experiments is to obtain
              evidence that collisions of relativistic  heavy ions with sufficiently high
              energy produce a phase  transition from normal nuclear matter into a new phase
              of matter  made up of a large volume of free quarks and gluons.  The above 
              named accelerator facilities provide a range of energies needed  to raise the
              energy density to more than ten times normal nuclear  matter density, thought
              to be sufficient to produce deconfined  quark and gluon matter.  Experiments
              will be designed and carried  out which look at the signatures of a quark-gluon
              plasma as  reflected in particle momentum distributions and multiplicities  of
              each type of particle produced.  Development work will be  carried out for
              purpose of producing a detector system with  sufficient individual particle
              tracking and identification  capability to handle the huge particle
              multiplicities expected  from central heavy ion collisions.  Some calculations
              will be  carried out to determine expected interaction regions within the 
              colliding systems.  In addition, lower energy charge exchange  reaction
              measurements will be completed which bear on the density  dependence of
              nucleon-nucleon interactions.  Research in these  areas will advance our
              understanding of the underlying quark  model of nucleons and mesons.  These
              topics are among the most  exciting in nuclear physics.  Education of graduate
              students and  postdocs is integral to this activity, as is development and 
              construction of major state-of-the-art equipment  ***
