Title       : Formal Models of Legislative Organization and the Decision to Delegate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1997   
File        : a9511628

Award Number: 9511628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109591             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharyn O'Halloran so33@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Epstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511628  O'Halloran    Recent literature on positive political theory,
              addressing such  diverse topics as legislative organization, administrative 
              procedures, judicial review, and comparative political  institutions,
              consistently posits that the process by which  policy is made ultimately shapes
              political outcomes.  Known  generally as the "new institutionalism," this line
              of research  asserts that what politicians do is intimately linked to how they 
              do it.  In the study of American government, one of the most  important
              procedural choices is whether substantive policy  decisions will be made by
              congress or delegated to an executive  branch agency.  This question goes to
              the very heart of policy  making in a separation of powers system, as the
              forces brought to  bear on legislators are quite distinct from those affecting 
              bureaucratic agencies.    The current research investigates Congress's choice
              of whether or  not to delegate substantive discretionary authority to the 
              executive branch.  It has been argued that Congress delegates  authority merely
              to shift the blame for unpopular policy  decisions or to protect favored
              constituents.  The researchers  suggest instead that congressional delegation
              to the executive  branch can be seen as a politically expedient response to the
               inefficiencies of congressional policy making.  Thus, this  analysis links the
              details of legislative organization to  congressional-executive relations and
              the decision to delegate.    The project contains three central components.
              1)Building on new  advances in the theory of the firm, the researchers model 
              Congress's decision to produce policy "in-house" or subcontract  policy making
              to the bureaucracy.  From this model, they derive  several propositions about
              the impact of divided government,  committee outliers, and organized interests
              on Congress's  decision to delegate, and on the amount of discretion granted to
               executive agencies.  2)  The investigators empirically test the  model of
              delegation with data drawn  from important legislation  enacted over the past
              half century.  This data set allows the  researchers to track changes in
              delegation both across issue  areas and over time.  Using the econometric
              specifications  suggested by the theoretical framework they test a series of 
              hypotheses relating political conditions to delegation and agency  discretion. 
              3)In addition to legislative histories, the  researchers conduct detailed case
              studies of two policy areas,  international trade and environmental regulation.
               These case  studies investigate whether the institutions of delegation are 
              fixed and unchanging, or malleable, responding predictably to  changes in the
              political environment.  ***
