Title       : Genetic Analysis of Tetrahydrobiopterin Interactions with Tyrosine Hydroxylase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9511156

Award Number: 9511156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis M. O'Donnell jodonnel@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9511156  O'Donnell, Janis      Catecholamines are one of the basic groups of
              messenger molecules  in the central nervous system and are intimately involved
              in  transmitting information about the environment to the appropriate  brain
              regions in all animals.  The enzyme regulating catecholamine  biosynthesis is
              tyrosine hydroxylase.  An essential cofactor  required by tyrosine hydroxylase
              is tetrahydrobiopterin.  If  tetrahydrobiopterin levels are compromised, then
              catecholamine  biosynthesis is similarly compromised pointing to the reliance
              of  tyrosine hydroxylase on this cofactor.  Dr. O'Donnell has been 
              instrumental in identifying the enzyme responsible for the  production of
              tetrahydrobiopterin.  This enzyme is GTP  cyclohydrolase.  In the experiments
              supported by this award, Dr.  O'Donnell will examine the physical interaction
              of tyrosine  hydroxylase with GTP cyclohydrolase to better understand the 
              integral dependence of one enzyme on the other.  The structures  present in GTP
              cyclohydrolase that physically interact with  tyrosine hydroxylase will be
              examined using sophisticated molecular  techniques to alter the structure of
              the cyclohydrolase enzyme.   Further investigations will map the location of
              GTP cyclohydrolase  and tyrosine hydoxylase in neurons to establish whether
              they exist  as a complex or as individual molecules.  In addition, by genetic 
              screening  procedures, the genes encoding these enzymes will be  studied to
              determine if they are controlled by similar regulatory  elements providing for
              coregulation at the gene and protein level  in controlling the production of
              the essential cofactor,  tetrahydrobiopterin.  Catecholamines are crucial
              elements in normal  functioning of the central nervous system and understanding
              the  regulation of catecholamine biosynthesis is critical for future 
              understanding of neurological disorders, such as Parkinson's  disease.
