Title       : Rate of Persistence of Responding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1996  
File        : a9511934

Award Number: 9511934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Shull rlshull@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                        Abstract    Shull  9511934    If an individual is
              obtaining some type of reward by  responding, what happens if additional
              rewards are freely  given, regardless of what the individual is doing?  One 
              obvious effect is that the rate of the operant response  declines.  But free
              rewards can also enhance the persistence  of the response--at least that is
              what research with pigeons  has demonstrated.  When conditions are made less
              favorable  for responding (e.g., when the subject is satiated or when  the
              delivery of all rewards in halted), responding will  persist longer if
              additional free rewards had been provided  in the context than if they had not
              been.    An implication is that the rate and the persistence of  operant
              behavior are not aspects of a single process like   response strength  but are,
              instead, independent properties  of behavior controlled by different classes of
              variables.  The rate of operant behavior (i.e., the inclination to  engage in
              the behavior) depends on the strength of the  operant contingency-- that is, on
              the proportion of the  total reinforcers that are obtained by the particular 
              response.  Persistence appears to depend on the degree to  which the context in
              which the response occurs signals an  increase or a decrease in the rate of
              reinforcers regardless  of whether or not the response produces those
              reinforcers.    One interpretation of the persistence effect is that the 
              freely delivered rewards make the context in which they  occur more arousing or
              emotionally exciting through a  Pavlovian conditioning process.  The emotional
              excitement,  in turn, feeds into the operant behavior making it  relatively
              more persistent in the face of worsening  conditions.  A possible practical
              implication is that one  can enhance the persistence of a response by
              presenting  reinforcers freely in the context in which the response  occurs
              (e.g., in a classroom) even though doing so will  likely reduce the rate of the
              response.    It is possible, however, that  the rate and persistence of 
              behavior appear to be independent properties only because  response rate in our
              usual experimental preparations is a  mixture of different kinds of behavioral
              events.  The  proposal provides a formal development of this possibility, 
              based on the assumption that response rate, as usually  measured, is comprised
              of  initiations  of activity and  performance during the activity.  The rate of
              initiations  corresponds most closely to the everyday sense of an  inclination
              to engage in an activity.  An implication is  that the rate and persistence of
              the usual measure of  response rate can appear independent even though the rate
               and persistence of initiations are correlated.    The proposed experiments are
              intended to examine the effects  of additional free reinforcers on the rate and
              persistence  of initiations.  Several preparations are described that  should
              provide a measure approximating initiation rate, as  distinct from the
              composite rate.  The important question is  whether the rate and persistence of
              initiation rates covary  as a function of the operant contingency or are
              independent.  The subjects will be rats.  The response will be lever  pressing
              for food reinforcers.
