Title       : Mandible Correlates of Contrastive Emphasis in Repeated Corrections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9511998

Award Number: 9511998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Osamu Fujimura fujimura.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The study is an experimental investigation of jaw movement:  how jaw
              movement changes as a function of whether the speaker  emphasizes a word when
              s/he is asked to clarify a word a listener  misunderstood, and also, how jaw
              movement changes when the  speaker must repeat this same word several times in
              order to make  himself understood by the listener. The method involves
              examining  jaw movement tracings from x-ray microbeam recordings, which have 
              already been collected for four speakers. These jaw movement  traces will be
              measured in terms of various duration, velocity  and displacement measures
              using a recently developed software  tool. Tentative statistical analyses will
              be applied to these  measurements to plan for future research which would
              involve a  large number of subject in order to identify which jaw measures  are
              most useful in characterizing contrastive emphasis. Although  previous studies
              have examined jaw movement associated with  contrastive emphasis, no study to
              date has looked at jaw movement  of unrehearsed impromptu speech, and
              especially not of speakers  saying the same utterance with repeated
              corrections.       As an experimental study, it is independent of any 
              particular theoretical framework; however, one of the goals of  this endeavor
              is to better understand the underlying  organizational principles of speech
              considering existing  theoretical models. In particular, jaw movement pattern
              in a  seminatural dialogue situation will be interpreted as an aspect  of the
              prosodic representation of the utterance, relating  observed articulatory
              gestures to perceived of emphasis placed on  one of the three digits in a
              sequence, in the context, like, "No,  it is nine FIVE nine Pine Street" (the
              capitalized digit  indicates the word the speaker emphasized). The findings of
              this  study are proposed to be interpreted to examine the validity of  several
              current theories of articulation-based prosodic  organization models; in
              particular, the PI's recent theory of  phonetic implemen tation (the
              converter-distributor model) will be  evaluated determining its system
              parameters such as the relation  between the numerically augmented metrical
              pattern and magnitudes  of syllables and boundaries.
