Title       : Survey Respondents' Reactions To Persuasion Attempts: Ethical Valuations and
               Behavioral Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9511932

Award Number: 9511932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76628              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor Singer esinger@isr.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Groves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Increasingly relied on by government and private sector, sample surveys range
              from health care to prayer in schools, to the design of future automobiles. 
              They are a basic tool in commercial activity and in statistical operations of
              government agencies, and they contribute to induction and testing of theories
              in most of the social sciences.  Increasingly, they are a common experience in
              the daily lives of U.S. residents.  Efforts to maintain response rates, so as
              to preserve the representativeness of surveys and their inferential power,
              raise serious ethical issues for survey research.  Focusing on the issue of
              equity, this pilot project will design and test methods to:  explore public
              reactions to ethical issues in the use of incentives and to alternative ways to
              reduce nonresponse; and investigate the effect of these reactions on people's
              willingness to participate in surveys.  The investigators want to find out
              under what conditions, if any, people feel an obligation to participate in a
              survey; under what conditions, if any, they expect a tangible reward for their
              participation; what strategies to increase participation offend their sense of
              equity or their standards of politeness; and how these various beliefs combine
              to affect the likelihood of participation.  The pilot will examine the
              following methods to measure these variables:  direct questioning to measure
              beliefs, perceptions, expectations, and standards; videotaped vignettes to
              measure predicted behavior in response to different combinations of survey
              characteristics and reward; and a small field experiment to measure actual
              behavior.  The narrow aim of this research is to investigate the role of
              respondent perceptions in survey participation; it also has broader
              implications for understanding the motivational force of equity evaluations and
              the role of attitudes in influencing behavior.  Several articles and plans for
              further research should result from this award.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
