Title       : Collaborative Research: Archaeological Investigation and Paleoenvironmental
               Context of Mining at the Tsodilo Hills, Western Kalahari Desert
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1998   
File        : a9511496

Award Number: 9511496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94746              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Robbins lrobbins@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Robbins    In collaboration with Dr. George Brook, Dr. Lawrence Robbins will 
              conduct archaeological and paleoenvironmental research in the  Kalahari Desert
              of Botswana. They will focus their work at the  site of Tsidilo Hills, a rocky
              outcrop which has been inhabited  intermittently for tens of millennia. In
              recent work, the  investigators have discovered 13 prehistoric mines which are
              cut  into these hills. Preliminary evidence indicates that they may be  at
              least 1,000 years in age and that a number of minerals such as  mica schist and
              coloring agents were obtained. In this  multidisciplinary project the team will
              map and photograph all of  the mines. They will excavate a series of one meter
              squares into  the charcoal rich mine floors to recover dating samples and 
              artifacts and they will excavated in mine tailings. Test  excavations will also
              be conducted in a large painted cave that  is located next to one of the mines.
              A second phase of the  project involves a program of paleoenvironmental study
              which will  permit reconstruction of climate and climate change during the 
              period that the mines were in operation. With this data it will  be possible to
              study human-environmental interaction and examine  the extent to which mining
              activities were influenced by climatic  change. In situ sediment samples will
              be collected in the region  and sediment texture and chemistry will be
              determined. Bucket  auguring will be conducted to recover sediment samples in 
              adjacent valleys and thin sections collected from stalagmites to  measure
              annual layers. My this means it should be possible to  obtain a 2,000 year
              record of layer thickness, a proxy of  rainfall. This record will be the
              longest high-resolution proxy  record of rainfall for southern Africa and
              should provide  important data on temporal variations in climate during the 
              period under study.    This research is interesting for several reasons. For
              the last  2,000 years both hunters and gatherers and agriculturalist- 
              pastoralist have inhabited the  Kalahari. Anthropologists have  been very
              interested in the long term relationships between these  groups and wish to
              know whether the Bushman peoples claimed by  many researchers to be "pure
              hunter gatherers" did in fact  function this way. The study of mining will
              provide a basis for  looking at interaction and trade. In particular it should
              be  possible to determine which group in fact was associated with the  mining
              activities. The environmental research will provide an  excellent basis for
              examining human behavior in a natural  context. Many anthropologists have
              postulated that changes in the  extent and intensity of trade networks served
              to buffer  environmental change and unpredictability.
