Title       : War and Nature: Science and Technology in the History of Chemical Weapons and
               Insecticides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9511726

Award Number: 9511726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund P. Russell russell@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Two of the most powerful factors shaping the 20th century have been war and the
              environment.  Traditionally, however, researchers have treated these issues as
              separate.  Dr. Russell asks whether this separation is the right approach.  He
              cites the history of chemical weapons and the parallel history of insecticides
              to argue that we should not separate these subjects.  Efforts to control
              national and natural enemies are linked, he argues, on at least three levels. 
              The first is technology.  Beginning in World War I, chemical compounds shuttled
              between battle fields and farm fields.  In Gerhard Schrader's laboratory, nerve
              gases and insecticides entered the world as fraternal twins.  The second is
              institutions.  Nation states harnessed military and civilian institutions in
              tandem to develop chemicals for war and peace.  The third was metaphor. 
              Soldiers and scientists shaped the way people experience war and nature through
              shared metaphors.  In World War II, for example, military and civilian
              publications published cartoons of half-Japanese, half-insect creatures and
              called for "annihilation" of both. These developments helped produce some of
              the most exciting, and the most tragic, events of this century.  Humans used a
              poison chemical to boost crop yields and free themselves from disease, but they
              also used the same compound to try to "exterminate" human beings.    Dr.
              Russell is organizing his research around case studies of institutions
              representing military, civilian, scientific and industrial interests.  His
              results promise to advance our understanding of interactions between science,
              technology and society, between military and civilian endeavors, and between
              humans and nature.  They also promise to inform debates about pest control,
              arms control, dual use technology and environmental policy.    Dr. Russell's 
              is using his research to help train students in  the School of Engineering and
              Applied Science at the University of Virginia.  Hi is developing a module on
              environmental issues for use  in courses required of all fourth year students. 
              He is also developing two electives in environmental history and environmental
              problems and policies.
