Title       : Visual Attention, Perception, and Memory for Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9511633

Award Number: 9511633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Treisman treisman@phoenix.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511633  TREISMAN    The goal of this research is to study the formation,
              storage and  retrieval of visual representations of objects.  In particular, 
              it will explore the separate effects of attention, of prior  knowledge, and of
              the task being performed on the nature of  visual memories.  Recent research is
              revealing surprising  evidence of the plasticity of the visual system: 
              Information is  often registered without awareness or conscious memory,
              although  it can be probed using indirect methods like priming or  interference
              with subsequent perception of the same objects.  The  conceptualization behind
              this research distinguishes between the  reactivation of prestored
              representations of familiar objects  (which leads to object identification or
              classification) and the  creation of new tokens, either of familiar or of
              unfamiliar  objects, representing the current stimulus as we are seeing it,  in
              its particular, perhaps arbitrary instantiation.    Several different priming
              paradigms will be used to study newly  formed object tokens.  One series of
              experiments will explore the  object-specific integration of information in
              displays of moving  objects.  The general question is how we maintain the
              coherence  and continuity of perceived objects as they move and change in a 
              dynamic environment.  Another explores the initial  representations that are
              automatically generated without  attention the first time a new object is seen.
               A negative  priming paradigm, in which an unattended object becomes the 
              attended one on a later trial, will be used to explore the nature  and duration
              of these object tokens.  For example, is their  three-dimensional structure
              available?  Is their shape abstracted  from other aspects like size, color and
              orientation?  Under what  conditions can they be consciously retrieved, as well
              as  passively shaping our perceptual responses?  The focus will be on  the ways
              in which these implicit memory tokens differ from the  representations formed
              either for attended novel object s or for  unattended familiar objects.  The
              aim is to better understand  what roles attention and prior knowledge play and
              how they  interact in object perception.    This research may well lead to a
              better understanding of the  higher levels of processing in the visual system. 
              It may have  implications for ways of improving visual learning in a variety 
              of skilled tasks, and for better understanding the various  influences that
              unattended visual stimuli can have in shaping our  behavior (for example in
              advertising).  It may also suggest ways  of linking the inferred processes to
              neural mechanisms in the  brain, perhaps throwing light on the various
              difficulties  experienced by neurological patients with damage to specific 
              areas of the brain.    ***
