Title       : Storage Improvement, Conservation Treatment and Documentation Upgrade of
               Archaeological Perishable Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9511795

Award Number: 9511795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy N. Odegaard odegaard@ccit.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G. Michael Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Odegaard    With National Science Foundation support, Nancy Odegaard and her 
              colleagues will conduct a program to improve the conservation of  and access to
              perishable archaeological artifacts excavated from  a number of sites in the
              American Southwest. This collection  consists of an estimated 21,500 artifacts
              and ethnobotanical  lots. Based on a conservation survey, approximately 18%
              require  improved housing; many others require major or minor conservation 
              treatment. To remedy these problems, the team will undertake  necessary
              conservation, improve storage of materials and  consolidate and organize
              associated documentation. The related  computerized database will be updated
              and a user's guide  developed.    The archaeology of the United States
              Southwest is important for  several reasons. First, this region saw the rise of
              complex  societies which in prehistoric times linked communities with  roads
              which stretched across large expanses of deserts, which  constructed multistory
              buildings which housed hundreds of  individuals and which devised ways to
              survive in a harsh and  unpredictable desert environment. Secondly, because of
              the dry  conditions, perishable organic materials are often well preserved  and
              these provide insights which are rare in archaeological  situations. For
              example it is often possible to reconstruct local  environmental conditions and
              then determine the subsistence  strategies which human groups took to adapt and
              respond.    The perishable organic materials at the Arizona State Museum are 
              an endangered and valuable archaeological resource. With NSF  support, they
              will be properly conserved and made more available  for scientific research.
