Title       : Optimality Theory in Syntax: Universal Constraints and the Lexicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9511891

Award Number: 9511891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane B. Grimshaw grimshaw@ruccs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The core of Optimality Theory (OT) lies in these ideas:       Constraints are
              universal.       Constraints can be violated.       Grammars are rankings of
              constraints.       The optimal form from among the set of competing candidates 
                   is grammatical, all non-optimal candidates are       ungrammatical.  An
              optimal output form for a given input is selected from among  the class of
              competitors in the following way: A form which, for  every pairwise competition
              involving it, best satisfies the  highest-ranking constraint on which the
              competitors conflict, is  "optimal".  OT, while originally developed for
              phonological analysis, is a  general theory of constraint interaction, and
              several recent  pieces of research suggest that it extends in interesting ways
              to  the domain of syntax. The research described in this proposal  builds upon
              this earlier work, and addresses two fundamental  questions concerning
              syntactic theory which can be addressed  under OT assumptions in ways which
              differ significantly from  prior approaches.       The first question concerns
              the relationship between the  syntax of a language and its lexicon. The
              position is often taken  that the lexicon of a language determines its syntax.
              Indeed it  has been asserted that all grammatical variation among languages  is
              reducible to lexical differences. The current project takes a  different line,
              and aims to show that many grammatically  significant lexical properties of
              languages (perhaps all?) can be  derived from their grammars, i.e. from the
              ranking of universal  constraints which constitutes their grammars.       The
              second question concerns the universality of  constraints, a question that is
              clearly tied in a central way to  the idea of constraint violability. The core
              hypothesis of OT is  that every constraint is present in the grammar of every 
              language. This contrasts sharply with the view that constraints  vary
              "parametrically"; a view in which the form a constraint  takes in one language
              need not be the same in all. The  project  research focuses strongly on the
              predictions and problems raised  by this hypothesis about universal grammar
