Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Property Rights and Land Use in Changing Rights,
               Changing Forests: Sabah, Malaysia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9511470

Award Number: 9511470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6340               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Peluso   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511470  Peluso  This field research examines the impact of a changing political
              economy on legal and customary property law systems and practices among Dusun
              villagers around Mount Kinabalu in Sabah, Malaysia.  The communal forest
              resources management practices of the Dusun were given legal status in 1930. 
              Now villagers believe that the privatization of land and resources within their
              community forests (legally, "Native Reserves") is necessary for economic
              survival.  If forest reserves are moved from community management to private
              ownership or sold to outside interests, dramatic changes in the use,
              protection, and distribution of these resources will probably occur.  The focus
              of this research will be on the ways in which transformation from customary
              laws to a formal legal system has affected local property rights and land use
              practices and resulted in conflicts between and within communities over use and
              ownership of land.  It will expand the body of knowledge that emphasizes the
              importance of integrating resource management and property rights law systems
              within the larger historical and political-economic context to understand the
              behavior of resource users.  It will probably demonstrate that property rights
              and control over and access to resources are crucial factors affecting resource
              management systems.  %%%%  This field research examines the impact of a
              changing political economy on legal and customary property law systems and
              practices among Dusun villagers around Mount Kinabalu in Sabah, Malaysia. The
              villagers now believe that the privatization of land and resources within their
              previously-communal forests is necessary for economic survival.  If forest
              reserves are moved from community management to private ownership or sold to
              outside interests, dramatic changes in the use, protection, and distribution of
              these resources will probably occur.  The focus of this research will be on the
              ways in which transformation from customary laws to a formal legal system has
              affected local prope rty rights and land use practices and resulted in
              conflicts between and within communities over use and ownership of land.  ****
