Title       : Child/Adolescent Risk Precursors of Adult Adjustment: A Longitudinal Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9511640

Award Number: 9511640
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Block jblock@violet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project comprehensively assesses at age 30 the participants in a
              longitudinal study of personality and cognitive development begun in their
              early childhood.  Participants have already been intensively assessed during
              their nursery school years, in middle childhood, preadolescence, early and late
              adolescence, and young adulthood.  Appreciable information also exists
              regarding their parents and parent-child interactions.  Many theoretically
              important and useful findings concerning the determinants of personality and
              cognitive development have been reported during the course of this study. 
              However, the ultimate import of various childhood and adolescent behaviors and
              experiences can only be recognized in adulthood.  By age 30 life paths and
              opportunity structures are appreciably set for most individuals.   A
              multifaceted assessment of subjects when they are entering their fourth decade
              is unusually consequential.because at this age, unlike the last assessment at
              age 23,  the developmental requirement  of accommodating to issues of work and
              interpersonal connection has been seriously confronted.  The age 30 assessment
              will focus upon the participants' life courses to date and their current life
              circumstances (e.g., work and career patterns, self perceptions, experienced
              life stresses, physical and mental health, cognitive and moral development,
              personal philosophies, pattern of leisure time usage, interpersonal and
              attachment relationships).  Procedures will involve detailed, intimate, and
              systematic interviews videotaped for subsequent coding; various experimental
              information-processing procedures deemed relevant to personality, cognitve, and
              moral development; measures of psychobiologic reactivity; inventory items which
              follow up and extend knowledge derived from previously administered
              questionnaires.  These data wiill consolidate understanding of the implications
              of various  processes during the formative childhood, adolescent, and youth
              years for successful developmental outcomes in adult hood.  This project
              provides follow-up assessment at age 30 of participants in a well-established
              longitudinal study who have been intensively studied from ages 3 to 23.  Unlike
              most longitudinal data sets,  this project is notable for the large amount of
              data available for each participant and on the comparability of the data across
              time periods.  Because of its longitudinal -- fully prospective -- nature, 
              many theoretically important and useful findings have been reported during the
              course of this study that could not be gleaned from other data sets.  For
              example, one notable contribution has been to revise the understanding of the
              impact of divorce on children:  by studying families prior to divorce, it was
              shown that pre-divorce family discord appears to account for much of what
              earlier had been viewed as an effect of divorce.  Other contributions to
              knowledge include:  the nursery school and familial antecedents of drug use in
              adolescence and young adulthood;  the early childhood personality and parental
              antecedents of depression in adolescence and young adulthood; early antecedents
              of creativity, ego-resilience, and ego-control;  personality continuities in
              self-esteem and resiliency.  By extending assessments to age 30, when life
              attainments and relatively established life patterns can be identified, this
              project addresses crucial developmental issues that cannot be addressed with
              data collected at earlier ages. More specifically, a multifaceted assessment of
              subjects when they are entering their fourth decade is unusually consequential
              because at this age, unlike the last assessment at age 23,  the developmental
              requirement of accommodating to issues of work and interpersonal connection has
              been seriously confronted. The  prospective assessement of the antecedents of
              successful adaptations in the domains of work and marriage which this project
              will provide is highly relevant to the Human Capital research agenda on
              'workplace' and 'families'. These data wiill consolidate understanding of  the
              implications of various  processes during the formative childhood, adolescent,
              and youth years for successful developmental outcomes in adulthood that are of
              great societal consequence..
