Title       : Improvement in Zooarchaeological Data Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1995      
File        : a9511302

Award Number: 9511302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71406              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Wing ewing@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Wing    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Elizabeth Wing will  enter
              information on a series of archaeological assemblages into  a Paradox data
              management system. Approximately 25 specimens are  included in a "catalogued
              lot", and 19,526 of these lots will be  entered into the Florida Museum of
              Natural History computer  system. The materials themselves consist of faunal
              remains from:  archaeological sites from Historic period Florida and 
              southeastern Georgia; prehistoric Florida and Georgia; and from  coastal and
              highland Ecuador and Peru. The Florida faunal remains  trace changing
              human-environmental interaction over thousands of  years and indicate how human
              subsistence responded to changing  environmental conditions at differing levels
              of cultural and  technological complexity. The South American collections
              permit  scientists to chart the origin and spread of domestic animals in  the
              Andean region and therefore gain insight into perhaps the  most significant
              change in human subsistence technology.    Museums such as the Florida State
              Museum of Natural History  contain collections which, in theory, will allow
              scientists to  address many significant questions. However often such materials
               are difficult to use because they are poorly catalogued and the  information
              which may be available is difficult to recover. Dr.  Wing curates one of the
              most important archaeological faunal  collections in the United States and with
              National Science  Foundation support, these remains will be made available
              online  to a very wide group of potential users.
