Title       : Recursive Competitive Search Equilibrium: Labor Market Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9511111

Award Number: 9511111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale T. Mortensen d-mortensen@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511111  Mortensen    This project extends and applies an aggregate model of
              income and  employment determination developed under the previous NSF grant  in
              three areas:  (1) fixed investment in job creation, vacancy  chains, and
              innovation; (2) wage determination and human capital   investment; and (3) the
              value and role of unemployment insurance.  The solution to the aggregate model
              is based on a new solution  concept called a recursive competitive search
              equilibrium that  combines the notion of equilibrium in a matching model of the
               labor market with the concept of recursive competitive search  equilibrium. 
              The research contradicts the widely help view that   only imperfect competition
              in labor and/or product markets can  explain involuntary unemployment, sticky
              real wages and observed   employment volatility.  This new framework permits
              more accurate   quantitative estimates of the effects of labor market policy as
               well as greater realism.      How human capital investment is shared in an
              environment with  transaction friction and turnover has long been a topic of
              debate  and study.  The new framework will be used to study such  questions as:
              Do bargaining mechanisms and other wage formation  institutions provide the
              information individuals need to invest  in a decentralized setting?  If so,
              what are the losses  associated with these institutions?  Under what conditions
              is  there a role for government intervention in the form of subsidies  to
              training and education?    The significance and potential importance of this
              new dynamic  general equilibrium framework and methods for the study of labor  
              market policy are shown by the attention paid to the strikingly  large
              estimates obtained under the previous NSF grant of the  effects of the payroll
              tax and the Unemployment Insurance (UI)  system on the U.S. unemployment rate. 
              A major problem with the  estimates of the dead weight losses attributable to
              UI, one  shared with virtually all the formal literature on the subject,  is
              that it accoun ts for distortions attributable to  moral  hazard  but does not
              include the  insurance  value of the UI  benefit because the model used in the
              analysis is one in which  agents are risk neutral.  The third part of this
              project  addresses the theoretical and computational problems in  estimating
              the value of UI insurance.
