Title       : Family Interactions, Human Capital Investments and Endowments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9511955

Award Number: 9511955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jere R. Behrman jbehrman@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Taubman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Rosenzweig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511955  Behrman    The principal objective of this project is to improve 
              understanding of the determinants of human capital investments  and
              intergenerational financial transfers and their consequences   for the level of
              and changes in the inequality in earnings and  income.  The project develops
              and tests models that incorporate  family behavior, endowment inequality within
              and among families,   and interactions between family resources and
              opportunities for  post-secondary schooling.  The project investigates issues
              of  bias and potential bias in estimates obtained using standard 
              cross-sectional, sibling and twins  estimators,  the role and  importance of
              measurement errors, and the effects of unmeasured  shocks differentiating human
              capital investments among siblings,   net of endowment differences.  The models
              will be applied to a  newly-collected large-scale survey data set describing
              identical   twins, their spouses, their children and their parents using a 
              questionnaire designed specifically to elicit information  relevant to the
              project s objectives within family and life-cycle  contexts.      More
              specifically, the project will yield estimates of (1)  endowment effects on
              human capital investments - measured by time  in school, school quality, and
              work experience - and financial  transfers between adults and their parents,
              (2) how such effects   varied across cohorts with different college and labor
              market  opportunities, (3) differences in such investment determinants  across
              men and women and by family background, and (4) the  consequences of these
              interactions among endowments, family  behavior, family resource constraints
              and schooling opportunities  fort the distributions of earnings and income. 
              The  investigations will also help determine the value of twins data  in social
              science research, which is currently imperfectly  understood.  The project will
              also produce a public-use data set   from the new survey data.
