Title       : Genetic Specification Neuronal Identity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9511338

Award Number: 9511338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall W. Phillis rphillis@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9511338  Phillis  The establishment of the distinct identities of individual
              neurons  represents a fundamental step in the development of the diverse  array
              of neurons that make up a mature nervous system. During this  process,
              individual nerve cells develop distinct properties  including characteristic
              anatomy, physiology, and patterns of  connectivity.  However, the mechanisms
              that confer neuronal  identity are just beginning to be understood. The goal of
              this  research is to investigate the role of a newly discovered gene in  the
              establishment of neuronal identity in the invertebrate  peripheral nervous
              system.  Mutations in this gene affect behavior  and the morphology of adult
              sensory organs. In addition, these  mutations have the ability to enhance the
              phenotype of mutations in  another gene that is a regulatory gene required to
              confer proper  identity to external sensory organs. If function in this gene is
               lost, the mechanosensory bristles are transformed in their identity  and
              acquire characteristics of internal stretch receptors. When  mutations are
              present in both genes, there is an interaction that  results in the loss of
              nearly all of the mechanosensory bristles  from adults.   The effects of
              mutations in the gene under study on sensory organ  development will be
              investigated using several genetic and  immunological markers specific to
              certain types of sensory organs.  This analysis will determine whether
              mutations in the gene result  in a transformation of sensory organ identity. 
              The gene will also  be cloned and sequenced to determine the pattern of its
              expression  and the structure of its protein product.  Finally, an ectopic 
              expression system for the gene will constructed to determine  whether
              expression in specific subsets of sensory organs affects  their development.
              The data from these investigations will provide  fundamental insights into the
              genetic mechanisms that function in  the development and differentiation of the
              peripheral nervous  system.
