Title       : The Biologist as Public Intellectual: Julian Huxley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9511474

Award Number: 9511474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95573              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Cross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stephen Cross:  "The Biologist as Public Intellectual:  Julian Huxley"    The
              "Public Intellectual" has had a vivid history in science.  In the 17th century,
              scientists such as Robert Hooke or Robert Boyle would stage public exhibitions
              of the experiments they conducted.  In the 19th century, Thomas Huxley,
              Julian's grandfather, engaged in famous debates about the validity of evolution
              with Bishop "Soapy" Wilberforce.  Margaret Mead took it upon herself to
              popularize anthropology and, in the process, took on issues of peace and war. 
              Sigmund Freud and Albert Einstein, taking advantage of their public stature, 
              jointly authored a public appeal for world peace. In the 1980's, Carl Sagan was
              ubiquitous on TV speaking of the wonders of "billions and billions' of stars. 
              Stephen  Jay Gould appears on TV, gives public lectures to packed halls, and
              writes a popular essay series for Natural History magazine.   While many of
              these scientists are mistrusted if not outright ridiculed by their peers --
              e.g. Mead and Sagan -- much of this hostility can be laid to envy and a real
              misunderstanding of the role these scientists play in transmitting an
              enthusiasm for science to the general public.  How one achieves the role of
              "public intellectual" and what its implications are for the scientist are the
              subject of this study by Dr. Cross.    Julian Huxley (1887-1975) was a major
              figure in 20th century life sciences.  He made important contributions to a
              number of fields, including embryology, ethology and evolutionary theory.  He
              was a principal architect of the evolutionary synthesis in the 1930's and
              1940's--the neo-Darwinian unification of the theory of natural selection with
              new conceptions in genetics and population theory.    Beyond "pure" science,
              though, Huxley was also a gifted and prolific popularizer.  He collaborated
              with H.G. Wells on The Science of Life and later became director of the London
              Zoo.  He regularly appeared on the BBC radio program, the "Brains Trust" and
              became the first director gener al of UNESCO in 1946, thus assuming an
              international stage for his endeavors.  In effect, Huxley transformed himself
              from a researcher into a public intellectual--a position from which he strove
              to disseminate the scientific creed that he termed "evolutionary humanism."  
              He provides an outstanding demonstration of how scientists have considered
              their fields to be intimately involved with questions of morals and social
              purposes.  He makes visible what might be termed the affective level of
              scientific culture--the level of deeply nurtured optimism in the redemptive,
              culture-creating power of science.  Huxley's life provides historical
              perspective on the debates about the relation of the scientist to the public
              sphere, and about modernism as a distinctive cultural formation in this
              century.
