Title       : Expected Value Model of Social Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9511782

Award Number: 9511782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noah E. Friedkin friedkin@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a theoretical analysis and laboratory study of social exchange, based
              on an expected value model of social power.  In this model a power structure
              indicates opportunities for exchange relations and a sample space of exchange
              networks.  The approach incorporates a micro-model of bargaining that predicts
              exchange outcomes in each of these possible exchange networks.  When drawing on
              observed relative frequencies of exchange networks (such as arise during
              repetitive trials of an experiment), the expected value model currently
              provides the most accurate account of the distribution of benefits among actors
              in exchange networks.  However, the model does not predict the relative
              frequency of exchange networks that may arise during the exchange process and,
              in one instance, it fails to account for the observed distribution of exchange
              payoffs.  The model now has been elaborated to include an account of the
              incidence of exchange networks, and it addresses the anomalous finding reported
              in the literature.  The present project will assess the elaborated model both
              analytically and empirically, in comparison with a competing graph-theoretic
              model, employing a set of networks that have not been previously examined in
              the literature, for which the two approaches make markedly contrasting
              predictions.  %%%   This is fundamental research on exchange, bargaining and
              power in social networks, an area of research that is rapidly coming to a clear
              consensus about the mathematical laws that describe a range of important
              phenomena.  Rigorous understanding of the dynamic and structural factors that
              influence the concentration of social capital in real-world networks of
              exchange depends upon working out the abstract relationships in theory and
              laboratory experiments such as conducted in this project.
