Title       : Broadcast Technologies and Public Policy: Government Regulation of Radio and
               Television in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9511607

Award Number: 9511607
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76301              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh R. Slotten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The role of scientists and engineers in government decision-making poses a
              number of problems within a democracy.   How does a regulator balance the
              technical expertise that a scientist brings while at the same time emphasize
              broad-based democratic participation which takes into account the controversial
              socio-political aspects of technical decision making?   Dr. Slotten is
              exploring the areas of conflict as well as agreement and support in the
              intersection of technology, science, and the demands of a democratic society
              through an analysis of the Federal Radio Commission (FRC), organized in 1927,
              and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), established in 1934.   The FCC
              was created to extend the work of the FRC to regulate television and other
              communication technologies as well as radio. Dr. Slotten is focusing on the
              intersection of technical issues and the social, political, economic, legal,
              and cultural components of regulation by the federal government of the four
              most important broadcast technologies developed during the 20th century:  AM
              and FM radio, monochrome and color TV.  He is analyzing the public policy
              debate during the period when the public implications of each new technology
              first became important, examining specifically the role of the different
              participants and the significance of key policy decisions for the early
              commercial development of the technologies.  This period was crucial for the
              establishment of the American system of broadcasting and the related culture of
              mass communications.  By analyzing the complex interplay of different factors
              that went into the formation of public policy for radio and television, we not
              only gain a deeper understanding of the institutional and social framework in
              which policy decisions were made, but we also gain a better appreciation of the
              tensions and conflicts that continue to frame science and technology debates. 
              This study is particularly timely given the current interest in revising the
              Communications Act of 1934 and in formula ting policies for the construction of
              a "national information infrastructure."
