Title       : U.S.-Kenya Cooperative Research - Tsetse Flies and Their Endosymbionts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9511806

Award Number: 9511806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Serap Aksoy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5991,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This collaborative research grant supports the international linkage costs to
              enable Dr. Serap Aksoy, Assistant Professor in the Department of Internal
              Medicine at Yale University School of Medicine, and a postdoctoral associate,
              to conduct field-based studies in Africa over a three-year period, to
              understand the fundamental biological relationships between symbiotic
              microorganisms and the tsetse (genus Glossina).  The work will be conducted in
              collaboration with Dr. S.K. Moloo, Head of the Tsetse Research Laboratory at
              the International Laboratory for Research on Animal Diseases (LRAD), in
              Nairobi, Kenya.  The research will focus on host-symbiont coevolution in tsetse
              and its gut- and ovary-tissue associated endosymbionts. Building on current
              understanding of the phylogeny and the potential function of these organisms
              based on observations of a limited set of laboratory colonies, the
              international collaboration will permit research with wild flies and flies from
              other colonies.  In Nairobi, the PI will collect specimens from the wild and
              from laboratory strains from Vienna and Canada, and will extract and store the
              nucleic acids and other materials for analysis. The first aim is to evaluate
              the concordant evolution hypothesis of tsetse and their endosymbionts and to
              validate the constructed phylogeny for genus Glossina  using field collected
              insects.  The second goal is to evaluate the extent and the stability of
              Wolbachia -mediated Cytoplasmic Incompatibility phenomenon in tsetse in nature.
               The collaborative relationship between the international partners and their
              institutions builds on their complementary strengths. The facilities, size of
              colonies, and availability of technical personnel at ILRAD make possible
              microinjection and mating experiments on a scale that would be difficult to
              undertake at the PI's home laboratory. The novel approach of using insect
              symbionts to disrupt the biology of disease-transmitting insects promises
              immense potential benefit for developing countries and the global economy.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
