Title       : Elementary Coordination Dynamics of Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9511360

Award Number: 9511360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130856             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. A. Scott Kelso kelso@walt.ccs.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pier-Giorgio Zanone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511360  KELSO    The ability of animals to learn from experience reaches its 
              highest form in human beings.  Yet, despite extensive work in  various fields
              of scientific inquiry, fundamental questions still  remain to be answered: 
              What is learning?  What processes  underlie the ability of humans to learn new
              skills?  What is the  nature of change?  What factors determine generalization
              of one  skill to another?  What makes one task easy to learn and others 
              difficult?  This research is part of a broad program addressing  these
              questions through studies of perceptual-motor coordination  in tasks not unlike
              learning to play a musical instrument, but  simple enough to be measured.  The
              approach employs novel methods  that allow a quantitative evaluation of the
              learner's existing  capabilities before the introduction of a novel task. 
              Nobody is  a blank slate.  The individual learner possesses his/her own 
              "signature" (dependent on previous experiences, inherited traits,  etc.) that
              influences the learning process.  This research is  based on the hypothesis
              that the rate of the learning process and  the form that it takes is depend on
              the interplay between  preexisting capabilities and the task to be learned. 
              Since both  can be expressed in terms of the same variables and the rates of 
              change of these variables, dynamical laws of learning become  accessible.  This
              research will investigate how learning causes  changes, not just in the
              representation of what has been learned,  but in the entire layout of the
              learner's dynamics.  Preliminary  studies have shown that what is learned
              (relevant information) is  quite independent of the particular system that
              practices the  task.  Thus, the ability to transfer knowledge from one domain
              to  another appears to rest heavily on finding out what the relevant 
              information is.  A further direction of the research stems from a 
              conceptualization of memory which assumes that its strength  depends on the
              stability of the learned state and can be  precisely quant ified using
              dynamical measures (e.g.,  fluctuations, time to relax from perturbations). 
              Moreover,  future plans include an evaluation of human brain activity  patterns
              corresponding to behaviorally observed changes in  learning and memory. 
              Although the research is basic, aimed at  understanding the psychological and
              neuronal mechanisms of human  learning, it has the potential to spawn both
              implications and  applications.  In particular, the focus on individual
              constraints  on learning and the need to structure the learning situation in 
              the context of such constraints have significant implications for  education. 
              Avenues for applications exist in human-machine  interface design, prosthetics,
              and rehabilitation following  strokes, as well as in recovery from the numerous
              brain diseases  that afflict human beings.    ***
