Title       : Phonetic and Phonological Investigations of Indonesian Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9511185

Award Number: 9511185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abigail C. Cohn acc4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Indonesia exhibits great linguistic diversity, yet even the  most widely
              spoken of the Indonesian languages remain poorly  studied. Particularly lacking
              are systematic phonological studies  and instrumental phonetic investigations.
              The goal of this  project is a detailed phonetic and phonological analysis of 
              several related Indonesian languages of the Western Austronesian  language
              family (including Indonesian, Javanese, Sundanese,  Madurese, and Batak). It
              will involve basic description and  documentation of these languages, while
              including several  specific research projects focusing on the phonotactics and 
              prosodic systems of these languages. Building on these basic  descriptions, an
              investigation of the influence of regional  languages (Javanese and Batak) on
              the structure of Indonesian  will also be carried out. This work will be
              carried out through  study of previous sources on these languages,
              consultations with  native speaker consultants, and acoustic analysis of
              recordings  of multiple speakers.       The end result of the project will
              include a bibliography on  recent work on the structure of Indonesian
              languages, a  systematic acoustic database analyzing the phonetic properties of
               the consonants and vowels of each of these languages, articles on  topics such
              as stress and the prosodic structure of Indonesian,  the phonetics and
              phonology of glides, the structure of  geminate-singleton contrasts, and
              influences on Indonesian of  regional languages, and a monograph on the
              phonetics and  phonology of the languages under investigation.       The
              project will have the dual purpose of providing a  comprehensive understanding
              of several languages meriting fuller  study, while at the same time providing a
              new source of data for  the testing of linguistic theories, thereby broadening
              our  understanding of the nature of human language.
