Title       : Relativity Principles in Historical and Foundational Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9511796

Award Number: 9511796
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Rynasiewicz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511796,  Robert Rynasiewicz    After the introduction of special relativity,
              physicists have come more and more to place a special emphasis on the role of
              relativity and symmetry principles in theory construction.  Such was quite
              explicit in the considerations that led Einstein to the general theory of
              relativity, and the identification of appropriate symmetry groups has become a
              central concern in theoretical particle physics.   There has, however, long
              been disagreement within the physics community as to what it means for a theory
              to embody or satisfy a relativity principle.  One famous critique came form
              Erich Kretschmann in which he published a scathing review of Einstein's
              characterization in terms of the from invariance of the fundamental equations
              under coordinate transformation and suggested that Einstein's gravitational
              theory, despite its general covariance, is in fact an "absolute" theory in the
              sense that it satisfies no non-trivial principle of relativity.    Since
              Kretschmann's critique, there is still no consensus as to (a) what relativity
              principles in fact are satisfied by what is traditionally called the general
              theory of relativity; (b) how to characterize in general the concept of a
              relativity principle; or (c) what the relationship is between relativity
              principles and other types of symmetry principles such as gauge symmetry and
              time-reversal invariance.  The current project aims to do two things. The first
              is to identify the crucial historical factors responsible for the emergence
              among physicists of the general ideal of a relativity principle.  The second is
              to make some systematic progress on how such a principle should be properly
              sketched out, relying in particular on ideas of Kretschmann and others and also
              the PI's own views as developed in previous grants.  The resulting study should
              be of interest to physicists, historians and philosophers of science.
