Title       : Meeting to Review and Synthesize Miombo Ecosystem Processes and Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9511826

Award Number: 9511826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul V. Desanker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1325,5928,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This workshop, organized by Dr. Paul Desanker, Assistant Professor, School of
              Forestry and Wood Products, at Michigan Technological University, in
              cooperation with Mr. Mzoma Ngulube of the Forestry Research Institute of
              Malawi, will  be held in Zomba, Malawi,  in November or December, 1995. 
              African and U.S. researchers of global change, ecology, forestry, hydrology,
              social and economic sciences, public health, and  other disciplines, will
              review the state of knowledge regarding the processes and mechanisms of savanna
              woodland ecosystems and develop a proposal for a regional study on miombo
              woodlands.  Miombo woodlands, one of the most extensive vegetation covers in
              southern Africa, are undergoing major changes due to human disturbances and
              possibly global climatic changes.  The woodlands hold vast pools of carbon, and
              changes in fire, climate, disturbance regimes and other controlling processes
              will likely result in significant global effects.  The large savanna area of
              Southern/Central Africa is the largest area of seasonal vegetation in the
              southern hemisphere, and so, phenological effects of these savannas must be
              significant in global circulations.  Among the issues to be addressed  are
              carbon sequestration, trace gas emissions in relation to soil processes and
              biomass burning, and the linkages between satellite data with ground
              measurements to describe ecosystem processes in this poorly studied region of
              the world.  An edited volume of the proceedings will be published.   In
              addition to eight US researchers, the workshop will include participants from
              Zambia, Tanzania,  Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Mozambique, South Africa, Malawi,
              and Zaire. This workshop will strengthen collaboration internationally 
              (between US and African scientists), regionally (among scientists throughout
              southern Africa, including South Africa), and across disciplinary boundaries. 
              This workshop will buttress the concern about the socio-economic role of miombo
              woodlands with heightened awareness of ecosystem functions related to soil
              protection, watershed protection, wildlife preservation, biodiversity, and
              species with medicinal properties.  All of the participants are involved in
              other fora related to global change; this ensures that the conclusions of this
              meeting and the findings of  future research will be linked into the global
              research effort on climate change.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
