Title       : Collaborative Research: Beyond the Water's Edge: Individual Preferences,
               Domestic Institutions, System Structure and Foreign Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9511289

Award Number: 9511289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59384              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Clifton Morgan morgan@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511289  Morgan    A great deal of recent research in international relations
              has  focused on the relationship between democracy and foreign policy.   One
              strain on this literature, originating from works dealing  with issues of war
              and peace, has addressed the question of  whether democracies are less war
              prone than non-democracies.  A  second and older strain, some of it originating
              from the study of  comparative foreign policy has expanded our horizons into
              other  areas, including alliance behavior, defense expenditures and  policy,
              and reliance on international organizations.  These two  approaches have
              produced a number of empirical regularities  indicating that democracies do
              behave somewhat differently than  do non-democracies with the best know being
              that although  democracies tend to fight, and even initiate, wars as often as 
              other states do, they rarely, if ever, fight one another.   Explanations for
              these observations have centered around two main  approaches--the norms
              approach, holding that democratic leaders'  behaviors are guided by the norms
              regarding conflict behavior  that they are socialized to accept, and the
              structural approach,  holding that democratic institutions make it easier for a
               leader's opponents to block policies (such as war) they  disapprove.  Attempts
              to construct critical tests for determining  the better approach have proven
              inconclusive, largely because  there is so much overlap between the two
              arguments and because  democratic norms and democratic institutions often
              coexist.    The above suggests that a reevaluation of the research is in  order
              and a new theory is needed.  This investigation articulates  and tests a
              general theory of foreign policy.  The theory  specifies how individual
              preferences, domestic political  structures, and the international environment
              interact to produce  foreign policies.  The theory also integrates the work on 
              conflict behavior with other types of foreign policy such as  alliance
              formation, defense spending, and events inte raction.   The theory is
              formalized and is used to deduce hypotheses  systematically.  The methods
              appropriately employed use a variety  of extant data sets to test relevant
              hypotheses.    This research investigation should substantially enhance our 
              understanding of the topic.  ***
