Title       : The Renovation of Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9511703

Award Number: 9511703
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Eastwood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A common mistake people have about the nature of scientific discovery is that it
              is often mere chance that a particular person or laboratory or nation or even
              an entire culture makes a scientific advance.  Penicillin was discovered, in
              this theory, by a chance examination of a particular mold.  Kekule discovered
              the structure of the benzene ring because he dreamt of a snake biting its own
              tail.  Yet none of these discoveries would have been made if the scientists did
              not already have a "prepared" mind that was ready to recognize possible
              solutions to problems when they see them.  This "prepared" mind is what Dr.
              Eastwood is studying.  In his case, though, he is examining not the preparation
              of a single scientist like Kekule but an entire culture. He is looking at
              nothing less than the critical issue of why science rose in the West rather
              than in other cultures.  After all, in the Middle Ages, China, India, and the
              Muslim countries of the Middle East were far, far more advanced than the
              cultures of Europe.  Indeed, it was only because the Middle Eastern and
              Northern African countries passed on to Europe the science that they had
              received and developed from the Greeks that Western Europe was even set on the
              track to develop modern science.  Yet as Dr. Eastwood points out, just like
              Kekule, the Western world had to be prepared to receive and work with the
              materials they were given from the Middle East and Africa.  What about Western
              culture led the scholars to accept this science and transform it to make what
              is modern science?  Clearly it was not the materials alone that caused this. 
              If the knowledge the West received from Arab scholars automatically led to
              modern science, then why didn't the Arabs make the transformation?  Dr.
              Eastwood is examining in the context of mathematical astronomy how Europe was
              both well-prepared and had internally developed motives to pursue Arabic
              mathematical astronomy.  This motivation led the West not only to take what the
              Arabs gave them but transform it into, fir st, the Newtonian and, ultimately,
              the Einsteinian world views.  Thus, this study promises to address the central
              question in the culture of science:  what is it about Western Civilization that
              leads to the rise of science and technology.  Dr. Eastwood will not provide the
              definitive answer, but he will surely provide a part of it.
