Title       : Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Empirical Issues in Discrete Choice
               Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9511280

Award Number: 9511280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99647              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tulin Erdem erdem@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program revolves around three different but related projects in
              discrete choice modeling  and estimation. The common theme is the modeling of
              consumer choice behavior, and the estimation of  models of consumer behavior on
              revealed preference data sets.  With the availability of electronic  scanner
              panel data, choice models have become very important for understanding consumer
              behavior.  For  example, such models may be used to evaluate the impact of the
              marketing mix on consumer purchasing  behavior, and to assess the patterns of
              competition in the market place.  The three research projects  in this study
              involve the use of recently developed simulation estimation techniques.  In the
              model of  the first project, consumer choice probabilities are high dimensional
              integrals over unobserved prices  and coupon values, as well as over stochastic
              preference shocks. Thus, Monte-Carlo methods must be  used to simulate the
              likelihood function in the model.  In the second and third projects, both 
              solution of the dynamic programming problem and construction of the likelihood
              function require high  dimensional integrations over stochastic process for
              prices,  preference shocks, etc.  In these  projects we will use MonteCarlo
              methods both to solve consumers' dynamic programming problems and to simulate
              the likelihood function.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
