Title       : In vivo Analysis of Dynamin Function in Synaptic Vesicle Recycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9511062

Award Number: 9511062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mani Ramaswami mani@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: IBN-9511062  Principal Investigator:  Ramaswami, Mani    The
              brain is composed of over a billion individual nerve cells  connected to one
              another at complex structures called synapses.   Each cell receives input from
              a multitude of other cells in the  brain and may respond by signaling to the
              cells that receive its  outputs.  All complex behavior owes itself to signaling
              by  individual nerve cells and the reception of these signals by other  nerve
              and muscle cells.  The basic mechanism of signaling by nerve  cells is similar
              in all species.  It involves the release of  packets of neurotransmitter
              molecules by the nerve cell.  Because  the total number of packets available at
              any time to the nerve cell  is very limited, they need to be rapidly
              replenished for sustained  neural function.  A model is available which
              contains a genetic  defect in a protein called dynamin which iq unable to
              replenish  these packets.  Dynamin is highly conserved across species.  Dr. 
              Ramaswami will examine the role of dynamin in neuromuscular  communication
              using specialized genetic methods available, and by  novel microscopic
              techniques.  In this model synapses will be  altered in a controlled way using
              modern genetic techniques and  behavioral indices will be monitored.  In
              addition, using  microscopic methods, the localization of dynamin will be 
              investigated and how it is involved in normal neuronal function.   Examination
              of the role of dynamin at the neuromuscular junction is  a fundamental issue
              that will reveal unique information about  synapse function.  There is also
              great relevance of these studies  to understanding neuromuscular disorders
              associated with aberrant  signaling between cells.
