Title       : The Intrinsic Dynamics of Social Judgement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9511657

Award Number: 9511657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin R. Vallacher vallacher@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Nowak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                               This research
              program will investigate the tendency for the product of social judgment
              processes (e.g., evaluation) to display temporal variation in the absence of
              new information or external influence.  Such variation, representing intrinsic
              dynamics of social judgment, reflects the successive activation of unique
              configurations of cognitive and affective elements pertaining to the target of
              judgment.  Because each configuration has implications for higher order meaning
              and evaluation, this successive activation provides the basis for internally
              generated temporal variation in judgment.  When the elements are relatively
              consistent, intrinsic dynamics tend to dissipate as the configurations become
              integrated into a single higher order frame. Static integration may be hard to
              achieve, however, when the elements are mutually inconsistent.  In such cases,
              there will be sustained intrinsic dynamics as two (or more) conflicting higher
              order frames alternate in prepotence, each providing integration to some
              portion of the elements.  This dynamic integration is especially likely when
              the judgment is personally important to the judge.  A paradigm involving the
              use of a computer mouse will be used to test this theoretical framework. 
              Subjects receive information about a target person represented as a circle in
              the middle of the display screen and then think about and evaluate the target
              for several minutes.  During this time, they express their evaluation by using
              the mouse to adjust the position of the cursor relative to the target.  Several
              dynamic measures are derived from the position changes (e.g., rate of change in
              evaluation).  The emergence of static vs. dynamic integration, as well as other
              aspects of intrinsic dynamics, will be examined in the context of important
              topics in social psychology, including close relationships, social interaction,
              stereotyping, and attitude-behavior consistency.  The research program as a
              whole is inte nded to establish intrinsic dynamics as basic to social judgment,
              supplementing the traditional focus on content and structure.          Our
              judgments of one another tend to be remarkably dynamic, with a variety of
              thoughts and feelings coming to mind in rapid succession.  At the same time,
              judgment provides a basis for decision-making, planning, and interpersonal
              behavior--functions that require stability in our thoughts and feelings.  The
              proposed research program will test a theoretical framework that explains how
              mental volatility gives rise to integrated understanding and coherent
              evaluations of one another.  A distinction is made between two different ways
              of integrating the variety of facts, feelings, and images one may have
              concerning the person being judged.  Static integration occurs when this
              information is not too inconsistent and can be averaged in some fashion to
              yield a stable judgment.  Mental volatility in this mode of integration should
              diminish over time as the judgment is formed.  Dynamic integration, on the
              other hand, occurs when information about the person exceeds a threshold of
              inconsistency.  In this mode of understanding, two (or more) conflicting ways
              of thinking about the person, each providing integration for a portion of the
              available information, may emerge and alternate in mental dominance for the
              judge.  Judgment in this case is therefore characterized by oscillation between
              different ways of thinking about the person rather than by one stable
              perspective on the person. The relation between mental volatility and judgment
              is examined in the context of important topics in social psychology, including
              intimate relationships, judgments of ability, racial stereotypes, and moral
              judgment.
