Title       : A Randomized Trial on Educational Inputs in Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9511347

Award Number: 9511347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kremer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511347  Kremer    There have been many retrospective statistical studies of the
               effect of educational inputs on school performance.  However,  these
              retrospective studies will be biased if schools with  different educational
              inputs systematically differ in other,  unmeasured ways which are correlated
              with school performance.   For example, schools with better physical facilities
              may also  typically have parents who are more advantaged or more committed   to
              education, and this parental input, rather than the physical  facilities
              themselves, may be responsible for the correlation  between test scores and
              physical facilities.  This project  conducts a randomized trial which can
              overcome many of the  statistical problems of past studies.    The project
              carries out one of the first randomized trials on  educational inputs and
              school performance.  The trial is based on  the work of International Christian
              Humanitarian Services, (ITS),  a Kenyan GO.  ITS provides selected rural
              primary schools with  textbooks, exercise books, uniforms, classroom
              construction,  desks, and medical services.  The investigator will randomly 
              assign a group of candidate schools to either a control group or   treatment
              group.  Schools in the treatment group will receive  both educational and
              medical services from ITS.  Schools in the  control group will receive medical
              services in return for  participating in the program and cooperating with their
               monitoring and evaluation efforts.  The project compares the  change in text
              scores and dropout rates between the two groups.    Since different components
              of the assistance package will be  provided in different years, and will affect
              different classes of  students, the investigator should be able to separately
              assess  the impact of the different inputs.  The project also examines  whether
              the impact of the additional resources differs with  students  gender or
              socio-economic status, or with teachers   training and pedagogic techniques.
