Title       : The Role of Contrast Sets in Processing Natural Language Focus Constructions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9511340

Award Number: 9511340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory N. Carlson carlson@ling.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Tanenhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This project examines the real-time processing of sentences  with focus
              constructions within the framework of a representational  theory of the
              semantics of focus. We will concentrate primarily on  sentences and discourses
              exhibiting contrastive focus, with special  emphasis on the theoretical notion
              of a contrast set, the group of  alternative entities, properties, etc., that
              something in the  assertion in the sentence implicitly stands in contrast to.  
                  Existing literature clearly establishes that readers and  listeners devote
              extra attention to focused words and phrases.  However, to our knowledge, there
              has been little psycholinguistic  work to date conducted within the context of
              an explicit  representational theory of focus. Consequently, fundamental 
              questions about the informational contribution of contrastive  focus, and its
              consequences for on-line language processing, have  not yet been explored. The
              research that we are planning  investigates the processing of sentences and
              discourses  exhibiting contrastive focus, as understood within the context of 
              current semantic theory. The most basic question is whether  contrast sets are
              indeed computed during the course of  understanding an utterance marked with
              focus against the  background of a discourse context, and, if so, when are they
               computed, and how are they computed (that is, what factors govern  their
              determination). We will also examine how they are used in  managing attention
              (and salience of entities) in discourse  processing and interpreting
              referential expressions.       Most of these questions will be examined using a
              new  experimental paradigm in which subjects follow spoken  instructions to
              manipulate objects in a workspace while their  eye-movements are monitored
              using a video-based camera system.  Preliminary work using the visual world
              paradigm has demonstrated  that listeners seek to establish reference
              incrementally, making  eye-movements to relevant objects that are closely
              time-locked to  referential expre ssion in the instructions. Subjects typically
               make an eye-movement to an object prior to reaching for it and  the
              programming of the eye-movement to the target object occurs,  on average,
              within several hundred milliseconds of the word in  the instruction that makes
              that object unique with respect to the  relevant visual alternatives.
