Title       : Science, The Cold War, and Democratic Values: Scientists in U.S. Foreign Policy,
               1945-1963
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9511867

Award Number: 9511867
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Doel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Until World War II, the international activities of science and of the U.S.
              government were conducted in relative isolation from one another.  By the start
              of the Cold War, scientists became increasingly involved in foreign policy
              evaluations and decision-making.  This unprecedented development created a new
              professional role for scientists and new tensions with traditional diplomats
              and career politicians.  Yet because the history of American involvement in
              international science after 1945 remains largely unexplored, little is known
              about these far-reaching changes.  Dr. Doel is concentrating in this study on
              science and scientists in the State Department, the National Security Council,
              the Central Intelligence Agency, and related institutions in the early Cold War
              era.  He is focusing particularly on how the new links between science and
              foreign policy influence the practice of science and affected American
              diplomacy, and examines how these developments affected democratic values and
              processes, including the role of experts in policy formation.       The
              integration of science and technology into foreign policy was one of the most
              significant political transformations in the second half of the 20th century
              and is recognized today as a salient feature of global relations.  Yet this
              transformation was far from smooth.  Diplomacy, one of the least responsive of
              democratic establishments, linked to traditional constituencies, was slow to
              react to the new prominence of science.  Scientists, seeking to extend their
              faith in technocratic values to broader realms of U.S. policy, nevertheless
              persevered in creating new opportunities that many hoped would ease
              international tensions while aiding American research.  Yet, after Sputnik's
              launch, scientists split with one another and with the government officials
              over American participation in international science activities, management of 
              Third World science aid, and calls for centralized controls over U.S. research
              to match perceived Soviet superiority .  The relationship between science and
              U.S. foreign affairs is an important component of Cold War history, one that
              promises new insight into the evolution of democratic values and practices.
