Title       : Escaping Distressed Neighborhoods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9511732

Award Number: 9511732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott J. South s.south@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,DHCI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This research is designed to study patterns and determinants of residential
              mobility out of distressed neighborhoods in U.S. metropolitan areas.  It is
              concerned with understanding racial differences in mobility, in particular, the
              characteristics of individuals, families, and social contexts that allow some
              minority group members to leave poor neighborhoods for more desirable ones. 
              Data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics' Geocode-Match Files and Census
              Extract Datasets will be used to select a nationally representative sample of
              families and individuals and to test three theoretical models of residential
              mobility.  The human capital/life stage model argues that residential mobility
              is a concomitant of social and occupational mobility and of life cycle changes.
               The place model focuses on barriers to mobility, especially those caused by
              racial discrimination.  The housing availability model relates moving to
              availability and to the constraints of renting or ownership.  %%%   This
              research should contri`ute to new models of intrametropolitan mobility by
              taking into account the full range of relevant variables that can affect moving
              by individuals and families located in distressed neighborhoods.  By explicitly
              modeling  the effects of racial discrimination on housing search and location
              choice it will provide a comprehensive examination of barriers against and
              opportunities for residential mobility.   The research should result in
              attaching probabilities to the links between human capital and neighborhoods,
              family, poverty, and disadvantage.  Findings should be useful to policy makers
              concerned with these issues as well as to social scientists looking for more
              comprehensive theories.
