Title       : Short-term Unsteadiness in Aeolian Sediment Transport Across Beaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9511529

Award Number: 9511529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Sherman sherman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard O. Bauer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9511529  Bernard O. Bauer, Principal Investigator (PI)  Douglas J. Sherman,
              Co-PI  University of Southern California, Los Angeles    Short-Term
              Unsteadiness in Aeolian Sediment Transport Across Beaches    Sediment transport
              is a fundamental agent of change in geomorphological systems.  Our conceptual
              understanding of sediment transport processes is robust, but practical
              implementation of this knowledge is constrained by our inability to translate
              theory into generally-applicable predictive models.  Problems occur as a result
              of technical and logistical hurdles.  This research will enhance our
              understanding of the potential role of unsteadiness in sediment transport
              processes and the appropriate means of parameterizing models by focusing on an
              aeolian beach environment.  The results should be indicative of transport
              processes in other geomorphic environments.  Unsteadiness at temporal scales of
              seconds to tens of minutes will be investigated systematically to determine
              whether wind speed fluctuations are critical to modeling short-term sediment
              flux across beaches--existing model parameterizations of transport are based on
              steady-state assumptions.  Continuously-measuring, fast-response sand traps
              employing electronic load cells will be deployed in the field to provide
              contemporaneous time series of both wind speed and sediment flux.  The field
              data will provide insight into the character of transport rate variability
              across beaches and serve as a foundation for exploring improvements in
              predictive equations.
