Title       : Phenylketonuria: Social History, Ethics, Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 11,  1995  
File        : a9511909

Award Number: 9511909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79802              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane B. Paul   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The history of research on phenylketonuria (PKU) provides a rich opportunity to
              examine an array of critical ethical and social issues that arise in the
              application of human genetics.  Since the early 1960s, all newborns in the U.S.
              have been screened for the genetic disease PKU which, if untreated, leads to
              severe mental retardation and behavioral disorders.  This screening program is
              generally considered the greatest success story of applied human genetics. 
              However, its success is not unqualified.  Because PKU screening has a
              relatively lengthy track-record, it can provide a guide to the probable
              trajectories and pitfalls of other screening programs.  In particular, a
              history of this program can illuminate why solutions to problems that involve
              the application of science have singular appeal to the press, the public, and
              state officials; how even controversial screening programs, once instituted,
              may be quickly routinized and, once routinized, easily expanded for other
              purposes; how analyses of benefit and harm may come to be framed in ways that
              minimize the latter; how widely accepted ethical principles (as reflected in
              textbooks and in guidelines issued by professional organizations) may cease to
              inform on-the-ground practice.  The project aims to provide insights of value
              both for policymakers and for scholars in the fields of science and technology
              studies and ethics and values studies.  Its conclusions will be based on
              research in the scientific literature, supplemented by archival work and
              interviews with individuals involved in the early history of newborn screening.
               Through talks, articles and a book, the investigator aims to reach multiple
              audiences.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
