Title       : The Internal Legal Culture of Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9511843

Award Number: 9511843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124932             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Riggs Fuller srfuller@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              95-11843    Fuller  Contemporary laws impose substantial responsibilities upon
              employers to adhere to and enforce government policies designed to protect
              civil rights and other aspects of the employer-employee relation.  Despite
              this, the laws regulating the employment relation tend to be broad and
              ambiguous, leaving organizations wide latitude to interpret and decide how to
              comply with them.  Previous research indicates that organizations respond to
              these laws by creating internal legal structures that serve as symbols of
              attention to law.  But research give few clues concerning a number of 
              important questions concerning how these structures shape the internal legal
              culture of their organizations or whether (how much?) they influence employees
              to assert their legal rights when they perceive them to be infringed or pacify
              employees by creating the impression that the employer must be obeying the law.
               Drawing on organization theory, this study is a broad investigation of the
              creation and characteristics of internal legal cultures within organizations
              and the extent to which laws designed to protect employees actually change
              organizational culture and affect the work lives of employees.  It is based on
              interviews with general, legal, and personnel administrative officials in six
              organizations and on a survey of 200 employees in each of these organizations. 
              At the intraorganizational level, it will investigate employees views of the
              realization of rights in organizations and of the likelihood of their opting
              for legal solutions to employment problems.  At the organization level, the
              study will elucidate officials' conceptions of law and enactment %%%%  The laws
              regulating the employment relation tend to be broad and ambiguous, leaving
              organizations wide latitude to interpret and decide how to comply with them. 
              Previous research indicates that organizations respond to these laws by
              creating internal legal structures that serve as symbols of attention to law. 
              But research give few clues concerni ng a number of  important questions
              concerning how these structures shape the internal legal culture of their
              organizations or whether (how much?) they influence employees to assert their
              legal rights when they perceive them to be infringed or pacify employees by
              creating the impression that the employer must be obeying the law.  Drawing on
              organization theory, this study is a broad investigation of the creation and
              characteristics of internal legal cultures within organizations and the extent
              to which laws designed to protect employees actually change organizational
              culture and affect the work lives of employees.  It is based on interviews with
              general, legal, and personnel administrative officials in six organizations and
              on a survey of 200 employees in each of these organizations.  At the
              intraorganizational level, it will investigate employees views of the
              realization of rights in organizations and of the likelihood of their opting
              for legal solutions to employment problems.  At the organization level, the
              study will elucidate officials' conceptions of law and enactment of internal
              legal culture.  ****
