Title       : Student Poster Session on Arthropod Venoms. Meeting will be held in Frederick,
               MD, July 30 - August 4, 1995.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9511941

Award Number: 9511941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Davy Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9511941  Jones  The field of molecular analysis of the structure of arthropod
              venom  proteins has recently made rapid advances that appear to  interrelate
              what were previously isolated lines of research.  Up to  the present, there has
              never been an international format to bring  together international researchers
              and students investigating the  molecular structure of protein toxins in
              arthropod venoms.  The  objective of organizing such a gathering has now been
              accomplished  with the scheduled symposium of principle investigator speakers, 
              for which funding support has been identified.  It is highly  appropriate that
              this next generation of students observe, and  better yet, be involved with,
              the formulation of ideas for future  directions of the field that will come
              from the gestation of the  discussions of their mentoring principle
              investigators at this  first of its kind symposium.  However, full funding has
              not yet  been identified for a proposed graduate and postdoctoral poster 
              session in connection with the parent symposium.  The proposal  seeks the
              remaining partial support for the cost of participation  of graduate and
              postdoctoral students, including women and minority  students, that is
              necessary to enable the proposed poster session  to be established and attended
              by the students.  %%%    Predatory and parasitic arthropod inject a wide
              variety of venoms  and toxins into tissues of their prey or hosts.  These venom
               proteins and toxins cause a range of physiological effects, but  their exact
              mechanisms of action are not well understood.  At the  1995 Pan American
              meeting of the International Society of  Toxinology, there will be a symposium
              that brings together for the  first time the major national and international
              researchers who are  studying the molecular structure and action of these
              proteins.   Toward the education of a next generation of researches in this 
              area, a companion poster session for students will be held, in part  under the
              sponsorship of the National Science Founda tion.  Through  their attendance of
              the symposium by their participation in this  poster session, the students will
              become exposed to the scientific  methods and results used by the major
              researchers in the field.  In  addition, the students will be exercised in the
              presentation of  research to colleagues in the field, and will also have the 
              opportunity to meet with the major researchers whose labs the  students may
              seek to join in higher postdoctoral training.  ***
