Title       : Collaborative Research: On Semi-Parametric Mixed Poisson Regression Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9511490

Award Number: 9511490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157411             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Land kland@soc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A basic problem in the statistical analysis of scientific data consists of
              developing models for the analysis of so-called count data -- data consisting
              of the numbers of events of some type occuring over a given period of time. 
              Examples include the number of incidents involving damage to ships of a
              specified type over a given time period, the number of crimes committed per
              year in the life course of a career criminal, and the number of firms of a
              given type founded per year in an economy.  To account for factors that
              increase or decrease the rates of occurrence of such events, regression models
              of the Poisson or Poisson family (where the latter consists of mixtures of
              Poisson regressions) typically are formulated.  The most commonly used mixed
              Poisson regression models -- which offer considerably more flexibility than the
              basic Poisson model -- are based on the specification of a parametric mixing
              distribution such as the gamma distribution.  A new methodology for mixed
              Poisson regressions -- based on a nonparametric specification of the mixing
              distribution and the semiparametric maximum likelihood estimation of the model
              parameters -- has been defined and explored by the Principal Investigators. 
              This project will systematically refine, reexamine, and more fully develop
              statistical procedures of estimation, testing, and model comparison for this
              new class of models.  A computer simulation study will be conducted to examine
              the properties of the statistical estimtors for relatively small samples.  Four
              prototypical datasets from diverse subject matters will be analyzed to
              demonstrate the techniques and to make comparisons with existing analyses. 
              Computer software for the empirical application of the techniques will be
              further developed.  Because these new statistical models provide more
              flexibility in modeling event count data than conventional models, the methods
              to be developed could improve data analyses across a variety of scientific
              disciplines.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
