Title       : Mechanisms of the Yan Protein-Mediated Inhibition of Cell Fate Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9511201

Award Number: 9511201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Chun Lai zcl1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9511201  Lai    A long term objective of Dr. Lai's research is to elucidate
              the  inhibitory mechanisms of cell fate determination and cellular 
              differentiation. Inhibitory signal transduction plays a critical  role in
              development, but little is known about the mechanisms.  Using the Drosophila
              eye system, a negative nuclear regulator of  photoreceptor cell specification,
              the product of the yan gene, has  been previously characterized. Dr. Lai
              hypothesizes that Yan  normally acts to maintain photoreceptor precursor cells
              in an  undifferentiated state, and such inhibition can be overcome by 
              proneural signalling, for example, the Sevenless tyrosine receptor  kinase and
              Ras1 protein that promote the development of  photoreceptor cell. To understand
              how Yan acts to maintain  precursor cells undetermined, and to reveal the
              functional  significance of negative control in nuclear signal transduction, 
              Dr. Lai's team will use a combination of genetic, molecular and  cellular
              approaches. The specific aims include: 1) a genetic screen  for Enhancers of
              yan, 2) genetic characterization of E(yan)  mutations, and 3) molecular cloning
              of E(yan) genes. To accomplish  these aims, a sensitized and efficient assay
              has been devised by  Dr. Lai for identifying mutations that interact with yan.
              Selected  E(yan) genes will be genetically and molecularly characterized. 
              Methods to be used include mutagenesis of the Drosophila genome,  phenotypic
              analysis of isolated mutations, molecular cloning and a  P transposon mediated
              transformation. The Drosophila photoreceptor  cell provides an amenable system
              for molecular genetic studies of  key regulators of development. The work
              proposed here will lead to  the identification of key inhibitory regulators of
              cell fate  determination, whose structural information can be used for 
              identifying their vertebrate homologues. It will yield valuable  information on
              how negative control is integrated into the  regulatory hierarchy of signal
              transduction in the nucleus.  ***
