Title       : Justice in the Delivery of Government Services: Decision Norms of Street-Level
               Bureaucrats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9511169

Award Number: 9511169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Maynard-Moody s-maynardmoody@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              95-11169    Maynard-Moody  The official actions of street-level bureaucrats
              substantially influence the distribution of government goods and services.  A
              better understanding of the norms that govern the decisions of street-level
              bureaucrats would enhance our ability to make most effective use of the
              government.  This study seeks to discover under what conditions street-level
              government workers use recognizable norms of substantive justice to shape their
              allocative decisions and how that use is shaped through local work and
              identity-centered cultures.  It relies on data collected from stories of
              official interactions told by a carefully-selected sample of  bureaucrats over
              a period of time.  The story analysis is combined with intensive field work to
              learn how local work and identity cultures shape the management of
              justice-related decision-making dilemmas in particular settings.  %%%%  The
              official actions of street-level bureaucrats substantially influence the
              distribution of government goods and services.  A better understanding of the
              norms that govern the decisions of street-level bureaucrats would enhance our
              ability to make most effective use of the government.  This study seeks to
              discover under what conditions street-level government workers use recognizable
              norms of substantive justice to shape their allocative decisions and how that
              use is shaped through local work and identity-centered cultures.  It relies on
              data collected from stories of official interactions told by a
              carefully-selected sample of  bureaucrats over a period of time.  The story
              analysis is combined with intensive field work to learn how local work and
              identity cultures shape the management of justice-related decision-making
              dilemmas in particular settings.  ****
