Title       : Paleodiet: Moving Forward Conceptually and Backward Temporarily Using Light
               Stable Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9511574

Award Number: 9511574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169713             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn L. Fogel fogel@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fogel    With National Science Foundation support Dr. Fogel will culture  bone
              cells in media that has been formulated to answer specific  questions regarding
              the incorporation of carbohydrates, proteins  and lipids into collagen and
              hydroxylapatite. Compound-specific  isotopic measurements of C and N of
              individual amino acids will  be determined on each of the experimental
              cultures. This research  will provide the basis of improved interpretation of
              isotopic  ratios from fossil bone and assist in the reconstruction of 
              prehistoric human diet. In a second part of the study, results  will be applied
              to six suites of fossil bone to address questions  of direct archaeological
              relevance.    Archaeologists wish to reconstruct the diet of past populations 
              because such data not only sheds light into ancient subsistence  practices but
              also provides insight into other aspects of  societies such as the degree of
              hierarchical social organization.  Research has indicated that the carbon and
              nitrogen isotope  ratios in bone are related to diet and that one can work 
              backwards from skeletal remains to gain insight into what was  eaten. However
              the process is far from straightforward and  scientists do not understand how
              elements from different kinds of  foods are differentially incorporated into
              the different phases  of bone. Through her carefully controlled work at the
              cellular  levels, Dr. Fogel should be able to unravel these interactions.  This
              research will have widespread applicability not only in  archaeology but in
              other areas of science as well.
