Title       : Effects of Prosodic Position on Consonant Articulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1997       
File        : a9511118

Award Number: 9511118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Keating keating@humnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project brings together three distinct lines of research on  variation in
              speech production. The first line of research concerns  how consonants are
              articulated when they are at the beginning of a  word or syllable, vs. at the
              end of a word or syllable. Initial  consonants have more articulatory contact
              and in general more  extreme articulations than do final consonants. The second
              line of  research concerns how consonants are articulated in different 
              positions in a phrase or utterance. Consonants at the beginning of  a phrase or
              utterance have more articulatory contact and in general  more extreme
              articulations than do consonants that come later in a  phrase or utterance. The
              third line of research concerns  large-scale trends in consonant and vowel
              articulation over whole  utterances. It has been suggested that less
              articulatory effort is  expended on consonants and vowels that come later in an
              utterance.  The present project tests a hypothesis that unifies these lines of 
              research: that articulations are more extreme at the beginning of  units larger
              than a segment (syllable, word, phrases, utterance).  This hypothesis will be
              tested in four languages: English, French,  Korean, and Taiwanese. A series of
              experiments is proposed to  compare articulations in different positions in
              different sized  units. The primary dependent variable is tongue-palate contact
              as  measured by electropalatography. Other measures include Voice Onset  Time,
              nasal airflow and vocal cord contact as measured by  electroglottography.
              Variation in articulation will also be  compared to general trends in
              subglottal pressure and fundamental  frequency.  The significance of this
              project will be to develop something  that has long been known in general but
              never worked out in any  specific way: that the articulations of individual
              consonants and  vowels depend on their prosodic positions. The results of the 
              project will be relevant to researchers in linguistic phonetics,  speech
              production, and speech technology.
