Title       : Valuing Risky Projects: Integrating Option Pricing Theory and Decision Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9511364

Award Number: 9511364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin F. McCardle   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are two major competing procedures for evaluating  risky projects where
              managerial flexibility plays an  important role:  one is option  pricing
              theory, based on the  no-arbitrage theory of financial markets, and the other
              is  decision analytic, based on stochastic dynamic programming.  The basic
              procedure in the option pricing evaluation of is  to find a portfolio of
              securities and a trading strategy  that generates cash flows exactly matching
              the cash flows of  the risky project.  One then determines the market value of 
              this replicating portfolio and compares this value to the  cost of undertaking
              the project, yielding, as a consequence,  the optimal investment decision.  The
              basic procedure in a  decision-analytic evaluation is to construct a decision
              tree  (or dynamic programming) model of the project and assess the  manager's
              subjective probabilities and utilities for the  possible outcomes.  One then
              works backwards through the  tree to find the project's value and the optimal
              investment  decision.  As a project involves more real assets, such as 
              buildings, equipment, and human capital (as opposed to  purely financial assets
              such as stocks and bonds), finding a  replicating portfolio becomes
              problematic.  On the other  hand, as a project grows in complexity, assessing 
              probabilities and utilities for all possible states of the  world becomes
              difficult.  The goal of this research project  is to further develop a
              procedure for evaluating risky  projects that integrates the option-pricing and
              decision-  analysis approaches.  The proposed procedure is consistent  with
              both the option-pricing and decision-analysis  approaches, can be applied when
              the option pricing method  fails due to a lack of a replicating portfolio, and
              is  simpler and easier to implement than a full decision-  analytic treatment.
