Title       : Languages of the Vietnam-China Borderlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1995   
File        : a9511285

Award Number: 9511285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerold A. Edmondson jerry@ling.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Gregerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The present project is to prepare a database in electronic and book  form of
              phonological, lexical, and (to a lesser extent) grammatical  information on
              selected languages of northern Vietnam. We are  targeting languages or
              varieties unstudied outside Vietnam,  specifically those found in the far
              northwest of Vietnam:  (1) Kadai and Tai family   Bouyei/Yay (Giay/Bo Y), Laha
              (La Ha),        San Chay/Cao Lan, Bl./Wh/Red Thai  (2) Hmong-Mien   Hmong
              (Meo), Dao (Yao, Kim Mun), Pa-hng (Pa            Teng)  (3) Mon-Khmer   Khang,
              Mang       This project is significant because the Tai and Kadai,  Hmong-Mien,
              and Mon Khmer groups of extreme northern Vietnam  (Haut Tonkin) occupy a
              special place in the linguistic history of  East and Southeast Asia, but have
              remained linguistically poorly  known up to now. The goal here is to begin to
              fill this gap in  knowledge.       The end products of this study will be: (a)
              an electronic  database in MS-Excel format with lexical items in IPA 
              transcription and (b) a research monograph. The data to be  collected for this
              project could be quite important generally for  SE Asian linguists, linguistic
              typologists, historians, and  anthropologists studying the spread of languages
              and material and  non-material culture from China into SE Asia. It will also be
               important specifically in clarifying: (a) the linguistic  developments that
              have led to modern Lao, Thai, Hmong and some  Mon-Khmer languages, (b) the
              nature of the proto-languages from  which they have descended, (c) the
              interaction of pitch and voice  quality co-occurrence phenomena, and (d) the
              terminological  confusion about genetic affiliation and place in the family of 
              some of these groups.
