Title       : Explanatory Coherence in Social Explanation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9511554

Award Number: 9511554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188591             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Read read@rcf.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this program of research, a series of experiments tests a parallel 
              processing model of social perception and social explanation.  This  model
              differs sharply from the two-stage, serial processing , models  that currently
              dominate much social psychology.  One set of studies  seeks to demonstrate that
              when subjects are combining dispositional and  situational information, whether
              they underadjust for either  dispositional or situational factors under high
              cognitive load, and the  extent to which they do so, reflects the impact of
              attentional focus and  causal unit formation on the spread of activation in a
              conceptual  network.  Such results would contradict Gilbert's (1989) model of 
              dispositonal inference and would, at a minimum, force a major expansion  of
              Krull's (1993) model.  A second set of studies attempts to show that  just as
              individuals frequently make spontaneous situational inferences,  so do they
              frequently make spontaneous situaitonal inferences.  These  studies also seek
              to show that the latter influences do not require a  goal to make such
              inferences as Krull (1993) suggests, but rather are  under the control of the
              stimulus configuration.  Several factors are  investigated that may influence
              the likelihood of spontaneous  situational inferences: (1) individualist vs.
              collectivist beliefs; (2)  proximity of the situational causal context to the
              target behavior; and  (3) salience of the situational causal context.  A third
              set of studies  examines whether situational and dispositional information can
              be  quickly and spontaneously integrated, in parallel, to make a spontaneous 
              dispositional inference, thereby arguing against models that propose a  two
              step process for the integration of dispositional and situational  information.
               A fourth set of studies will test the hypothesis that  factors, such as
              cognitive load and salience which should reduce the  spread of activation from
              explanations to behavior identifications, will  reduce the impact of
              explanatory hypotheses on the id entification of  ambiguous behaviors.  This
              program of research has the potential to  replace several special-purpose
              'mini' theories of social explanation  with a general connectionist model that
              can handle a wide variety of  phenomena.   Figuring out the characteristics of
              others is central to successfully  negotiating everyday life.  But doing so is
              surprisingly complicated.   This program of research tests a model which seeks
              to explain how people  do this.  A central claim of this model is  that when
              people make  inferences about the causes of behavior, such as "Sheila was
              furious",  the available information is integrated simultaneously into a
              limited  capacity working memory  rather than being processed serially.  The 
              implication of this parallel processing of information  is that  the  causal
              explanation that a person favors (e.g., "Sheila is short  tempered" or ""Sheila
              was insulted") will depend upon things that  influence information integration,
              such as the person's  focus of  attention, the strength of pre-existing causal
              links among potential  causes and effects, and how much demand is being placed
              on the person's  cognitive capacities by other ongoing tasks.  The results will
              have  important implications for our understanding of biases in social 
              perception.
