Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research On Current Problems in Field Theory and Gravity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9511992

Award Number: 9511992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19885              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roman Jackiw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9511992  Jackiw    This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Roman Jackiw,   
              Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to  pursue with
              Dr. Q-Han Park, Department of Physics, Kyung Hee  University, for a period of
              24 months, a program of cooperative  research to investigate various questions
              in field theory and  gravity.  Dr. Choonkyu Lee, Department of Physics, Seoul
              National  University, will serve in an advisory capacity with Dr. Park so  as
              to facilitate Dr. Park's entry into collaborative research  with the U.S.
              scientist.  This research will be centered on three  major topics: (1)
              properties of effective field theories for  high-temperature and high mass
              quantum chromodynamics (QCD) as  well as gravity; (2) low-dimensional field
              theory including  gravity; and (3) the study of integrable models and soliton 
              physics.    The collaborators expect to make significant progress in 
              understanding physical/mathematical properties of field theory  and gravity and
              in finding possible applications to various areas  of physics.  Benefit for the
              U.S. side will result from access to  well-trained Korean scientists, familiar
              with the topic, who are  eager to engage in the research and its computations. 
              The Korean  scientist will benefit from contact with a senior U.S. researcher 
              who, in addition to collaborating on this project, can provide an  overview of
              current research in this field and can provide  suggestions for the direction
              of further Korean research in field  theory and gravity.  This project is
              relevant to the objectives  of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
              seeks to  increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean  scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of scientific  information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Dr.
              Park's  participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science  and
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
