Title       : Studies of transvection and chromatin in Drosophila melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9511808

Award Number: 9511808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chao T. Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9511808  Wu  Several candidate members of a putative chromatin complex have been
              identified in Drosophila.  These include the products of zeste, Posterior sex
              combs, Suppressor 2 of zeste, Polycomb, Polycomb-like, and polyhomeotic). 
              Genetic, biochemical, and cytological data argue for the existence of other
              members as well as for other types of complexes.  Who are the other members? 
              What other complexes are there and who are the members of the other complexes? 
              These are important questions because the impact of a complex is the sum of the
              activities of all its members and it is not possible to fathom a complex until
              all its components are understood.  This proposal address these questions. 
              Genetic screens to find chromatin-related genes have relied almost exclusively
              on four phenomena: PFV, zeste1 eye color, homeosis, and dosage compensation. 
              Clearly, these phenomena fall short of representing the full range of
              developmental programs.  As a consequence, our understanding of the proteins
              and mechanisms by which chromatin regulates gene expression is limited and it
              is almost certain that more chromatin-related proteins and processes remain to
              be discovered. For example, of the 12-17 proteins thought to participate in one
              species of chromatin complex, less than half have been identified.  The goal of
              the proposal is, therefore, to identify the chromatin-related genes and
              mechanisms that have managed thus far to elude researchers.  The strategy of
              the proposed research is to diversify the genetic approach by implementing
              three new kinds of screens for genes encoding chromatin-related functions.  Our
              screens are unlike most, if not all, previous screens which identified genes by
              mutations that modified specific phenotypes, such as eye color or segment
              identity.  Instead, our screens will identify genes by virtue of their
              interaction or redundancy with some of our best candidates for chromatin
              proteins.  %%%  Chromatin structure underlies phenomena as fundamental as
              inheritance and gene expressio n.  It is involved in transcription, position
              effects, recombination, and oncogenesis, to mention just a few examples.  This
              proposal explores the structure of chromatin in Drosophila.  ***
