Title       : Many-Body Effects in the Photoionization Process, US-Turkey Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9511609

Award Number: 9511609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Manson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports cooperation between Dr. Steven Manson,
              Physics Department at Georgia State University, Atlanta, and Dr. Zikri Altun,
              Physics Department at Marmara University in Istanbul, Turkey.  The research
              deals with two areas: first, the photoionization of open-shell atoms using
              many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) with particular emphasis on the very
              difficult transition metals and rare earth elements, by investigating the
              region around the so-called giant resonances in the photoionization cross
              sections of the 3rd transition metal atoms; and second, the photoionization
              with excitation of closed-shell atoms, where the experimental results of
              photoelectron spectroscopy measurements display many partial cross sections
              whose relationships are difficult to evaluate, and where the calculation of
              these cross sections will help understand this important correlation.      
              Scope:  This project will allow a cooperative activity that has started about
              two years ago to continue for an additional two years, and to produce maximum
              benefits from the collaboration.  The US scientist's group is well established,
              is experienced in the photoionization theory, and has extensive facilities for
              large-scale calculations.  The Turkish scientist has considerable knowledge of
              the MBPT codes, developed by his thesis advisor and mentor, and also has the
              facility for code development and testing at his department.  The two
              scientists have already accomplished considerable success in the first two
              years, presented several papers at scientific meetings, and have submitted at
              least one joint paper for publication.  They are likely to produce more papers
              during the period of this project extension.  The project clearly meets the
              objectives of the Division of International Programs in linking US scientists
              with foreign scientists where the talents and capabilities are complementary.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
