Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Food Faddism" and Nutrition Science in the
               United States, 1910-1970
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9511876

Award Number: 9511876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Kett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SBR 9511876   Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Food Faddism and Nutrition
              Science in the United States"    Unlike previous studies that have examined
              health reform movements, this project will explore the relationship between
              "food faddism" and nutrition science, thereby broadening our understanding of
              the complex impact of science and scientists on 20th century American politics
              and culture.  More particularly, it will explore a sphere of activity, the
              consumption of so-called "health foods" in the United States, in which
              scientific authority has been notably ineffective during an era generally
              believed to mark a high point of public regard for science and its
              practitioners.  It will examine why the use of these foods and food supplements
              continued unabated and even increased during the current century, even though
              most nutrition scientists condemned these dietary practices as "food faddism.".
                 Preliminary research has shown that the proposition that the American food
              supply is nutritionally poor, which is the core belief of most post-1920's
              health food advocates, has often been fostered by the work of mainstream
              nutrition researchers.  This project will examine in detail the links between
              nutrition science and the three major health food claims: 1) modern food
              processing robs food of valuable nutrients, 2) commercial agriculture produces
              nutrient-poor crops, and 3) the nation's food products are laden with harmful
              chemical additives.  It will evaluate the scientific authenticity of these
              claims and explore how the lack of scientific consensus on many nutritional
              issues contributed to the spread of health food doctrine.  In pursuit of these
              objectives, the careers of a number of scientists who were highly esteemed by
              the health food community will be investigated.    In addition, this project
              will look at the role played by scientists in both combating and encouraging
              food faddism.  It will examine the campaigns waged against nutritional 
              misinformation, and attempt to evaluate the reasons fo r their failure. 
              Conversely, it will show how the activities of some nutrition scientists,
              especially their involvement in public health affairs, have perhaps
              inadvertently furthered health food practices.
