Title       : Activity-Dependent Growth Cone Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9511558

Award Number: 9511558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence F. Kromer                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Lnenicka gregL@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lnenicka  9511558  The development and regeneration of the nervous system is
              highly  dependent upon the properties of the growing tip of the nerve cell, 
              the growth cone. Growth cones control the extent and direction of  nerve cell
              elongation and, thus, allow the formation of appropriate  connections in the
              nervous system. The actions of growth cones are  largely regulated by their
              level of intracellular calcium. Calcium  enters the growth cone through calcium
              channels and is removed  through a number of processes collectively referred to
              as calcium  buffering. Nerve cells show differences in their properties of 
              growth. Differences in the regulation of intracellular calcium  and/or the
              sensitivity of growth cones to intracellular calcium  play an important role in
              these differences in nerve cell growth.  The purpose of this research is to
              define the role of calcium  regulation and calcium sensitivity in these
              differences in nerve  cell growth. In addition, the factors responsible for the
               development of these differences in growth cone properties will be  examined.
              In particular, the hypothesis that the previous activity  or "use" of nerve
              cells affects their properties of regeneration  will be tested. These studies
              are possible by utilizing the  relatively simple invertebrate nervous system,
              where large  identified cells with differences in activity and growth cone 
              properties can be directly examined. The studies will be performed  using
              previously developed cell-culture techniques for studying the  growth of
              regenerating axons of nerve cells. Axon growth will be  followed using
              time-lapse video-microscopy of growth cones.  Recently developed methods for
              measuring intracellular calcium  concentration using imaging techniques will be
              used to determine  the sensitivity of the growth cones to intracellular
              calcium, and  their calcium buffering capacity. Calcium influx will also be 
              directly measured in growth cones. These studies will contribute to  our
              understanding of the basic mechanisms invo lved in the growth  and regeneration
              of nerve cells.
