Title       : Constraint Use In Language Comprehension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9511270

Award Number: 9511270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryellen C. MacDonald mcm@gizmo.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This research is designed to investigate syntactic ambiguity  resolution in
              normal, adult language comprehension. The study of  ambiguity resolution can
              illuminate the architecture of the  language comprehension system and can
              evaluate the  psycholinguistic and linguistic theories concerning the nature of
               linguistic mental representations.       The theoretical framework of the
              investigation is a lexical,  "constraint-based" framework in which syntactic
              ambiguity is seen  as a type of lexical ambiguity, such that syntactic
              ambiguity  resolution has the same properties as the resolution of lexical 
              semantic ambiguities. This approach has been applied profitably  to the
              analysis of several "classic" syntactic ambiguities in  English that had
              previously been taken as evidence for a  radically different processing
              architecture.        The experiments use self-paced reading methods and eye 
              fixation monitoring to study ambiguity resolution and constraint  use. A large
              amount of normative data is also collected  concerning the strength of the
              constraints, and regression  methods are used to determine the extent to which
              difference  constraints affect comprehenders' interpretations at different 
              points in time.       The research is significant in that it advances a unified
               account of language comprehension in which representation at all  levels
              (phonological, lexical, syntactic, discourse, etc.) are  governed by the same
              basic properties, including frequency  sensitivity and activation of
              representations via constraint  satisfaction. A unified account of language
              representation  affects not only theories of human language use, but also work
              in  artificial intelligence, which to date has generally reflected  the more
              traditional theories of human language comprehension.  Our understanding in the
              unified approach of human ambiguity  resolution could therefore have
              substantial impact on computer  natural language comprehension research,
              particularly the very  difficult problem of ambiguity resolut ion in these
              systems.
