Title       : History and Philosophy of 20th Century Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9511855

Award Number: 9511855
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Maienschein maienschein@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Maienschein    Developmental biology has recently celebrated its centenary as a
              specialty within biology.  The problems that were set forth at its creation,
              however, remain to be answered today.  Far from being discouraged, however,
              developmental biology is, according to a centenary report in Science magazine,
              "basking in its prime.  Indeed the excitement and promise of the field have
              never been greater, as researchers close in on the secret of how a single
              fertilized egg cell goes through the complex and beautifully orchestrated
              series of changes that create and entire organism."  Under this grant, Dr.
              Maienschein is analyzing the changing ways the central issues of development
              have been addressed over the past century.  Against a background of similar
              questions that these biologists were trying to answer,  Dr. Maienschein is
              looking at how the significantly different details in approaches, methods,
              techniques, and different basic assumptions have pushed and pulled researchers
              in a variety of directions.  She is focusing on issues of morphogenesis (how
              structural changes develop) in particular, and on the changing concepts of
              "organization" which have underpinned many of the discussions.  Spotlighting
              and comparing selected examples illuminate the way the debates have shifted and
              some of the underlying epistemological assumptions that have accompanied the
              shifts.    In this project,  Dr. Maienschein will test the hypothesis that
              there have existed competing styles of thinking within this biological
              community.  In particular, she argues, there emerge epistemic styles, each
              sharing fundamental epistemological assumptions about what will count as
              knowledge and how to warrant knowledge claims.  These epistemic styles define
              and direct the scientific work and are contextually embedded, while those in
              each group share patterns of basic assumptions about the nature of science.
