Title       : Democratization and Science: The Theory and Practice of Technical Assistance at
               MIT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9511315

Award Number: 9511315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart W. Leslie swleslie@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Kargon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              MIT offers an unusual opportunity to study how the theory and practice of
              modernization shaped one another within the context of the Cold War.  In the
              1950's and 1960's, MIT social scientists, natural scientists and engineers
              formulated an important new approach toward the uses of science and technology
              as tools of American foreign policy.  These ideas about modernization and
              democratization had considerable influence on the macro-level in the Kennedy
              administration.  On the micro-level, MIT tried to carry out some of the ideas
              presented in this new approach by assisting a number of universities in Third
              World countries (India and Korea, for example) develop technological institutes
              for training of engineers to serve in modern democracies.  Under this grant,
              Drs. Leslie and Kargon are concentrating on the developments at MIT and their
              influence on US policy.  Future studies will examine how these projects were
              carried out by MIT in advice to these Third World institutions.    MIT's
              version of modernization gave a new prominence to science and technology as
              indispensable tools for furthering American interests abroad.  In practice,
              technical assistance did not always promote either independent economic
              development or political democracy, as its promoters expected.  Nonetheless, by
              redefining the respective roles of economics and politics in American foreign
              policy, modernization theory represented an important alternative to military
              containment and had lasting implications for political and economic culture in
              the developing world.      Of particular interest is how the theory of
              modernization was pioneered and used at MIT's Center for International Studies
              (CENIS) by economists Max Millikan and Walt Rostow, political scientists Lucian
              Pye and Ithiel Pool and anthropologist Clifford Geertz.  MIT's social
              scientists never fully appreciated how much their own assumptions about
              science, economic development and political culture--in short, the very tenets
              of modernization theory itself--had been sh aped by the political and economic
              priorities of the Cold War.  Not did MIT's engineers always recognize how much
              the models of technical education and regional development they were offering
              the Third World had been influenced by the same priorities.      Drs. Leslie
              and Kargon are investigating under this grant the theories advanced at CENIS
              concerning the relationship among science, technology, and development, with
              particular attention to their presumed effects on democratization in the Third
              World.  They are also investigating how MIT tried to implement these ideas by
              examining the history of MIT's involvement in the founding of technological
              institutes.  They have other support to see how these plans were specifically
              carried out in Korea.  Future studies will extend this work to the actual
              implementation of MIT's plans in India and how the Indian Institute of
              Technology actually developed as an adaptation of MIT's blueprints and Indian
              sensibilities.
