Title       : Protein Interactions Required for the Function of a Candidate Mechanosensory Ion
               Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9511710

Award Number: 9511710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica A. Driscoll driscoll@mbcl.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9511710  Driscoll, Monica A.      All living organisms have the ability to
              sense and respond to  mechanical stimuli.  Mechanotransduction is critical to
              such  diverse processes as hearing, touch and gravitaxis in plants and 
              animals.  Mechanotransduction in all species studied to date  appears to be
              mediated by ion channels that open or close in  response to mechanical stimuli.
               The genes encoding these channels  have been identified but an examination of
              the subunit structures,  composition and assembly has yet to be undertaken. 
              Dr. Driscoll  has been instrumental in identifying these novel channels in a 
              simple biological model system and she proposes to continue her  studies with
              these interesting proteins.  In the proposed studies,  she will determine how
              these channels assembled and which subunits  are linked together into
              functional units.  Additionally, since  tension must be applied to the channel
              for it to open or close, the  implication is that it is somehow anchored into
              the cell.  Further  studies will identify the normal constituents of the
              cellular  skeleton that serve as the anchor point for these channels.   Through
              these studies, Dr. Driscoll will gain unique insights into  the biochemical
              nature of the mechanisms by which cellular  distention is involved in changing
              cellular function.  In addition,  since mechanical forces are involved in
              changing cellular function  in mammals as well as simple organisms, new
              insights may be gained  about the mechanisms in which sonic or tactile
              information are  transduced in humans thereby opening new avenues of clinical 
              significance.
