Title       : Role of Sensory Experience in Parcellation of Sensory Neocortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9511430

Award Number: 9511430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Pallas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      1200 Moursund Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/790-4846

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9511430  Pallas  The overall goal of this research is to determine how different
               areas of the cerebral cortex become specialized to process  different types of
              sensory information, and how functionally  specialized brain circuitry is
              created from non-specialized brain  tissue during development and evolution. 
              The hypothesis being  tested is that the sensory inputs received by cortex
              during  development play a critical role in organizing specific circuits in 
              cortex.  To test this hypothesis, auditory cortex will be studied  in three
              groups of animals; one group which has had sensory input  to auditory cortex
              removed at birth, another group which, by a  minor surgical procedure, has had
              visual input diverted into the  auditory pathway at birth, and a third group
              which consists of  normal, unmanipulated animals.  How the circuitry of
              auditory  cortex is affected by these manipulations of sensory experience  will
              then be examined. Using the rewiring manipulation, it has been  shown
              previously that auditory cortex can be "turned into" visual  cortex by
              supplying it with visual input from birth.  The question  yet to be
              investigated is whether this occurs because the early  visual inputs have
              changed the circuitry of auditory cortex, or  because auditory cortex is so
              similar to visual cortex that it it  has an intrinsic capability for processing
              visual input  appropriately.  Preliminary results suggest that the visual
              inputs  do induce changes in circuitry.  The circuitry of auditory cortex, 
              then, will be examined using anatomical methods to determine  exactly what
              these changes are and how they produce the functional  changes that have been
              observed.  Knowledge of how sensory input  influences cortical circuitry during
              development will provide  information about how evolutionary changes in sensory
              organs might  ultimately be accommodated by the central nervous system.  This 
              research, therefore, will provide fundamental information about  both cortical
              developmental mechanisms and the evolution o f complex  structures in the
              central nervous system.
