Title       : Effects of Selective Acetylcholine Loss on Experience-Dependent Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9511872

Award Number: 9511872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57543              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Herron pherron@utmem.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Schweitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The somatosensory cortex of mammals is famous for its map-like
              representation of the parts of the body responsive to touch.  This area also
              was one of the first used to show what is now known as a common cortical
              property called experience-dependent plasticity, which is a change in the
              sensitivity of cortical responses to a particular spatial stimulus.  If an area
              of the body is deprived of touch for a long time, the responsive area in the
              cortex becomes less sensitive and may decrease; if the area of the body is
              continually stimulated, the cortical sensitivity increases and the cortical
              area may expand.  A simple model system for showing the plasticity is the
              facial whisker array of rodents, which maps in a very distinctive way in what
              are called "barrel fields" for their shape.  The long whiskers easily can be
              trimmed daily, so that the intact whiskers receive much more of natural sensory
              stimulation than the trimmed ones, and it turns out that the central responses
              to neighboring trimmed versus untrimmed whiskers show significant changes. 
              This project investigates the role of a biochemical compound called
              acetylcholine (ACh) in the experience-dependent plasticity.  ACh is known to
              affect the transmission of excitatory impulses between nerve cells.  A novel
              specific immunotoxin is used to pharmacologically block ACh inputs from a part
              of the brain that provides the major source of ACh inputs to the cortex. 
              Electrophysiological recordings measure the responsiveness of central cortical
              nerve cells to give a quantitative assay of the plasticity with and without the
              precise and specific ACh blockage.  Results will be important to understanding
              the nature of cortical function, and have potential impact not only on recovery
              from cortical deficits, but also on mechanisms of development and perhaps
              learning.
