Title       : Schema Induction in a Structure-Sensitive Connectionist Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9511504

Award Number: 9511504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hummel jhummel@lifesci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith J. Holyoak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511504  HUMMEL    This research will develop a computer system to model how
              people  learn schemas from examples.  Schemas are knowledge structures  that
              describe general situations, events, rules, or  relationships.  For example, a
              Restaurant Schema might specify  the kinds of events that take place in
              restaurants, and the  relationships between the actors in those events (e.g.,
              chefs,  waiters, and customers, etc.); a Family Relation Schema might  specify
              the kinds of relationships that define various family  members, such as
              sisters, brothers, parents, uncles, etc.  A  schema is very general, in that it
              refers to many specific  situations, and also highly structured, in that it
              specifies the  relationships between objects, events, or even between other 
              relationships.  Psychologists and computer scientists have long  recognized the
              utility of schemas as a basis for reasoning:  If  one can recognize an object
              or situation as an instance of a  general schema, then one can use the schema
              to reason about the  specific object or situation.  For example, the Family
              Relation  Schema tells us to expect that Mom's brother, Bob, is our uncle,  and
              that if Bob has children, then they will be our cousins.  Due  to the schema,
              it is not necessary to learn the family relations  for every individual
              separately.  Although the generality and  structured nature of schemas make
              them extremely useful forms of  knowledge, they also make them very difficult
              to model:  Traditional symbolic approaches to computer modeling are good at 
              representing structured information, but they have difficulty  flexibly
              matching specific instances to general facts; by  contrast, connectionist
              models are good at flexibly matching  instances to general categories, but they
              have great difficulty  representing structured information (such as rules and 
              relationships).  Perhaps for this reason, no one has ever  developed a formal
              and general model of schema-based learning and  reasoning.  Hummel and Holyoak
              have developed a computer mo del of  analogy that combines a connectionist
              architecture with the  capacity to represent and learn relational structures. 
              The  model's capacity to represent structured information in a  flexible,
              general manner makes it an ideal vehicle for simulating  human schema learning
              and use.  The research will apply the  model's approach to the representation
              of structure to the  problems of representing, learning, and using schemas. 
              The  result will be a model that can (a) learn general schemas from  specific
              examples, (b) match new instances to learned schemas,  and (c) use the schemas
              to make inductive inferences about the  new examples.  The model will be the
              first formal theory of human  schema-based reasoning, and will contribute
              substantially to our  understanding or human reasoning is a wide variety of
              domains.   It will also be the first working computer system to use schemas  to
              reason flexibly about general knowledge domains.    ***
