Title       : Hormonal Influences in Nonviolent Dominance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9511600

Award Number: 9511600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138984             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Dabbs jdabbs@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Prior research on testosterone has focused on delinquent and antisocial
              behavior.  Little attention has been directed toward prosocial behavior, or
              toward variables that mediate and moderate the effects of testosterone.  The
              proposed research will cover four areas. First, it will examine physical
              individual difference characteristics as they are correlated with testosterone
              level.  Second, it will examine cognitive factors that are correlated with
              differences in testosterone level, using neuropsychological tests and pupillary
              response measures.  Third, it will examine behavioral differences between
              groups of high and low testosterone individuals, focusing upon success in
              select occupations.  And fourth, it will examine the role of testosterone in an
              assertive, out-going, and risky kind of behavior called "heroic altruism."  The
              work is guided by an evolutionary model, which holds that testosterone is
              selected to produce strength, persistence, focused attention, a combative frame
              of mind, a preference for action over   thought, a confident and intimidating,
              manner, and sexual activity.  These characteristics sum together to define
              dominance, which leads to success in agonistic encounters and to reproductive
              success.  Personal experiences and social control forces moderate the effects
              of  testosterone, allowing it to lead to delinquency, restraining it, or
              converting it into prosocial behavior.   Many high testosterone people are
              aggressive and violent, but some devote their lives to helping others.  To
              understand how this can be, we need to look at the most basic effects of 
              testosterone.  Testosterone brings strength, activity, a willingness to fight,
              and a confident manner.  These can be used to hurt other people or to help
              them.  The present project will gather detailed information on the personality
              and ways of thinking of high testosterone people.  It will also study how
              family values and community pressures lead these people to use testosterone in
              good or bad ways.  The results should  help us   understand what causes
              violence and how we can contol and limit it.
