Title       : An Empirical Examination of the Legal Standard for Hostile Environment Sexual
               Harassment Claims
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9511422

Award Number: 9511422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Gutek BGUTEK@BPA.ARIZONA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen O'Connor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511422  Gutek  The reasonable woman standard, the legal standard used to judge
              what constitutes a hostile environment was first adopted by the Ninth Circuit
              Court and is now used by several courts.  It is widely held to be supported by
              social science research showing that men and women tend to define sexual
              harassment somewhat differently and do not always agree on the behaviors that
              constitute sexual harassment.  A Review of the literature shows that research
              findings do not adequately support what occurs in court cases.  It appears that
              women have a broader definition than men of what constitutes sexual harassment.
                  A series of experiments will be conducted using samples of undergraduate
              students and potential jurors from a jury pool (in Pima Court, Arizona). 
              Variables (e.g., the target's reaction to behavior; selected characteristics of
              the situation; and the legal standard--reasonable person vs. reasonable woman)
              will be systematically manipulated to measure gender differences in the
              evaluation of sexual harassment scenarios.  This research proposes to close the
              gap between what is known from existing research and what is needed to assist
              and guide the courts and policymakers in how to evaluate claims of sexual
              harassment.  %%%%  The reasonable woman standard, the legal standard used to
              judge what constitutes a hostile environment was first adopted by the Ninth
              Circuit Court and is now used by several courts.  It is widely held to be
              supported by social science research showing that men and women tend to define
              sexual harassment somewhat differently and do not always agree on the behaviors
              that constitute sexual harassment.  A Review of the literature shows that
              research findings do not adequately support what occurs in court cases.  It
              appears that women have a broader definition than men of what constitutes
              sexual harassment.     A series of experiments will be conducted using samples
              of undergraduate students and potential jurors from a jury pool (in Pima Court,
              Arizona).  Variables  (e.g., the target's reaction to behavior; selected
              characteristics of the situation; and the legal standard--reasonable person vs.
              reasonable woman) will be systematically manipulated to measure gender
              differences in the evaluation of sexual harassment scenarios.  This research
              proposes to close the gap between what is known from existing research and what
              is needed to assist and guide the courts and policymakers in how to evaluate
              claims of sexual harassment.  ****
