Title       : World Systems and Alternative Models of Mesopotamian-Anatolian Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9511329

Award Number: 9511329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161379             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gil J. Stein g-stein@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gil Stein and his collaborators
              will conduct one season of fieldwork at the archaeological site of Hacinebi and
              the following year will analyze the materials they have excavated. Hacinebi is
              a 3.3 ha. mound strategically located at the major Euphrates river crossing
              point in southeast Anatolia, overlooking the main trade route from Mesopotamia
              to the copper and lumber sources located in Turkey's Taurus mountains. The site
              was inhabited during the 4th millennium BC and the small amount of later
              overburden makes it possible to expose broad horizontal areas of occupation and
              provide a representative picture of settlement organization and functions.
              Excavations in 1992-4 have established that Hacinebi has two main early
              occupations and artifact distributions in the later one suggest a possible
              Mesopotamian `colonial` enclave in one corner of this Anatolian settlement.
              With NSF support, Dr. Stein will expose pre-contact levels at Hacinebi in order
              to reconstruct economic organization and the degree of social complexity at the
              site before Mesopotamian expansion. Broad horizontal exposures of the upper
              level will allow comparison of pre contact and contact organization and in the
              latter permit examination of the relationship between local and immigrant
              groups.  The first Mesopotamian city states pursued a strategy of aggressive
              commercial expansion into neighboring areas and recent research has located
              several sites which have been interpreted as such outposts, established to
              control trade routes while extracting raw materials in what may be the world's
              earliest known colonial system. Although some `colonies` have been excavated,
              virtually nothing is known about either the organization of this system or its
              effects on the development of local polities. Many archaeologists and
              historians have speculated on what form such interactions may take and have
              developed a world systems model which postulates domination of the periphery by
              the central group. However little data exists to support such a formulation and
              Dr. Stein has suggested that alternate models may in fact apply. By providing
              detailed data on local political and economic organization during this critical
              contact period at Hacinebi, Dr. Stein will conduct the first rigorous
              archaeological test of such models and will contribute significantly to our
              understanding of inter-regional interaction in the development and spread of
              social complexity in the ancient Near East.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
