Title       : Prehistory of the Channel Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9511576

Award Number: 9511576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113187             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne E. Arnold jearnold@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Jeanne Arnold and her colleagues
              will conduct three seasons of archaeological research at sites located on Santz
              Cruz Island, one of the Channel Islands located off the coast of California.
              Previous work has indicated an archaeological sequence which extends back
              millennia in time. The proximate goal of the research is to locate a number of
              submerged pitlike structures which served as living sites and to excavate a
              number of them. A remote geophysical survey will be conducted to find sites and
              on this basis a sample for excavation will be selected. Data will be recovered
              from ca. 30 houses at 6 well dated sites. In most, small scale excavations will
              be conducted while at three, larger areas will be exposed to develop an
              understanding of house floor features, differential distributions of artifacts,
              quantities of craft production by-products and the presence/absence of wealth
              items. The materials recovered will be analyzed to provide both environmental
              and socio-cultural information.  Archaeological studies along the southern
              California coast in recent years have shown that the prehistoric populations of
              the Northern Channel Islands and adjacent mainland coast developed a highly
              specialized political economy characterized by unique features, the most
              important of which were legitimate craft specializations, an intensive exchange
              system across the Santa Barbara Channel, and an elite sector able to control
              resources, labor and the movements of manufactured goods through ownership of
              plank canoes and manipulations of valuables. Based on both archaeological and
              ethnographic data, anthropologists believe that the coastal Chumash peoples
              were among the New World's most complex hunter-gatherers. Dr. Arnold wishes to
              understand how this unusual level of complexity developed and was manifested in
              the social organization of the island populations. Because of the commercial
              nature of the craft manufacture, she wishes to gain insight into the
              relationship between economy and social organization. To accomplish this, she
              will focus on intra-settlement variation to determine the extent to which
              social ranking is evident and the degree to which it relates to manufacturing
              activities.  This research is important because it will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of United
              States prehistory and shed new light on how social complexity emerges.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
