Title       : The Structure of Similarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9511757

Award Number: 9511757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dedre Gentner gentner@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Medin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511757  GENTNER    Similarity is a central aspect of cognitive processing.  It 
              influences category learning, transfer of knowledge, inductive  inference,
              decision-making, and case-based reasoning and  planning.  Because of its
              centrality, it is important to  understand the psychology of similarity.  The
              approach on which  this research is based models similarity as a process rather
              than  considering it as a simple value to be measured.  Thus, the  approach
              departs from prior research by others in its emphasis on  dynamic models of the
              psychological processes that underlie  similarity, and also in utilizing rich
              representations of the  items being compared.  The research involves two
              computational  models of the process of similarity comparison, SME and SIAM, 
              that show how the comparison process proceeds from local to  global alignment. 
              A focus of the research is further exploration  of the time course of
              similarity comparison and analysis of its  implications for on-line processing.
               For example, speeded  similarity judgments show sensitivity patterns different
              from  slow judgments, an observation relevant to interface design in  contexts
              where humans are placed under speed stress.  Previous  work on this project
              investigated two key factors in similarity  processing.  The first was
              interconnectivity, the fact that  interactions between features can make some
              features more salient  in similarity judgments and even change the
              psychological  interpretation of the features.  The second issue was the effect
               of alignment on judgments of the perceptual similarity of two  figures.  The
              new research to be performed under this  Accomplishment-Based Renewal is
              organized around two major  questions:  1.  How do structure and process
              interact to  determine similarity; and 2. How do results on similarity 
              processing extend to other tasks that use similarity as a  component.  For
              example, new experiments will investigate how the  seeming similarity between
              two figures changes with context, by  manipulati ng the kind of alignment that
              is easy or hard to do.   Yet another line of research will examine the effect
              of  similarity comparisons on constructive induction associated with 
              similarity judgments, category-based induction, memory retrieval,  and decision
              making.  Overall, the project will inform our  understanding of the range and
              flexibility of similarity  processing and examine its role in other cognitive
              functions.    ***
