Title       : Japanese Bioscience and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9511897

Award Number: 9511897
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63661              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel K. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Coleman is undertaking a major study of bioscience and its role in Japanese
              society.  To complete his portrait of Japanese bioscience, he is examining
              several groups as well as individuals in Japan who pursue laboratory research
              in biochemistry, molecular biology and protein engineering, and the
              organizations in Japanese society that support (and sometimes hinder) their
              work.  This project offers a systematic study in another culture of bioscience
              as a basic science with very close connections to commercial applications.  Dr.
              Coleman hopes to demonstrate the pervasive influences on laboratory social
              organization from a number of specific elements in Japan's social structure, in
              particular government bureaucracy, management practices in industry, education
              in the life sciences, and the women's labor market.  He will present rich
              accounts and observations created through first-hand observation, in
              illustrations or qualified interpretations of aggregate survey studies.  He
              will thus provide a clear understanding of the direction of rapid change in the
              organization of present-day laboratory life science research in Japan.    Dr.
              Coleman is using a variety of data sets that he has already collected.  Among
              them are interview transcriptions and field notes from a previously supported
              year of participation observation in four bioscience laboratories in Japan,
              government surveys unavailable in English, and popular writings for both
              bioscientists and laypeople (also unavailable in English).  Under this grant,
              Dr. Coleman is undertaking additional research in Japan at the Science and
              Technology Agency's National Institute for Science and Technology Policy
              (NISTEP).  He will be examining the relations between basic bioscience research
              and biotechnology as an organizational and managerial issue.    This project
              promises contributions to our understanding of the social dimensions of the
              relationship between basic and applied research in the life sciences, and the
              constraints and opportunities of the larg er society with which research teams
              articulate.  It will also contribute to the current discussion regarding the
              role of ethnography in studies of laboratory social organization, and provide a
              new perspective on the "insider/outsider" debate concerning the epistemological
              status of ethnography's subjects.
