Title       : Self-Evaluation Maintenance in Close Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9511385

Award Number: 9511385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Beach   (Principal Investigator current)
              Abraham Tesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This program of research extends the PIs' Self-Evaluation Maintenance (SEM)
              model to intimate relationships.  More specifically, it examines the way in
              which self-evaluation threat and self-evaluation benefit in close relationships
              lead to changes in cognition and cognitive processes that are associated with
              the destructive processes of envy in marital relationships as well as with such
              positive emotions as felt attachment and commitment. The PIs will investigate
              the role of SEM cognitive processes in: 1)  precipitating defensive, negative
              judgments about the partner;  2)  increasing the availability of positive and
              negative memories of the partner; 3) facilitating constructive or destructive
              interpretations of prior interactive behavior;  and 4) influencing definitiion
              of the self and the emergence of complimentary 'selves' in intimate
              relationships.  The automaticity of SEM processes will also be examined.  Taken
              together, these studies will provide a foundation for understanding defensive
              reactions in dyadic relationships and their destructive interpersonal and
              intrapersonal consequences.           Marriage is a fundamental building block
              of civilization. Well functioning marriages provide the basis for effective
              emotional support in times of difficulty, thereby preventing potentially
              serious declines in worker health and productivity, and they also are a
              foundation upon which successful child rearing can occur.  Because parents who
              are able to nurture each other are also in the best position to enable their
              children to develop into competent and productive adults, successful marriages
              are the foundation of the nation's future productive capacity. Yet, fully half
              of first marriages are destined to end in divorce at great cost both to the
              individuals involved, their families, and to society as a whole.  This program
              of research will elucidate cognitive processes in the service of
              self-evaluation maintenance that can contribute to marital discord.  As such,
              it is highly relevant to the "Famili es" component of the Human Capital
              Research agenda.  One of the perplexing problems in understanding marital
              discord is how to account for the shift that may occur from giving a partner
              the benefit of the doubt to assuming the worst when negative things happen.  It
              is clear that automatic cognitive processes are involved and that these
              processes are often not amenable to conscious introspection.  However, the
              exact nature of these automatic cognitive processes has been elusive. This
              program of research will illuminate some of these processes.  Moreover, the
              project focuses on processes that are particularly relevant to the changing
              nature of American families.  In particular, the theoretical model that guides
              the work is highly relevant to the "new" marital problems that may emerge as
              traditional gendered divisions of labor give way to more egalitarian marital
              relationships. As such, the knowledge generated by this program of research
              will be highly useful in developing  improved methods for preventing and
              ameliorating marital difficulties.
