Title       : Mixe-Zoquean and Zapotecan Documentation and Comparative Linguistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9511713

Award Number: 9511713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence Kaufman topkat@pitt.edu,TzajinKajaw@Gateway.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Justeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This three-year project is designed to advance the  comparative study of
              MixeZoquean (MZ) and Zapotecan (Zn)  languages. No MZ language has more than a
              rudimentary syntactic  description, and for most even morphological description
              is  incomplete. We are targeting Ayapa, Oluta, Oaxaca Zoque,  Soteapan, and
              Texistepec for work in these areas, building on the  foundation provided last
              season. The project will also build a  lexical and textual foundation for those
              MZ languages that were  not investigated in previous seasons: Highland Mixe,
              Lowland  Mixe, and (conditions permitting) Chiapas Zoque. There are fairly 
              large vocabulary collections for these languages, but some  phonological
              features are unclear or underspecified, morpheme  classification is not
              adequate, and text collections are lacking.       Zn languages are mostly not
              fully documented, and the same  needs exist as for MZ. Three Zapotec languages
              (Isthmus,  Guelavi*a, and Oaxaca environs) and one Chatino language 
              (Zenzontepec)are targeted for initial documentation of the type  done in 1993
              and 1994.        The proposed work is significant in several areas. Both MZ 
              and Zn languages have structural properties of interest to  current linguistic
              theory, although they are structurally highly  dissimilar. Notably, MZ has
              ergativity and OV morphosyntax,and Zn  has tones and an often opaque system of
              prefixes and proclitics  on verbs. The project has the potential to make a
              major  contribution to early Mesoamerican cultural and linguistic  history: MZ
              languages were spoken by Olmecs,and were influential  at the Olmec era and
              subsequently in affecting many other  languages in the area. It contributes to
              the ongoing decipherment  of epi-Olmec writing; the interpretation of its texts
              depends  heavily upon MZ comparative studies, which were crucial in the 
              original decipherment. Zn comparative studies, though lagging  behind MZ
              studies, are already advancing the decipherment of  Oaxacan writing. Finally,
              it includes a major language salvag e  operation, helping to preserve an
              important part of the  linguistic heritage of the Americas.
