Title       : Doctoral Dessertation Research: Magnetic Recording in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9511787

Award Number: 9511787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4441               (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Brittain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the most novel and brilliant innovations of the 20th century, the
              magnetic recording of information, has turned out also to be one of the giant
              commercial successes of the last 50 years.  Mr. David Morton, under the
              direction of Dr. James Brittain, is undertaking his dissertation research on
              the history of magnetic recording in the United States.  He is focusing first
              on its protracted and troubled early phase of commercial development, following
              through to its sudden flowering during and immediately after World War II, and
              then shifting to its wide-ranging social, economic, and technological effects. 
              The history of magnetic recording is important for reasons that go beyond the
              huge economic significance of products such as audio and video recorders or
              computer hard drives.  The results of this research promise to illustrate and
              advance our knowledge of important historical processes and phenomena such as
              the interaction between government and industry, the ways that large
              corporations build business operations around particular technologies, the
              mechanisms of university research and development, and the transfer of
              technology internationals and from laboratory to industry.  In addition to
              studying the innovation and development phases of this technology, Mr. Morton
              is also exploring technological history from another perspective, that of users
              ald consumers.  Magnetic recording history is unique because of the way that
              the technology proved to be adaptable to such an amazing array of applications.
               This research promises to show how inventors, small companies, and even
              individual end-users made radical changes in the way magnetic recording
              technology could be utilized, in a sense redefining it to fit new ideas about
              how it would be useful.
