Title       : Asymmetric Alkylations - Synthetic Utility of Formamidines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9000344

Award Number: 9000344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $558088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert I. Meyers aimeyers@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program is funding this research.  Dr.                   
              Meyers will continue his very fruitful development of new                      
              methods for synthesizing optically active materials.  Many of                  
              the molecules used in treating diseases are optically active                   
              and this work has the potential to provide new routes for their                
              synthesis.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Metalation of chiral formamidines using butyllithiums, followed                
              by alkylation with various electrophiles, gives C-C bonds                      
              adjacent to nitrogen in very high enantioselectivity.  This                    
              process has now entered the advanced stage whereby complex                     
              alkaloids and other nitrogen-containing substances are being                   
              explored.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Future efforts will center on quaternary carbon derivatives and                
              attempts to reach a number of spiroisoquinoline alkaloids in                   
              high enantiomeric excess.  A search for more efficient and                     
              readily available chiral auxiliaries will also be undertaken to                
              increase the % ee's of the quaternary alkylated products.                      
                                                                                             
              In addition to the quaternary carbon stereocenters, asymmetric                 
              total syntheses will be attempted at suitable targets of                       
              biological importance.  Other studies will focus on mechanistic                
              aspects of this process using Li-NMR, molecular modeling, and                  
              isotopic derivatives in an effort to clarify the nature and                    
              reactivity of the organolithium intermediates.  Finally,                       
              mechanistic information, already in hand, has provided a clue                  
              that facile resolutions may be accomplished as an alternative                  
              means of reaching these optically active amines.
