Title       : Behavior of Individual Planktonic Copepods: Ecological Significance of
               Perception and Response of Predators and Prey Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9000144

Award Number: 9000144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Verity peter@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The long.term goal of the project is to identify and describe key              
              processes which govern the abundance, composition and                          
              distribution of zooplankton in the ocean. Recent results on the                
              relationship of copepod perception to clearance rate pointed to                
              the significance of perception, and led to the main hypothesis,                
              underlying the research proposed for the next three years.  Both,              
              signal perception performance, and the ability to respond to it,               
              determines whether prey organisms avoid, escape from, or are                   
              captured by predators. This project will examine the behavior of               
              various abundant prey (ciliates, copepod nauplii) and predators                
              (nauplii, copepodites and adult copepods) found off the                        
              southeastern continental shelf of the U.S.A.  The results will be              
              used to taxonomically classify behaviors, and to calculate                     
              mortality rates for early juveniles of abundant species of                     
              copepods.  Estimates of in situ mortality rates for early                      
              juveniles even of the most abundant copepod species are scarce                 
              and very difficult to obtain. The approach of quantifying                      
              species.specific, and stage.specific behaviors of motion,                      
              feeding, etc., in relation to sensor performance and morphology,               
              will ultimately lead to an understanding of copepod existence and              
              co.existence in the ocean.  In combination with ecologically                   
              oriented efforts and parallel studies on the physiology of                     
              mechanosensors  and chemosensors the proposed studies will aid in              
              an understanding of what governs zooplankton behavior in the                   
              ocean.
