Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Arrangements of Hyperplanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9000369

Award Number: 9000369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter P. Orlik orlik@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hiroaki Terao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Six problems are posed about hyperplane arrangements A                    
              defined by a product Q of linear forms in a vector space V.  (1)               
              The polynomial map Q has a non-isolated singularity at the                     
              origin.  Let F be its Milnor fiber.  Compute the cohomology of F               
              for a generic arrangement.  (2)  It has been conjectured that if               
              A is free, then the restriction of A to a subspace in its lattice              
              is again free.  Investigate this conjecture for Coxeter                        
              arrangements.  (3)  Known results on Hessians and discriminants                
              of Shephard groups will be combined with ideas of Saito to give a              
              case-free proof of the existence of flat basic invariants for                  
              Shephard groups, and to explain why the complements of their                   
              reflection arrangements are K(G,1)-spaces.  (4)  Let S be the                  
              algebra of polynomial functions on V and let J be the Jacobian                 
              ideal generated by the partial derivatives of Q.  If A is                      
              generic, then the homological dimension of S/J is equal to dimV.               
              Study the homological dimension of S/J for all arrangements.  (5)              
              Given H in A let B denote the restriction of A to H.  There is a               
              natural restriction of the derivations tangent to A to the                     
              derivations tangent to B.  This map is surjective in some cases                
              and not surjective in others.  Find precise conditions for                     
              surjectivity.  (6)  Subspace arrangements will be studied with                 
              respect to the question of additivity of the Poincare polynomial               
              under deletion and restriction.  The use of computers, to furnish              
              experimental material, is implicit in the work.                                
                   These six problems show that in high dimensions the ways in               
              which a finite number of linear spaces can be imbedded in a                    
              linear space of one greater dimension exhibits a surprisingly                  
              rich structure.  Standard tools of topology are well adapted to                
              elucidating this structure and will be further exploited.
