Title       : Research Expereinces for Undergraduate in Particulate Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EID 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1990        
File        : a9000888

Award Number: 9000888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EID  DIVISION 0F ENGIN INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOP
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40023              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudarshan K. Loyalka loyalkaS@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brad Keck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul C. Chan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Krawitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold D. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              Research in Particulate systems Engineering in crucial to advances in          
              combustion, atmospheric and environmental sciences, nuclear winter             
              studies, nuclear reactor safety, and materials manufacturing.  The             
              purpose of this project is to provide research experiences for                 
              undergraduate students in this area.  At least half of the students            
              will be selected from institutions other the UMC, with several                 
              recruited from Stephens College (a women's college), Lincoln                   
              University (HCBU), and other undergraduate schools in the State.  Each         
              student will undertake a specific research project, and a faculty              
              advisor (participating in the REU program) will work with the student          
              to develop his/her research skills.  An essential element of the               
              program will be its emphasis on professional development of the                
              students (e.g., paper writing and technical presentations).  The               
              purpose is to infuse bright undergraduate students with an enthusiasm          
              towards research careers, including graduate level education.                  
                                                                                             
              The University of Missouri-Columbia has made substantial institutional         
              commitments to the program.  These include support of faculty time,            
              waiver of tuition and fees for the student Participants, waiver of all         
              overhead costs, and stipends for two minority students (in addition to         
              those supported by the NSF funds).
