Title       : Mathematical Sciences: REU: Matrix Analysis and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1990     
File        : a9000645

Award Number: 9000645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rex K. Kincaid rrkinc@cs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   A research program focusing on mathematical problems in                   
              matrix theory will be supported through this Research Experiences              
              for Undergraduates award.  Eight students will work under the                  
              supervision of seven faculty members, using experimental and                   
              theoretical methods on a broad range of research topics.  An                   
              introduction to available sophisticated computing tools for                    
              mathematical exploration in matrix analysis: MATLAB, Mathematica,              
              Maple and GAUSS, will be provided, along with access to a new                  
              computer laboratory.  It is expected that students will present                
              their work at regional meetings of the Mathematical Association                
              of America.                                                                    
                   Research projects such as the approximation of functions of               
              matrices will be taken up.  Here one considers interpolating                   
              polynomials of complex functions and how the corresponding                     
              functions of matrices approximate one another.  Another area of                
              investigation concerns the convergence of products of matrices.                
              For powers of a single matrix, the behavior of the sequence of                 
              its powers is well known.  When the terms of the product are                   
              selected from a finite set of matrices, relatively little is                   
              known about convergence.  Work will also be done on the                        
              relationship of the spectrum of a matrix and its permanent.  For               
              example, one would like to know the maximum permanent taken over               
              all matrices with a given spectrum.  Other topics include extreme              
              points of nonnegative matrices, matrix equation and sign pattern               
              matrices.
