Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Scattering Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1990      
File        : a9000054

Award Number: 9000054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : September 1,  1990   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12192              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Zhou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work to be done during the period of this award will focus                
              on higher dimensional inverse scattering problems and on related               
              one dimensional problems.  The underlying idea for work of this                
              nature is that of constructing obstacles from data measured as                 
              particles pass the obstacle.  The transition from the future of a              
              solution of, say, the wave equation, to the past is called the                 
              scattering transform.  Knowledge of either the transform or its                
              spectrum is considered to be central to understanding any wave or              
              generalized wave which experiences scattering.                                 
                   This work will consider extending results on time dependent               
              Schrodinger equations with slowly decaying potentials in which                 
              the inverse equation admits simple poles.  In higher dimensional               
              settings the advent of multiple poles cannot be ruled  out.                    
              However, their structure is not understood.  The question  of                  
              whether or not they may accumulate will also be studied.                       
              One method to be used will consider solutions for time                         
              dependent Schrodinger equations which are not necessarily bounded              
              in time.  This method has been used to achieve the complete                    
              solution (for all potentials) for the one dimensional nxn inverse              
              scattering problem as well as for the one dimensional n-th order               
              scalar equation.  Several classical equations and systems are                  
              expected to be analyzed using results developed through this                   
              investigation.  They include the Zakharov-Shabat system and the                
              KPI equation.
