Title       : Research Involvement as an Educational Tool for the Non- Conventional,
               Undergraduate Engineering Student in the Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EID 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1990        
File        : a9000759

Award Number: 9000759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EID  DIVISION 0F ENGIN INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOP
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford B. Fedler clifford.fedler@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Gregory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver D. Hensley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              Because of high population of minority students in the southwestern            
              United States and the low percentage that pursue higher education, it          
              is important that educational tools be developed to encourage these            
              students to pursue and succeed in engineering and science fields.  In          
              addition to the minority students, many students in this region                
              graduate from small, rural schools with poor training for college.             
              The combination of these students (non-conventional students) have             
              different problems from traditional students.                                  
              A solution to this problem is the proposed model environment, which            
              involves both students at Texas Tech University and area Community             
              Colleges in meaningful research.  This research interaction and                
              mentoring by faculty members will provide an immediate feedback for            
              the value of math and science, enhancing both the efficiency and               
              quality of higher education.                                                   
              The faculty mentoring to students have established records of                  
              research, such as the Texas Tech Granular Flow Model and the Texas             
              Tech Wind Erosion Model.  A goal for each student researcher is a              
              published technical paper.  This work will develop pride and self-             
              worth for the student.                                                         
              The Student would be exposed to engineering research principles in the         
              areas of soil and water conservation, processing of agricultural, food         
              and industrial products, and development of renewable resources.
