Title       : Multiphoton Spectroscopy of Small Molecules and Atomic Helium (Physics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1990       
File        : a9000375

Award Number: 9000375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Komar                            
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1989  
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111787             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward E. Eyler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1241      ATOMIC & MOLECULAR PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A program of high resolution measurements on simple atoms                 
              and molecules will be continued, concentrating especially on                   
              the two-electron systems molecular hydrogen and atomic helium.                 
              The experimental methods involve multiphoton excitation of                     
              both ground state and metastable species.  A pulse-amplified cw                
              dye laser is used to obtain the high powers required for                       
              multiphoton excitation while retaining high resolution.  The                   
              dissociation energy and ionization potential of hydrogen will                  
              be determined to a new accuracy, and improved measurements will                
              be made of the structure of helium.  These measurements will                   
              provide the first stringent tests of calculations of quantum                   
              electrodynamic effects in the ground states of two-electron                    
              systems.  Microwave-optical double resonance will be used to                   
              precisely measure transitions between high Rydberg states.                     
                   A major focus on this research will be the interaction of                 
              excited states in hydrogen with the ionization and dissociation                
              continua, including the effects of doubly excited states.  The                 
              decay of Rydberg states will be studied both with and without                  
              external electric fields.  Work will continue on the                           
              photodissociation of hydrogen very near threshold, which yields                
              detailed information on long-range interactions between atoms.
