Title       : Mathematical Sciences: REU: Experimental Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1990     
File        : a9000624

Award Number: 9000624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Goodey PGOODEY@OU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andy R. Magid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ara Basmajian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Brick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Dipper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   In this Research Experiences for Undergraduates project, six              
              students will work with faculty advisors relating advances in                  
              computational technology to mathematical research.  The emphasis               
              of the work will be on computational aspects of two areas: group               
              theory and dynamics.  Following initial orientation, students                  
              will break up into teams, concentrating on one of the two themes.              
              The interplay between experimentation and theory will enable the               
              students to deal, at an early stage, with complicated examples                 
              which cannot be done by hand.  These will lead to a better                     
              understanding of groups, dynamical systems and their underlying                
              structure.                                                                     
                   Students concentrating on group theory will be introduced to              
              fundamental concepts of computational group theory through                     
              permutation groups and exposure to CAYLEY and other programming                
              languages capable of symbolic manipulation.  Dynamical systems                 
              will build on students' basic courses in calculus and linear                   
              algebra to investigate properties of orbits such as period                     
              doubling and saddle node bifurcations, Mandelbrot sets and the                 
              generation of fractal images using iterated functions systems.                 
              As the students become more familiar with computer                             
              experimentation, they will be exposed to problem areas and                     
              unsolved problems on which they will focus their attention for                 
              the remainder of the activity.                                                 
                   Interspersed with the research program will be an evening                 
              lecture series in the sciences, history and literature.
