Title       : CRB: Socioendocrinology of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1991       
File        : a9000094

Award Number: 9000094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53563              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. French jfrench@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2200

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The continued destruction of the coastal and tropical forest              
              in South and Central America threatens the survival of natural                 
              animal populations, including the callitrichid primates (tamarins              
              and marmosets).  While the golden lion tamarins are considered an              
              endangered species, through a highly successful breeding program               
              at the University of Nebraska under the auspices of the National               
              Zoological Park, these primates are being bred in captivity and a              
              small group of six have recently been reintroduced into forests                
              of Brazil.  Their survival as a species, however, depends                      
              extensively on understanding how their reproduction is                         
              synchronized to lead to a greater likelihood of fertilization.                 
                                                                                             
                   Dr. French will investigate the complex interplay between                 
              internal physiological factors and external social and                         
              environmental factors in gold lion tamarins.  Unlike Old World                 
              primates and apes, the callitrichid primates are monogamous and                
              thus, develop a close and long-lasting association, or pair-                   
              bond, between a breeding male and female.  Dr. French will use                 
              noninvasive data collection techniques for both hormone samples                
              and behavioral measurements to compare the degree to which social              
              factors influence hormonal regulation of reproduction.  His                    
              findings will be compared with the results obtained in similarly               
              conducted studies in which Old World non-monogamous primate                    
              species have been used.  This work will contribute to our                      
              understanding of the role of hormonal and social influences on                 
              reproductive behavior in golden lion tamarins as well as other                 
              New World primates of which many are considered threatened or                  
              endangered species.  Furthermore, the results will significantly               
              enhance the captive breeding programs of endangered species and                
              thus, contribute to the preservation of these small South                      
              American primates.
