Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1990        
File        : a9000716

Award Number: 9000716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Krantz sk@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   Six students will be chosen to participate in this Research               
              Experiences for Undergraduates project.  Seven faculty members                 
              engaged in five research programs will introduce the students to               
              a variety of possible directions on which to focus their                       
              energies.  They include work on the phi-transform, a new tool in               
              harmonic analysis for decomposing general functions as sums of                 
              simple terms.  It mixes time and frequency considerations,                     
              providing cancellation in powerful and subtle ways.  Particular                
              examples involving electromagnetic scattering, electrocardiogram               
              analysis and NMR imaging will be studied.  Work on Chern-Moser-                
              Tanaka invariants in the theory of several complex variables has               
              been hampered by the difficulty in calculating the invariants.                 
              Now it is possible to involve students in the use of symbol                    
              manipulation algorithms to make estimates and create numerical                 
              models to study these important mathematical structures.                       
              Students may also work on mathematical models of molecular                     
              evolution, (the  distribution of nucleotides in the coding                     
              regions of individuals chosen from a random-mating population);                
              on new high resolution methods for constructing magnetic                       
              resonance images from raw MR scanner data; on Fourier analysis                 
              over local fields; and on combinatorial number theory,                         
              specifically, on the randomness of the distribution of primes.                 
                Efforts will be made to encourage students to develop their                  
              work into publishable form or as the basis for senior honors                   
              theses.
