Title       : REU: Ecosystem Studies at the H. J. Andrews Experimental Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1990        
File        : a9000816

Award Number: 9000816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Beatty beattyj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew R. Moldenke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to the Department of Biology at Oregon             
              State University to continue a Research Experience for                         
              Undergraduates Site.  A 10-week summer program will provide 10                 
              undergraduates in biological sciences with research experiences in             
              ecosystem studies at the Andrews Experimental Forest which is the              
              site for several interdisciplinary projects, including the NSF                 
              sponsored Long-Term Ecological Research Program.  Students will                
              learn and develop skills as they interact and work closely with                
              scientists from several disciplines on individual projects within              
              the larger coordinated studies.                                                
                                                                                             
              To foster student development and monitor what careers they pursue             
              after they complete the program, a 4-phase program is planned:  an             
              overview phase which explains integrated ecosystem studies, an                 
              apprenticeship phase to develop skills, a personal research phase,             
              and an evaluation follow-up phase.  According to their interests,              
              students will join a collaborating scientist for the second and                
              third phases.  The Principal Investigator will coordinate the                  
              program, organize the overview phase, field trips, and seminars,               
              integrating the students and collaborating scientists, facilitate              
              progress toward independent questioning, and evaluating results.               
                                                                                             
              Students will be housed at the field station with other                        
              researchers, an arrangement that encourages afterhours discussions             
              and helps break the barriers between disciplines.  The project will            
              place promising students at a scenic research site with an                     
              interdisciplinary team of scientists to produce good science and               
              develop an enthusiasm for biological research.
