Title       : Morphometrics Workshop -- June 10 - 23, 1990, Stony Brook, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1990      
File        : a9000803

Award Number: 9000803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45422              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. James Rohlf rohlf@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Morphometrics is the study of shape and shape change, and it              
              combines aspects of geometry and statistics.  Morphometrics has                
              wide applications in systematic biology: quantitative description              
              of species and their differences; characterization of the changes              
              that occur during the development of an individual organism and                
              the evolution of a lineage; and the study of processes that                    
              impact on these differences and changes.  The field of                         
              morphometrics has made rapid advances in the past decade,                      
              stemming from the availability of desk-top image analysis systems              
              driven by microcomputers, and the development of several new                   
              conceptual approaches to the capture of biological shape                       
              information.  The limiting factors to the further growth of                    
              biological morphometrics have been the lack of appropriate                     
              microcomputer software, and the high training threshold that                   
              investigators face when attempting to use morphometrics in their               
              research.  The Systematic Biology Program of the National Science              
              Foundation supported a two-week training workshop at the                       
              University of Michigan in 1988, during which 35 faculty-level                  
              researchers were given hands-on training in morphometrics.  Since              
              that workshop, a new battery of software packages have been                    
              developed by the instructors, to be published with the Workshop                
              Proceedings volume in 1990.  Dr. Michael Bell and F. James Rohlf               
              propose a second two-week morphometrics training workshop, to be               
              held on the Stony Brook campus of the State University of New                  
              York.  The Proceedings volume and associated software will be the              
              principal material used in the course, which will train                        
              approximately 30 systematic biology researchers in the latest                  
              approaches to morphometrics.                                                   
                   The proposed training workshop will have wide implications                
              throughout systematic and evolutionary biology.  The participants              
              will represent different taxonomic groups and research                         
              philosophies, and they will return to their host institutions                  
              after the workshop prepared to use and teach the use of an                     
              important new research tool.  They will be in a position to write              
              competitive grant proposals for equipment acquisition and                      
              morphometric research.  During the workshop, possible new                      
              approaches will be discussed and the place of morphometrics in                 
              systematic research will take new form.  The workshop will be an               
              important test of the software prior to publication.  Training                 
              workshops such as this are cost-effective ways to disseminate new              
              methodologies and technologies.
