Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Analysis and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9000616

Award Number: 9000616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos Berenstein carlos@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research focusing on                  
              complex analytic methods applied to the analysis of convolution                
              equations, integral geometry and systems of algebraic                          
              equations.  Earlier work on interpolation problems in spaces of                
              entire functions has led naturally to questions concerning                     
              multidimensional convolutions equations.  One is actually                      
              interested in the question of deconvolution.  Many physical                    
              realizable systems such as transducers and sensors can be                      
              modeled as convolution with distributions.  This gives rise to                 
              a scheme to estimate signals such as images, radiation,                        
              acoustics, etc.  The data are given as a convolution plus noise                
              and the reconstruction process in this project consists of                     
              finding systematic ways of constructing deconvolvers.  In                      
              pursuing this work, several mathematical problems arise which                  
              are treated as distinct objectives.  They include finding the                  
              degrees and height in the algebraic Bezout equation, obtaining                 
              new properties and representations of residue currents                         
              (multidimensional residues) and questions in integral geometry                 
              related to the Pompieu problem.  The Pompieu problem actually                  
              covers a vast array of questions concerning integrals of a                     
              fixed function over various congruent configurations.  If the                  
              integtrals equal zero on a class of congruent sets, one is                     
              interested in knowing whether or not the function must be zero.                
              Most of this work is set within the framework of several                       
              complex variables.  Techniques of analytic function theory and                 
              harmonic analysis are predominant.  Diverse applications to                    
              systems theory and engineering are expected.
