Title       : CRB: Population Viability of Tropical Forest Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1992       
File        : a9000486

Award Number: 9000486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240375             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Woodruff dwoodruff@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Habitat destruction and fragmentation in tropical forests are                  
              the single largest threat to the planet's biodiversity.  The                   
              roles of genetic and demographic factors in the extinction of                  
              small populations in fragmented habitat patches are understood                 
              in theory but poorly documented empirically.  To test existing                 
              theory and to improve techniques of biodiversity conservation,                 
              the investigators will develop a new method of monitoring                      
              population viability in recently fragmented populations.                       
              Specifically, they will conduct population viability analyses                  
              of rat, tree shrew, and other small mammal populations in small                
              rainforest patches of different sizes during the first six                     
              years following isolation.  These habitat patches were all                     
              isolated in 1987 when the creation of the Chiew Larn reservoir                 
              flooded a forested valley in the Khlong Saeng Wildlife                         
              Sanctuary, Thailand, and created 165 islands.  Demographic                     
              changes in selected populations will be monitored by seasonal                  
              live-trapping as will levels of genetic variation, inbreeding                  
              and gene flow.  The study is novel in that the genetic changes                 
              will be monitored at the DNA sequence level with DNA obtained                  
              non-invasively from plucked hair.                                              
                                                                                             
              This study will contribute to our basic understanding of                       
              evolutionary biology and ecology in a number of ways.  It will                 
              provide among the first sequence-level data on variation in a                  
              number of nuclear and mitochondrial genes in several free-                     
              ranging mammal species.  It will also provide one of the first                 
              cases where both genetic and ecological aspects of population                  
              viability are monitored in the critical first 20 generations                   
              following insularization.  In addition, the study promises to                  
              contribute to conservation biology in three significant ways.                  
              First, the development of the genetic monitoring technique                     
              based on non-invasive sampling of DNA from hair will have wide                 
              applicability.  Second, the demonstration that population                      
              viability can be monitored in common small mammals should lead                 
              to improved management practices for rarer and more endangered                 
              species.  Finally, the lessons learned from this study in Thai                 
              forest fragments should be applicable to biodiversity                          
              conservation elsewhere in the tropics.
