Title       : US-Federal Republic of Germany Joint Seminar on Current Developments in Polymer
               Science; Grossen Ledder, FRG; September 9-14, 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9000152

Award Number: 9000152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale S. Pearson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin L. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              12        Chemistry                               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the participation of approximately ten young               
              U.S. polymer scientists in a joint workshop with potential                     
              collaborators from the Federal Republic of Germany.  Several                   
              industrial participants are expected, at their own expense.  The               
              meeting was co-organized by Dale S. Pearson of the University of               
              California at Santa Barbara and Edwin L. Thomas of MIT together                
              with Joachim Wendorff of the German Plastics Institute, Darmstadt,             
              and Hans Kricheldorf from the Department of Applied and Macro-                 
              molecular Chemistry,  University of Hamburg.  The workshop will be             
              held in a small village near Cologne, and will conclude with a tour            
              and panel discussion at the new Max Planck Institute for Polymer               
              Research at Mainz, FRG.  This is a major new facility which                    
              indicates the strong interest of the German government and scientific          
              community in polymer science.  Prior bilateral meetings in this                
              field (over three years ago and with different participants)                   
              resulted in a number of joint research projects, publications and              
              arrangements for sabbaticals in Germany and the U.S.  The small                
              size of the meeting is particularly conducive for initiating close             
              professional relationships among people who have not had an                    
              opportunity to meet before.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of the workshop is to address critical areas             
              of polymer science through a well balanced program that includes               
              contributions from chemistry, physics, materials science, and                  
              engineering.  Presentations will be about evenly divided among                 
              polymer synthesis and modification, polymer characterization, and              
              polymer theory.  Particular emphasis will be given to two areas:               
              synthetic research on electroactive polymers, a topic that has                 
              fostered intense collaboration between the physics and chemistry               
              communities, and the more general but rapidly expanding area of                
              polymer theory.  Advances in theoretical concepts coupled with the             
              increased availability of supercomputers are having a major impact             
              on the way polymer scientists view macromolecular behavior.  In                
              addition, the participants will review progress in several areas               
              included in previous meetings, such as liquid crystalline polymers,            
              self-organizing systems, and polymer interfaces and surfaces.  German          
              research in polymer dynamics and surface characterization is among             
              the best in the world due to their excellent facilities for neutron            
              and X-ray scattering studies and some top-notch people.
