Title       : Numerical Solution of Least Squares Eigenvalue Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9000526

Award Number: 9000526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse L. Barlow barlow@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a number of open questions concerning the               
              accurate solution of least squares and eigenvalue problems.  These two         
              problem areas are interrelated, but there are separate issues for each         
              one of them.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              For the work on least squares problems, there remain important issues          
              in both the analysis and implementation of the algorithms.  Both               
              direct and iterative methods for the solution of equality constrained          
              least squares problems will be considered.  The work on direct methods         
              concerns error analysis and implementation issues for sparse problems          
              and for message passing architectures.  The effort on iterative                
              methods concerns the development of a class of preconditioners that            
              would work well on constrained least squares problems.                         
                                                                                             
              The investigation of the eigenvalue problems is based upon theoretical         
              questions.  Recently perturbation bounds on the relative errors in the         
              eigenvalues of a certain class of symmetric diagonally dominant                
              matrices have been developed.  It has been shown that some algorithms          
              achieve these bounds.  For one important class of algorithms,                  
              divide-and-conquer algorithms, it is not known whether the relative            
              error bounds can be achieved.  Since this class of algorithms has              
              shown good performance on several distributed memory architectures,            
              the resolution of this open question will have a significant impact on         
              how eigenvalue problems are solved.
