Title       : The Role of Sarcodine-Algal Symbiotic Associations in Upper Ocean Carbon and
               Nitrogen Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1992  
File        : a9000201

Award Number: 9000201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Caron   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The three classes of symbiont-bearing sarcodines                          
              (acantharia, polycystine radiolaria and foraminifera) are a                    
              conspicuous component of upper ocean communities.  Most of the                 
              previous research on the ecology of these taxa has been                        
              concentrated on a single species or limited group of species. Dr.              
              Caron and colleagues will simultaneously examine the ecological                
              role of the entire assemblage of these three protozoa. Their                   
              research examines two hypotheses:  1.  In nutrient-poor oceanic                
              environments, the symbiont primary production in the entire                    
              population of acantharia, polycystine radiolaria and foraminifera              
              will represent a significant fraction of the total primary                     
              production and will dominate the production by large cells                     
              (operationally defined as cells larger than 74um).  2. Sarcodines              
              will be a disproportionately important component of sinking                    
              material from the euphotic zone compared with their suspended                  
              biomass. Symbiont production rates of the entire population of                 
              symbiont-bearing sarcodines are determined through a combination               
              of  large volume and diver-collected production measurements to                
              evaluate the importance of this production relative to total                   
              primary production.  The significance of these planktonic                      
              protists for the vertical flux of material is estimated by the                 
              concurrent measurement of both the stocks of sarcodines and the                
              rate of sinking export. These measurements are coordinated with                
              the GOFS Time-Series Study at Bermuda (participation in two                    
              cruises per year), which enables the investigators to view their               
              results from a large, seasonal perspective.
