Title       : Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1991  
File        : a9000665

Award Number: 9000665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41447              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Rhodes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to establish a Research Experiences for              
              Undergraduates Site in the Department of Biology and Biomedical                
              Sciences at Washington University.  Twelve undergraduates, from a              
              diversity of collegiate and ethnic backgrounds, will be recruited              
              to spend 8-12 summer weeks engaged in developmental biology                    
              research with faculty mentors who will be selected, on the basis               
              of mutual interests, from the about 30 developmental biologists on             
              the faculty.  These staff members have active, well-equipped and               
              funded research groups working on a wide range of developmental                
              problems, ranging from mating and zygote formation in                          
              chlamydomonas, through organ-specific gene expression in transgenic            
              plants, and control of germ cell differentiation in nematodes, to              
              formation of patterned connections in the mammalian CNS.  The                  
              emphasis of the program will be on getting each student actively               
              engaged in increasingly independent research in one of these                   
              productive laboratories.  However, to help the students view their             
              own research in a broader scientific and professional context, four            
              supplementary activities will be provided:  (1) One week will be               
              devoted full-time to introducing the REU students to some of the               
              major research models and methods of contemporary developmental                
              biology, through a coordinated series of lectures, discussions,                
              demonstrations and hands-on laboratory experiences.  (2) In each               
              odd-numbered week, a member of the participating faculty will                  
              present an informal research seminar and discussion, designed                  
              specifically for these students.  (3) In even-numbered weeks, the              
              students will participate with Washington University graduate                  
              students, postdocs and faculty in an ongoing Developmental Biology             
              Journal Club.  (4) At the end of the summer, a weekend retreat will            
              be held at which students in this program, together with other                 
              summer undergraduate research students, will present the results               
              of their summer research either orally or as poster papers.
