Title       : CRB: Effects of Landscape Management and Deer Abundance on Plant Community and
               Species Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1993   
File        : a9000102

Award Number: 9000102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : January 21,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Waller dmwaller@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Alverson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen L. Solheim  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                   Traditional forestry practices in the Northeast have led to               
              the dispersion of forest openings and scattered clear cuts                     
              throughout large regions.  The result is a fine-scaled mosaic of               
              young and older forests.  Such fragmentation has also created                  
              large amounts of "edge" habitat, purposefully constructed to                   
              boost populations of White-tailed Deer and other game species.                 
              These efforts have succeeded in boosting deer populations far                  
              beyond presettlement densities to the point where browsing by                  
              deer now appears to threaten plant species diversity by                        
              preventing the recruitment and regeneration of certain                         
              gymnosperms and associated herbaceous species.  We propose to use              
              existing long-term deer and plant survey data and the presence of              
              areas of reduced deer density to test hypotheses concerning the                
              impacts of deer browsing on species diversity and community                    
              composition and dynamics.  We will also compare the size and age               
              structure and community composition of forest stands dominated by              
              Eastern Hemlock and White Cedar among areas that vary in deer                  
              density.  Finally, we will use experiments to test the direct and              
              indirect effects of deer browsing.  Results from this study are                
              needed to document this new type of edge effect and to design                  
              practical patterns of forest use compatible with maintaining the               
              original species and community diversity of northern forests.                  
              Such analyses will allow implementation of appropriate                         
              conservation strategies.
