Title       : Query Optimization in Temporal Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9000619

Award Number: 9000619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arie Segev segev@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              While implementing temporal data models can dramatically increase              
              the expressive power of a database management system (DBMS),                   
              processing efficiency is critical to its success. The potentially              
              enormous sizes of historical data, coupled with the complexity of              
              many temporal operators, pose challenges to the practical                      
              implementation of a temporal DBMS. In this project, key issues                 
              related to the optimization of temporal database processing are                
              investigated. The focus of the work is on joins which are found                
              in the most common and costly queries. Optimization algorithms                 
              for the various join operators, data organizations, and data                   
              structures are be developed. An essential component of the                     
              optimization process is estimating the size of intermediate                    
              results. Temporal relations are distinct from snapshot ones, and               
              conventional estimation techniques are inadequate. Consequently,               
              a new mathematical approach to estimating selectivities for                    
              temporal data need be developed. As part of this project the                   
              alternative algorithms are first be simulated and analyzed. Then               
              two prototypes (one on top of an existing relational DBMS, while               
              the other is a direct implementation of important temporal                     
              operators) are built to further evaluate the optimization                      
              concepts. The results of this research will have an impact on                  
              database technology by providing a methodology for development of              
              efficient temporal database systems.
