Title       : Dynamic Aspects of Foraging Decisions: Short-Term Caching Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1991     
File        : a9000306

Award Number: 9000306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1990  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Lucas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Decisions made by animals are affected by numerous factors.  For               
              example, a bird's choice among different food items can be shown               
              to be affected by how hungry the bird is, the relative abundance               
              of food types, the sequence of previous encounters with different              
              food items, and the amount of fat reserves the bird has stored.                
              Until now, it has proved difficult, both theoretically and                     
              experimentally, to study the combined effects of these factors in              
              a meaningful way.  As a result, only a small fraction of the rich              
              diversity of responses that animals exhibit have been studied.                 
                                                                                             
              The current pilot project is designed to test techniques that                  
              will allow a more synoptic view of animal decision-making.                     
              Specifically, Dr. Lucas plans to test several predictions of                   
              caching behavior by Carolina chickadees under laboratory                       
              conditions.  Chickadees store food items singly in hundreds of                 
              different sites and retrieve this food within a period of days.                
              The predictions, derived from a dynamic-programming model, will                
              be tested by continuously monitoring body mass, cache size and                 
              caching decisions throughout the day.  Monitoring will be                      
              accomplished using computer-driven electronic balances and remote              
              sensors in potential cache sites.                                              
                                                                                             
              This work is important because it provides a methodology for                   
              understanding behavior in a broad context.  Decisions should                   
              reflect a balance of costs and benefits associated with                        
              alternative behaviors available to the animal.  The costs and                  
              benefits, in turn, are affected by current conditions and                      
              expected changes in these conditions.  This is as relevant to                  
              human behavior as it is to the behavior of non-human animals.                  
              Caching behavior is particularly revealing because, by caching                 
              food, the animal is providing for future nutritional requirements              
              (when the food is retrieved) to the detriment of current                       
              requirements (which could be satisfied by eating discovered food               
              immediately).  Thus, caching decisions should reflect current                  
              conditions and expected changes in those conditions when the food              
              is finally retrieved.
