Title       : Undergraduate Research Developmental Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1990       
File        : a9000810

Award Number: 9000810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Singer ssinger@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for a 10-week summer research                      
              experience for nine undergraduates from Carleton College and other             
              regional colleges and universities.  Pre-participation reading                 
              requirements will provide students with an adequate foundation for             
              meaningful scientific investigation.  During the summer, students              
              will work in a one-to-one relationship with a research supervisor              
              in the laboratory.  Weekly seminars will provides student with the             
              opportunity to discuss research plans and results as well as to                
              delve into primary scientific articles.  To further focus and unify            
              the student participants, a theme of developmental regulation has              
              been selected.  Six of the nine projects relate directly to this               
              theme and mid-summer seminars will be used to discuss current                  
              literature in this area.  Projects will include investigations of:             
              the mechanisms of action and the chemical characteristics of a                 
              possibly-steroid pheomone produced by Oedogonium, functional                   
              structure of Hensen's node in the chick embryo, regulation of                  
              floral development in tobacco, effect of B chromosomes in maize on             
              developmental processes, structure and function of the                         
              glucocorticoid receptor in rat liver, development of synaptic                  
              connections in Xenopus, variation of sex expression in composites,             
              role of song communication in coordination of parental care in                 
              cardinals, and effect of gregarine parasites on population biology             
              of capitellid polychaetes.  Opportunities to complete research and             
              writing during winter break will be available.
