Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Polynomial Interpolationand Spline
               Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1992   
File        : a9000053

Award Number: 9000053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. De Boor deboor@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amos Ron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The mathematical theories of multivariate polynomial                      
              interpolation and multivariate spline approximation differ in                  
              content and goals, yet share a common source.  In addition, many               
              of the mathematical tools used to analyze basic questions are                  
              similar.  Underlying much of this work has been the problem of                 
              developing a strategy for developing a theory of splines in                    
              several dimensions which is both computationally effective and as              
              accurate as the one dimensional basis from which the subject                   
              arose.                                                                         
                   Work on multivariate polynomial interpolation derives from                
              problems in what became known as box spline theory.  A                         
              surprisingly simple and general method for choosing, for any                   
              given finite set of points in a space of several variables, a                  
              good polynomial space for interpolation at those points, has been              
              discovered.  Work will now be done exploring the theoretical and               
              practical ramifications of this discovery.  A long-term objective              
              is to construct a coherent theory of interpolation, one which                  
              will play a more important role in multivariate numerical                      
              analysis.                                                                      
                   There are many approaches to spline approximation in higher               
              dimensions currently in use.  Each is associated with a certain                
              type of mesh along which the elements are joined.  The focus of                
              this work will be that of approximation order.  A better                       
              understanding of what makes for a good approximation order is                  
              expected to lead to the construction of better approximation                   
              methods. Ultimately, one would like to develop a unification of                
              the various theories and techniques now extant.                                
                   A particularly important area of application of this work is              
              in providing mathematical models of surfaces, often from a given               
              set of bounding curves.  The mainstay of industrial work at this               
              time is a method which only works for relatively flat surfaces.                
              One immediate goal is to obtain a better understanding of how                  
              one can tell whether a given surface can be well represented by a              
              small number of patches.
