Title       : Development of Interinstitutional REU Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EID 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1990     
File        : a9000639

Award Number: 9000639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EID  DIVISION 0F ENGIN INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOP
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40399              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ganesh P. Mohanty mohanty@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              An interinstitutional REU site is established.  The program will               
              provide ten selected undergraduates research opportunities in the              
              mechanical engineering and engineering science department encompassing         
              the mechanical, materials and bioengineering subject areas.  The               
              specific research topics selected for the program are of fundamental,          
              as well as, current engineering interest including several to be               
              conducted with external support and collaborations.  A five-member             
              faculty team from the host institution will supervise the  project             
              activities.  Research projects are thermal compatibility for metal-            
              ceramic systems, properties of liquid metal-liquid insulator                   
              interfaces, control-structure interaction of large flexible                    
              spacecraft, and diffraction studies of defect substructures in bulk            
              single crystals.  Participants will be recruited from both inside and          
              outside the host institution with special attention given to                   
              attracting qualified minority, handicapped and female students.  The           
              interinstitutional cooperative arrangement is intended to facilitate           
              the recruiting effort, allow several participants to work in on-going          
              joint projects to gain research experience and generally enhance the           
              impact of the REU program by spreading its benefits beyond host site.          
              Productive participation of the students in the project activities             
              will be assured through a concentrated ten-week summer involvement,            
              pairing of internal and external students on individual projects and           
              carefully planned orientation and post participation activities.  The          
              program will terminate with written reports and oral presentations of          
              the project results by the participants.
