Title       : CRB: Migratory Behavior of the Olive Ridley Sea Turtle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1990       
File        : a9000075

Award Number: 9000075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159944             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Owens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In collaboration with Costa Rican graduate students and                        
              scientists at two universities in Costa Rica, Dr. Owens will                   
              carry out a two-year field study of the behavioral factors                     
              influencing the migrations and unique nesting patterns of the                  
              olive ridley sea turtle.  The olive ridley and the closely                     
              related Kemp's ridley have a distinctive nesting behavior in                   
              which thousands of turtles gather in nearshore waters at the                   
              nesting beach and then emerge en masse to lay their eggs.  This                
              mass nesting is commonly known by the Spanish word "arribada,"                 
              but the physiological mechanisms and environmental cues involved               
              are unknown.  The olive ridley is a commercially important                     
              species threatened with extinction because it is under extreme                 
              exploitation pressure from fisheries between Mexico and Equador.               
              Because of the lack of data on the at-sea behavior and movements               
              of the olive ridley, any information collected will contribute                 
              significantly to our understanding of this animal.  The                        
              objectives of this study are to (1) monitor the pre-nesting and                
              post-nesting at-sea movements and diving characteristics of the                
              olive ridley and (2) determine the behavioral components involved              
              in arribada mating and massing.  These data will then be combined              
              with information on the physiology of the same turtles, being                  
              obtained under grant BNS 88-19940.  Dr. Owens and his colleagues               
              will attach satellite-tracking transmitters to female and male                 
              olive ridleys to follow their movements.  Both behavior in the                 
              vicinity of the nesting beach and long-term migrations away from               
              the nesting beach to the feeding grounds will be studied.                      
              Monitoring these movements will allow the researchers to evaluate              
              feeding, courtship, mating, and massing behaviors prior to and                 
              following arribada events.  An improved understanding of the                   
              factors regulating the mass nesting and migratory behaviors has                
              basic importance in marine zoology and potential value in                      
              developing improved methods for conserving this commercially                   
              exploited species.
