Title       : The Unity of Science: A Year-Long, Exploration-Oriented Interdisciplinary
               Science Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9455682

Award Number: 9455682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Dunn sdunn@mhc.mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom R. Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra N. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. Barry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. De Toma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this course is to develop an interdisciplinary  introductory science
              course for first-year college students that  will emphasize the methods and
              relevance of scientific inquiry.  Target students are primarily those students
              that do not intend  to major in a science. The course content is intended to
              include  interdisciplinary topics of broad interest in logical sequences.  We
              start, for example, with color vision (physiology, perception,  optics,
              spectroscopy), autumn foliage (isolation of chlorophyll,  photosynthesis, light
              as energy), and the origin of oxygen-rich  atmosphere (respiration, flow of
              energy through biosphere,  ecosystems). This theme (light, energy, and matter)
              then leads us  through topics in astronomy, physics, chemistry, geology, and 
              biology, all in context and without traditional discipline  boundaries.
              Laboratory demonstrations and exercises will be  exploration-driven with
              students actively participating in  defining the questions that are asked and
              how we look for  answers. In the last half of the year, small groups of
              students  will carry out self-directed research projects and present their 
              results to the class. Three faculty from different disciplines  will teach the
              course through lectures to the entire class  (approximately 1/3 of the
              meetings) and in smaller discussion  groups (2/3 of the meetings). Course
              content is able to evolve  and change depending on the faculty involved in a
              given year. A  lab director will facilitate weekly lab exercises, and senior 
              students from all disciplines will serve as teaching assistants  and role
              models. Students will be graded by the quality of  exploration reports,
              projects, and personal journals (no timed  exams). An Advisory Committee of
              outside persons will provide  input on course content and evaluation.
