Title       : Development of an Integrated, Multidisciplinary Science Literacy Course for
               Comprehensive Universities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9455440

Award Number: 9455440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin A. Pierce ben pierce@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann E. Rushing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent reports on the state of science education have identified  a need for
              more process-oriented, multidisciplinary science  courses; these reports also
              call for science courses that are  integrated within a coherent general
              education program. This  project will develop a two semester laboratory-based
              introductory  science course taught collaboratively by twelve faculty members 
              from six science disciplines. Called The Natural World, this  course will be
              modular in nature and centered around  multidisciplinary topics of current
              relevance.    The Natural World will emphasize the basic foundations of natural
               science, science as a way of knowing, the uses of science,  historical
              influences on the development of science, and the  interrelationships between
              science and culture. A unique aspect  of the Natural World will be its
              integration within a new core  curriculum of 38 hours that integrates the
              various academic  disciplines within a set of comprehensive and cohesive 
              interdisciplinary courses. The Natural World will be linked to  two humanities
              courses students will be taking concurrently.    Ten modules of
              interdisciplinary topics will be developed for use  in introductory science
              courses, each to include an instructors  guide, a student guide, suggestions
              for student and teacher  readings, writing assignments and laboratory exercises
              that  involve collaborative and discovery-based learning.
