Title       : Introductory Parallel Computing Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1994   
File        : a9455153

Award Number: 9455153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46303              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Fienup fienup@cs.uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Reflecting the improvement in parallel computer technology during  the past
              decade, parallel computing has emerged from the realm of  graduate study into
              the undergraduate curriculum at larger research  universities.  In 1991 the
              ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Curriculum Task Force  recommended the incorporation of
              several knowledge units related to  parallel computing into the curriculum of
              all undergraduate  computer science programs.  Unfortunately, at many small
              colleges  and universities, computer science faculty members possess little 
              experience in parallel computing.    To assist these computer science faculty
              in learning about parallel  computing, this project develops and implements two
              five-day  parallel computing workshops.  The workshops accommodates one- 
              hundred participants from small academic institutions lacking  faculty
              knowledgeable in the area of parallel computing.  The  workshop's main
              objectives are to:           provide participants with sufficient knowledge and
              hands-on  parallel programming experience so they can incorporate parallel 
              computing into their curriculum;           provide participants with
              educational materials to facilitate  incorporation of parallel computing into
              their curriculum; and           establish electronic mail capability between
              all participants  and the project directory for exchange of ideas, technical
              support,  and results relating to parallel computing.    After participants
              incorporate parallel computing into their  institution's curricula, these
              institution's undergraduate computer  science students will be better prepared
              for their professional  field.  Additionally, educational materials developed
              for the  workshops will be published, and made available electronically by 
              anonymous ftp.  This will assist other academic institutions  interested in
              incorporating parallel computing into their  curricula, or hosting similar
              workshops.
