Title       : State University of New York (SUNY) Pre-Precalculus Program:Empowering
               Underprepared Two and Four Year College Mathematics Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9455638

Award Number: 9455638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Shuart shuart@oswego.oswego.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol M. Poucher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred J. Patrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Pacitti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arlene H. Kleinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Oswego
	      
	      Oswego, NY  13126    315/341-2500

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The SUNY "Pre-Precalculus Project" is aimed at a large and  growing number of
              mathematically underprepared and/or unmotivated  students at both two- and
              four-year colleges. To address the many  special needs of students who fail to
              achieve in courses such as  introductory or intermediate algebra at the college
              level, this  project is developing a new approach to pre-precalculus featuring 
              a revamped curriculum involving contextual problem-solving, an  integrated use
              of technology, an improved pedagogy emphasizing  active, collaborative efforts
              by students and faculty, and  authentic assessment tied more closely to the
              course and real  world skills. A series of curriculum development workshops
              over a  two-year period is addressing these issues. The goal of the  project is
              the design of a sequence of two 4-hour pre-precalculus  courses and the
              creation of the instructional materials to  support them. These two courses are
              replacing all developmental  college mathematics courses prior to precalculus.
              As a result of  the diversity and expertise of this coalition of twelve SUNY 
              two-and four-year colleges, the project plans to empower students  with the
              mathematics they need in order to survive and flourish  in an increasingly
              technological and sophisticated 21st Century.  The model and materials
              developed by the project are appropriate  for many such underprepared students
              throughout the country.
