Title       : Enhanced Curriculum for Undergraduate Engineering Adult Learners in Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9455466

Award Number: 9455466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Owens tom owens@mail.und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary H. Pelton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The School of Engineering and Mines (SEM) in a partnership with  industry in
              1988 established three distance-learning  undergraduate engineering programs,
              offered in parallel with  corresponding traditional on-campus degrees. This
              initiative gave  access to an engineering education to students who, because of
               locations and schedules, otherwise could not pursue an  engineering education.
              The distance-learning students, by virtue  of their paraprofessional
              experience, have needs, expectations,  motivations, knowledge bases, and skills
              that differ from those  of traditional students. Thus, the curricula must be
              modified to  meet students' needs efficiently, incorporating their 
              experiential knowledge base and skills inventory, while  simultaneously
              ensuring validated compliance with ABET  accreditation standards. It is also
              critical that faculty develop  strategies for attaining maximum teaching
              effectiveness in the  distance-learning environment.    The stakeholders for
              the "Enhanced Curriculum for Undergraduate  Engineering Adult Learners in
              Industry"  include engineering  educators, industry, and undergraduate adult
              learners. Program  objectives include: (a) completing a comparison of a broad
              range  of cognitive and performance based competencies of  distance-education
              students and traditional students; (b)  enhancing curricula to meet the unique
              needs of adult learners  while adhering to ABET standards, (c) developing
              faculty members'  competencies needed to enhance teaching of non-traditional 
              learners; (d) evaluating program outcomes using summative and  formative
              techniques; e) disseminating results which document the  evolution of an ABET
              accredited, undergraduate distance-learning  program in engineering.
