Title       : The GeoSim Interface Library for Introductory Programming Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1995   
File        : a9455403

Award Number: 9455403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford A. Shaffer shaffer@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              N D. Barnette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455403  Shaffer  The GeoSim Interface Library (GIL) provides a common set of 
              Graphical User Interface functions for programs running under the 
              MS-DOS,Macintosh and X Windows programming environments.  Application program
              software is written to access GIL. In this way,  programs need only be written
              once to run under these three  programming environments. GIL handles most
              typical GUI tasks, such  as window display; backing store management for
              overlapping  windows; mouse interaction with buttons, drag regions, lists and 
              sliders. GIL supports help screens and alert boxes. GIL also  includes
              additional support for non-typical applications  development features such as
              log files, data file processing, and  time-driven functions independent of user
              interface objects and  actions (used for discrete event simulations).  Existing
              GUI  development systems do not provide the multi-platform capability 
              necessary for our diverse student population. Fortunately, GIL has  proven to
              be easy to use by students and researchers alike, and can  easily be adapted to
              class use. This proposal seeks to obtain the  modest manpower resources
              necessary to make GIL a tool that can be  used by undergraduates in
              introductory programming courses. GIL   provides a GUI library for use in
              writing class programming  assignments. Use of a GUI in introductory
              programming classes  allows students to begin early practice in writing
              applications  programs more like what they will do in their jobs. Enhancements
              to  the GIL system include a Graphical Interface Developer that allows 
              students to interactively place user interface elements on the  screen, better
              support for fonts and window backing store, and  classroom ready documentation
              and examples. GIL, including source  code and documentation, will be freely
              distributed via  tabsInternet.
