Title       : Using Iconic Environments to Teach Procedural and Object- Oriented Programming
               Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1995   
File        : a9455614

Award Number: 9455614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Bagert Don.Bagert@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben A. Calloni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455614  Bagert                                                1The question to
              be addressed is: Can icon-based programming  languages be used to teach
              first-year programming concepts to  undergraduate students more effective!y
              than text-based languages?  The specific objectives are: 1) To develop a
              complete set of course  materials for BACCII, an already-existing iconic
              programming  environment under ongoing development at Texas Tech University,
              and  use them in the first two computer programming courses. For this  project,
              the first course is an introduction to procedural  programming, software
              engineering, and C, while the second course  teaches concepts in
              object-oriented programming, data structures  and C++. 2) To determine whether
              iconic environments (and BACCII in  particular) can be used to more effectively
              teach procedural and  object-oriented programming concepts in the first two
              courses,  while still allowing students to learn the syntax of text-based 
              languages such as C and C++. The grant would test out the course  materials at
              Texas Tech, while a possible later grant would allow  for pilot programs to be
              started at five higher education  institutions. Data would be collected and
              evaluated not only for  the general student population of each course, but for
              various  groups such as women, underrepresented minorities and future 
              teachers. 3) To advance research in the area of using iconic  programming
              languages as learning environments. The results of the  data will allow for an
              evaluation of how future iconic languages  for learning programming skills
              should be developed. If it can be  demonstrated that iconic languages perform
              significantly better  than text-based languages in the learning of programming
              skills for  a wide variety of schools and student groups, it could 
              revolutionize how software development techniques are taught.
