Title       : Planetary Exploration in the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9455329

Award Number: 9455329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Binzel rpb@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Planetary exploration captures the imagination and interest  o students having
              both science and non-science backgrounds  and aspirations.  Current textbooks
              that simply present a  few pictures from planetary missions fail to capitalize
              on  the potential for utilizing the excitement of planetary  exploration as a
              theme for learning about physical processes  and the methods of science.  The
              project is developing a  curriculum that will build upon the appeal of space 
              exploration to promote interest in science and to teach  modern methods of
              scientific investigation and discovery.  It uses a hands-on approach in
              exploring processes which  shape planetary worlds using actual spacecraft
              images and  existing Macintosh computers.  Through a set of exercises, 
              students learn that scientific images are no longer pictures  in books. 
              Instead, modern scientific images are digital  objects that can be manipulated
              and examined in quantitative  detail.  Spacecraft images are used to motivate
              scientific  inquiry but the curriculum also emphasizes that digital  imaging is
              becoming inherent to all areas of beyond science.  The new curriculum involving
              digital imaging will be  incorporated into our introductory level classes which
               attract a broad cross section of science and non-science  students.  These
              students should carry their scientific and  digital imaging experience with
              them as new tools in their  pursuit of majors and careers in all areas of
              science,  engineering, medicine, humanities, and education.  Because  the
              curriculum is at the introductory science level and uses  both images and
              software available in the public domain (for  both Macintosh and PCs), these
              exercises can be available  for wide use in other colleges, universities, and
              high  schools.
