Title       : Workshop on Parallel Processing: Architecture and Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1994  
File        : a9455050

Award Number: 9455050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41203              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lan Jin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shigeko Seki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno Fdn
	      4910 N. Chestnut Ave
	      Fresno, CA  93726    559/278-0840

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Parallel processing is a new and fast growing field of computer  science. It is
              a comprehensive discipline, covering fundamental  concepts and techniques of
              parallel architecture, programming, and  algorithms.  The rapid development of
              parallel processing in recent  years has been incurring a significant impact on
              college education.   This project is a nine-day workshop on Parallel
              Processing:   Architecture and Programming,  bringing together 35 college and 
              university faculty members from all over the country to learn the  basic theory
              and practice in this new field of Computer Science and  discuss the issues of
              enhancing the undergraduate curriculum by  Parallel Processing.  The workshop 
              introduces the participants to  topics that can be used to enhance
              undergraduate courses in  computer organization, computer architecture,
              computer systems,  parallel processing, programming languages, concurrent
              programming,  design and analysis of algorithms, and theory of computation. 
              The  workshop emphasizes practical programming activities in Applied  Parallel
              Processing and Graphics Laboratory at California State  University-Fresno, the
              establishment of which has been supported by  NSF Instrumentation and
              Laboratory Improvement Program.  The workshop offers six two-hour tutorial
              lectures by Lan Jin,  Shigeko Seki, and Lan Yang.  Each lecture is followed by
              a one-hour  discussion and three-hour laboratory work.  The lectures address 
              fundamentals of parallel processing, shared-variable and message-  passing
              programming, parallel algorithms, and major parallel  architectures.  Three
              panel discussions are organized on the topics  such as curriculum design and
              teaching methodologies, laboratory  development, and trends of development of
              parallel processing.  The  workshop pays great attention to follow-up
              activities including an  active electronic forum throughout the academic year
              after the  workshop.
