Title       : Career Direction through Integrated Introductory Biology- Chemistry Laboratory
               and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1996  
File        : a9455288

Award Number: 9455288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Godrick godrick@biology.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emma Previato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Hausman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Standish C. Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Samuel  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is  a three step sequential undergraduate  biology-chemistry
              experience to retain science majors and to  inspire them to enter research
              careers. Step I occurs in a  student's first year with an integration of the
              second semester  laboratories of the majors' Introductory Biology and Chemistry
               courses. Lectures remain separate. In order to follow the student  experience
              of the integrated laboratories and to retain and build  upon student interest
              in science research, Step II is a required  Career Seminar course in Spring of
              the sophomore year. Seminar  speakers from academia, medicine, and industry 
              serve as hosts  for students participating in Step III, a Summer Research 
              internship between the second and third years of college. Steps  II and III
              function together in the sophomore year to provide a  practical application of
              the integrated first year laboratories  and to reinforce research career goals.
              Two laboratory sections  concurrently participate in Step I to pursue a number
              of  nontraditional, investigative laboratory modules which integrate  concepts
              from cell biology, molecular genetics, and general  chemistry. Seven hours per
              week is divided into formal laboratory  investigation, discussion, and comeback
              time. Over a 12-week  period four modules are presented. These integrated,
              modular  laboratories will examine (1) Vitamin C Metabolism, (2) Reaction 
              Dynamics of Enzymes, (3) Sources of Energy for Life, and (4)  Manipulation of
              Macromolecule. During the final week of each  module, students analyze data,
              draw conclusions and in selected  modules, design their own original
              investigations based on  previous experimentation. Mathematic tutorials are
              available.  This integrated, biological-chemical modular format directly 
              relates to and prepares science majors for modern  research-oriented upper
              division courses and parallel a realistic  career research experience. One
              section of the integrated  biology-chemistry laboratories is comprised entirely
              of women for  comparison with  the other two of mixed gender and with the 
              traditional separate biology and chemistry laboratories for the  other
              students.
