Title       : General Education Course Development for Earth System Science and Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9455714

Award Number: 9455714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Graumlich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger C. Bales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Leavitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine K. Hirschboeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate science education for both students majoring in  science and
              engineering, and those students who are non-science  majors must evolve to
              bring students in contact with the tools  needed to efficiently grasp critical
              and emerging scientific  issues. In 1991, the University of Arizona started a
              two-semester  sequence "Introduction to Global Change" to teach non-science 
              majors about the Earth system. The course teaches basic  scientific principles
              in the context of global problems and  challenges facing scientists, policy
              makers and citizens alike.  The current project further develops this
              general-science course  sequence in order to more fully integrate information 
              technologies into the courses, and to explicitly design materials  that promote
              collaborative learning and critical thinking skills  through several different
              instructional strategies.  PIs are  working with an independent, professional
              evaluator to develop  and implement 10 modules for the two-course sequence. A
              module is  a course unit focusing on a single topic, and involves laboratory 
              sections, lectures, homework, discussions or other resources. The  focus of
              their efforts is on: i) developing computer-based  laboratory exercises as the
              centerpieces of the modules, ii)  implementing the computer-based tools with
              the classes, iii)  assembling and preparing the additional material needed to 
              complete each module (e.g. visual aids, study questions,  background material,
              references), and iv) documenting each module  in a workbook for the classes.
              The workbook, including  documentation of software and data, will be made
              available to  faculty at other colleges and universities interested in 
              developing similar global-change courses.  An important aspect of  this project
              is the explicit assessment of the effectiveness of  different instructional
              strategies on students of different  gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic
              class. This  multidisciplinary teaching effort is part of the University of 
              Arizona's global-change resea rch program.
