Title       : New Geology Laboratories: Interactive Data Acquisition, Analysis, and Multimedia
               Modules of Geologic Phenomena, Part II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9455300

Award Number: 9455300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis S. Hodge glgden@UBVMS.CC.BUFFALO.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Reitan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus I. Bursik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Sheridan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This  project  brings an individualized approach  to  science  in  large 
              introductory  courses for non-science and  science  majors  through 
              participatory  geoscience  laboratories.   Use  of   the  multimedia products
              developed to date show that this new approach  produces  excitement  and 
              increased  comprehension.   Field  and  laboratory  data acquisition,
              statistical analysis, and  computer  modeling  of  complex  systems,  are 
              elements  throughout.   The  laboratories  develop skills such as field  and 
              laboratory  data  gathering,  graphical analysis, statistics of data, 
              mathematical  representation  of  results, map representation  of  information,
               computer modeling, synthesis and simulation of complex phenomena,  and  the
              interaction of science and society.  The topics  of  the  laboratories in this
              proposal include earthquakes, mass  wasting,  topography,  surface  water
              chemistry, and  earth  resources  and  materials.  The end products of the
              development will be a  CD-ROM  and  a  paper  laboratory manual.  The
              multimedia  components  in  SuperCard  can  be  used for instruction. These 
              modules  contain  extensive  visual  material  of geologic  phenomena, 
              interactive  computer  models  of significant physical principles,  video  and 
              audio  segments  of geologic processes and simulation  models  of  complex
              geologic problems.
