Title       : Curriculum Development - Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9455764

Award Number: 9455764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert English english@adminl.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Dolan  (Principal Investigator former)
              James G. Hudgings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455764  Dolan  This project is Phase II of a two-phase project to develop a
              two-  course sequence in Manufacturing Systems. The sequence can serve as  a
              model for manufacturing systems nationally. The project involves  the New
              Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) as the lead  institution for the
              North/Central Educational Technology  Educational Consortium and Camden County
              College as lead  institution for the Southern CIM Technology Consortium. The 
              consortia operate fully articulated programs aimed at the AAS and  BSET degree
              in Manufacturing Engineering Technology. The consortia  involve all community
              colleges in New Jersey, 13 in the Northern  Consortium and 6 in the Southern
              Consortium.  Articulated curricula  of the two consortia include a two-course
              sequence in Manufacturing  Systems. The sequence is critical to the success of
              the program. We  have noted significant deviations in course content and
              emphasis  amongst the consortial colleges.  This project will involve faculty 
              from the consortial colleges in development of model curricula and  training
              modules for the Manufacturing Systems sequence. It will  also identify
              possibilities for sharing of laboratory resources in  support of the model. 
              The first phase of the project is complete.  This involved soliciting input
              from the manufacturing sector on  required skills which should be attained from
              the sequence. It also  involved the development of the model curricula and
              training  modules for the first course in the sequence, Manufacturing Systems 
              I (Introduction to Manufacturing Systems). Draft copies of the  first modules
              have been distributed to consortial colleges and were  also distributed at the 
              NSF Project IMPACT Conference held in June  1994 in Washington, D.C.  The
              second phase of the project involves  the development of model curricula and
              training modules for the  second course in the sequence, Manufacturing System
              II (Advanced  Manufacturing Systems). It also involves identification of 
              laboratory resources throughout the  consortia and procedures for  arranging
              use in support of the model. Pre-publication editing,  printing, and
              distribution of the final products are also included  in this second phase.
