Title       : Preparing Leaders for Mechatronics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9455124

Award Number: 9455124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sema E. Alptekin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Mechatronics" is a strategy which involves integrating mechanical  engineering,
              electronic engineering and computer science into the  fundamental design
              process, rather than engineering each set of  requirements separately. This
              project will conduct an intensive  summer workshop and a follow-up conference
              to enhance the  knowledge, skills and instructional capabilities of 40 
              undergraduate faculty members drawn from institutions throughout  the USA to
              launch and lead interdisciplinary courses in  "Mechatronics Education" at their
              institutions. The workshop will  illustrate how mechatronics engineering
              concepts can be  successfully introduced at the undergraduate level in an
              integrated  way--from the design of complex products to final manufacturing.   
              The program will be offered in the following three phases: A  six-day
              Residential Workshop at CalPoly (Summer '95) involving  hands-on projects and
              demonstrations on design and manufacturing of  complex products and concurrent
              engineering, a two-day follow-up  session at an industrial site (Summer '96) in
              which participants  report on efforts to introduce new concepts at their home 
              institutions. During a one year follow-through phase, the  participants will
              utilize electronic mail and teleconference  facilities to exchange ideas.   
              The participants will be provided with ample opportunities to gain  hands-on
              experience with several traditional and state-of-the-art  manufacturing
              processes as well as concurrent engineering tools.  Lecture notes,
              comprehensive multi-media course material  demonstrating the equipment,
              software and the manufacturing  processes used by the participants during the
              workshop in the  design and fabrication of the complex products will be
              prepared and  will be made available to the participants.    The follow-up
              activities will be in the form of a conference that  will be held at an
              industrial site, and industry participation will  be provided through tours of
              plants in the San Francisco bay area.  Conference proceedings  in which the
              participants report on their  accomplishments will be prepared as an outcome of
              the workshop.  Several papers will be submitted for publication, and
              presentations  will be made at national ASEE conferences.
