Title       : A Workshop Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9455920

Award Number: 9455920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1625000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Gosser gosser@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Radel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1032,1046,7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The City College Consortium, which includes ten senior and  community colleges
              at the City University of New York, and the  Universities of Pittsburgh,
              Pennsyslvania, and Rochester, is  developing and applying widely a new model of
              teaching.  This  model, called Workshop Chemistry, introduces participation and
               mentorship by recent completers of the course.  Small group,  student-led
              workshops are integral to the course structure.  Each  week two workshops of an
              hour each complement the lecture and  laboratory components.  The workshop
              model provides a collaborative  learning experience that increases student
              involvement and provides  a new role for students as mentors.  In Workshop
              Chemistry,  students learn the problem solving, communication, and teamwork 
              skills crucial for success in the workplace while learning  chemistry more
              effectively.  Working together with the faculty,  students become an active
              part of the community of the department.  A prototype workshop model has been
              developed at City College in a  general chemistry course for science and
              engineering majors, and is  being expanded and refined for a broad range of
              courses including  preparatory chemistry, chemistry for allied health sciences,
               organic chemistry, instrumental, and analytical chemistry.  The  experience of
              students as workshop leaders provides a natural  introduction to teaching that
              is being formalized through a Teacher  Preparation component of the project. 
              The workshop method is also  being exploited and applied in curricula for
              technician training,  an initiative relevant to Advanced Technology Education. 
              The project evaluates Workshop Chemistry and disseminates it beyond  the bounds
              of the consortium.  Student Workshop Manuals that  include the problem solving,
              model building, and simulation  activities of the workshops are being produced
              for each course.   New project partners will be invited to view workshops, to 
              participate in faculty developments, and to implement pilot  workshop courses
              at their own ins titutions.
