Title       : Enhancement of Faculty Design Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1994   
File        : a9455062

Award Number: 9455062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lovas clovas@seas.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Packman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Enhancement of Faculty Design Capabilities" is a two-week workshop  offered
              during the summer at Southern Methodist University. The  workshop is offered
              for all engineering disciplines and faculty  that intend to or are presently
              teaching design in engineering  courses to undergraduate students. The workshop
              strives to address  needs of faculty from two-year and four-year institutions
              who teach  non-design, or engineering science, courses and desire to include 
              design into the course work.    The workshop addresses topics in design
              methodologies, design  content, design constraints, design tools, and teaching
              design  through a multi-faceted format using lectures, laboratory sessions, 
              discussion sessions, work sessions and industrial tours.  Participants will be
              expected to develop a design plan, design  problems, design projects, and
              design case studies. Workshop  participants will work individually, in
              single-discipline teams,  and in multi-discipline teams to design materials for
              use  incorporation into courses at their home institution. Faculty  leaving
              this workshop will have a design plan, design materials for  courses, a plan of
              implementation at the home institution, and a  network of design faculty with
              whom to interact.    This workshop will guide faculty to a different way of
              thinking, a  freshened approach to processes and procedures of design synthesis
               as opposed to highly analytical skills generally emphasized in  research
              activities and engineering science courses.
