Title       : Integrating Geographic Information Systems Into Undergraduate Environmental
               Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1998   
File        : a9455331

Award Number: 9455331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Cromartie jamie.cromartie@stockton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455331  Cromartie  Geographic Information Systems (GIS) computer programs are
              powerful  tools for spatial data analysis and mapping, widely used by 
              environmental professionals.  Specific GIS curricula, however, are  not
              available for undergraduate environmental studies.  The goal of  this project
              is to design, develop and test an integrated set of  core environmental science
              modules, incorporating GIS and related  technologies. All components, lecture,
              laboratory, and field, are  linked through the GIS in a multi-media framework. 
              An  interdisciplinary setting is provided for modules for the core  courses. 
              Advanced students are involved in developing, testing,  and implementing the
              new modules as teaching assistants in the core  courses. Modules emphasize
              self-paced instruction, collaborative  learning, group learning, and
              student-initiated projects. There are  plans to assess the pedagogical effect
              of the integrated strategy.   The revised curriculum represents a significantly
              improved  education practice for undergraduate environmental studies  students,
              other science majors and non-science majors. Study of  fundamental scientific
              concepts are integrated with study of  management, decision making, and ethics
              in a technically  sophisticated framework. The project demonstrates how GIS can
               enhance problem solving, critical thinking and communication  skills. 
              Nationally, this project will serve as a model for  environmental science. It
              will produce sets of interactive  courseware and manuals that other programs
              can adapt to their own  curricula. These will be disseminated electronically
              and through  publications and workshops. Because the course materials will 
              conform to a national consensus curriculum, other institutions  should be able
              to incorporate them with minimal modifications.
