Title       : Undergraduate Curriculum Development on Mechatronic Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9455395

Award Number: 9455395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai-Ran Hsu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nabil A. Ibrahim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1032,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455395  Hsu                                                   The short-term
              objective of this proposal is to develop five new  courses and two laboratories
              in mechatronic systems engineering by  a Taskforce that includes faculty
              members from Mechanical,  Electrical, Computer, General Engineering and Physics
              Departments  at the San Jose State University, and from local high tech 
              industry. Two faculty members from Mission College, part of the  California
              Community College System which supplies 70% of the  incoming studnets to the
              California State University System, are  also involved in the laboratory
              development.  In addition to new  course development significant improvements
              will be made in 4  exisiting courses and 5 existing laboratories.  The
              long-term objective of our activities is to establish a center  for
              Mechatronics engineering education built on the success of the  above
              short-term effort. This center will assist other institutions  in the nation to
              establish mechatronic curricula for single or  interdisciplinary engineering
              departments, as well as for human  resource development for industry.  The
              proposed curriculum will be built on three pillars: (1) the  fundamental
              principles of Mechatronic Technology, (2) the hands-on  experience, and (3) the
              application of Mechatronic Technology to  the industry in the region. Contents
              in Pillar (1) and (2) will be  made readily transportable to other institutions
              whereas the  content in Pillar (3) can be developed with assistance of local 
              industry and can be transported to other institutions in a similar  industrial
              setting. This model will benefit universities and  industries in other regions
              who seek to develop similar models.  Instructional materials developed from
              this project will be  disseminated to other institutions and industry through
              computer  links by means of multi-media CD-ROMs. Every effort will be made to 
              present results at conferences of various professional societies,  as well as
              publications in open literature. The Taskf orce will also  host a faculty
              enhancement workshop to disseminate initial results  and to gather additional
              input after the first year of the project.   An effort will be made to garner
              additional funding in the future  in order to offer workshops in the project's
              second and third years  of the development.
