Title       : Aerospace Concepts for Elementary Education Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9455346

Award Number: 9455346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce F. Carroll bfc@aero.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Abbitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Cronin-Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is a critical need to improve the quality of science  instruction in
              elementary school classrooms. We address this need  by having College of
              Engineering faculty offer a course for  elementary education majors that
              focuses on current engineering  topics and, more importantly, to present
              material in such a way  that future teachers will be able to use the material
              in their  classrooms. This is accomplished by first introducing the  scientific
              principles of an engineering topic, then providing  instruction in an
              appropriate teaching method, and finally  completing the topic with a
              laboratory session that involves  projects that can be used in an elementary
              classroom.    The course is being developed by engineering and education 
              faculty in collaboration with elementary school teachers.  We  will offer each
              topic as a module to facilitate portability to  the elementary classroom and to
              allow offering the course for  either one, two, or three credit hours. We are
              targeting  pre-service elementary majors although the course is suitable for 
              in-service teachers and could be easily tailored to accommodate  middle-school
              participants.    We are collaborating with College of Education faculty to
              overlap  this course with their existing science teaching methods course.  We
              expect that participants will be more confident with science  topics and, using
              our material, will be able to teach science  more effectively. Dissemination of
              the developed materials will  occur via presentation at professional meetings
              within the state  and nationally. In addition, we are creating a textbook to 
              accompany the course. We will evaluate the effectiveness of the  course by
              interviewing participants and College of Education  faculty.
