Title       : Imaging the Universe: A New Curriculum for Undergraduate Astronomy Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9455621

Award Number: 9455621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81660              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Mutel robert-mutel@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project extends and enhances the development of an innovative undergraduate
              astronomy curriculum based on CCD cameras and robotic telescopes.  The emphasis
              of the new curriculum is hands-on planning and analysis of the student's own
              images rather than traditional methods using observations from professional
              astronomers.  The primary audience is the non-science major in large
              introductory courses.    The project has three components.    The first is
              revisions and additions to the new laboratory curriculum already written.  We
              have developed fourteen observing laboratories as well as fifteen computer
              based tutorial exercises during the current grant period.  Based on comments
              from teaching assistants and students who have used the draft version of the
              curriculum, we will revise existing labs and add about fifteen additional labs.
               The revisions will attempt to make the hands-on approach more direct, make the
              mathematical level more nearly uniform, and better emphasize the imaginative
              and creative skills of the students.  The new observing labs will cover
              astronomical topics not yet addressed in the current manual,, including orbits
              of minor solar system objects, properties of variable stars, variability in
              active galaxies, and spectral line observation of nebulae and bright stars. 
              New computer-based laboratories will include extensive use of the astronomy
              databases and images available over the Internet using the Mosaic user
              interface.    The second component is the development of a software system to
              schedule and control a automated telescope system using commercially available
              hardware.  the system would be completely self-contained and controllable from
              any site on the Internet.  We have already developed a prototype system for a
              custom mount and dome using a low cost PC.  The system would allow interested
              colleges and universities to set up a complete CCD-based laboratory for large
              introductory classes with minimal effort and expense.  It could also be used to
              operate remote dark-site tel escopes which could be shared among several
              schools.    The third component is the development of an HTML Internet site at
              the University of Iowa for dissemination of on-line information related to the
              use of CCD cameras and robotic telescopes in the teaching of astronomy.
