Title       : Discovery - Based CAI Fundamentals of Science Course focusedon Relationship
               Thinking, History of Science, and Math Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9455599

Award Number: 9455599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula J. Ray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Syed G. Rabbani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Texas College
	      
	      Killeen, TX  765409990    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project being developed will meet a demonstrated need to  provide an
              interesting, challenging entry level science course in  community colleges to
              improve the success rates of educationally  disadvantaged students. Many
              students are under prepared for  mastering concepts in college-level biological
              and physical  sciences because they do not understand principles which use 
              relationship thinking. The objective is to develop an  interdisciplinary,
              experiment-based FUNdamentals of Science  course with a history-of-science
              theme and discovery methods to  investigate measurement, density, gas laws,
              electric circuits,  and light, including lasers. Relationship thinking and
              skills to  use math as a tool will be developed by having students use a 
              computer program to create graphs of relationships from data.    The program
              will target the many new and returning students who  function at approximately
              the intermediate algebra level. This  group includes especially women,
              African-Americans, and Hispanics  who need a successful experience in their
              introduction to the  sciences. Three four-year college professionals in
              undergraduate  science education have agreed to serve as advisors for this 
              project. Student progress will be tracked and analyzed. Detailed  explanations
              for integrating experiments and computers into the  entry level course will be
              developed and disseminated. A workshop  (Innovations in Science Teaching) to
              present the methodology and  materials developed will be scheduled for science
              teachers,  including teachers from area secondary schools.
