Title       : Establishing New Traditions: Revitalizing the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9455928

Award Number: 9455928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3899577            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Moore jwmoore@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clark R. Landis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1032,1046,7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project's goal establishes new traditions in the chemistry  curriculum that
              optimize opportunities for all students to learn  chemical facts and concepts,
              develop and pursue interests in  chemistry and chemistry-related disciplines,
              and appreciate how an  understanding of chemistry is important to life and
              living.  We are  changing fundamentally the ways students, faculty, and 
              administrators view their roles, creating a student-centered,  active-learning
              emphasis.  We have a broad range of reforms, each  of which is developed,
              tested, modified, thoroughly evaluated, and  widely disseminated.  We address
              five main areas that apply to all  levels of the curriculum: student-focused
              active learning; inquiry-  based/open-ended laboratories; interdisciplinary
              course clusters to  create learning communities; a topic-oriented curriculum;
              and  information technology/computer tools.  Each development in each  area is
              carefully evaluated, and only the best survive.  Evaluation  provides important
              information about the process of transfer of  innovations among institutions of
              different types.  To insure that  our reforms are useful for all students, our
              consortium includes  industry, public and private four-year institutions,
              minority  institutions, and two-year colleges.  The project gives special 
              emphasis to students who choose teaching as a career option by  main-streaming
              these students in courses which benefit them in both  content and pedagogy.
              Students, including those in Science  Education, are fully integrated in the
              development and  implementation of the project, working on both research topics
              and  evaluation.  The project also gives special emphasis to community  college
              students in Advanced Technological Education programs to  ensure that they are
              given the newly developed curriculum.  The  students in the ATE program will
              clearly benefit by being provided  the five main areas of thrust that this
              coalition is developing.   All the Students emerge with greater comprehension
              and better  re tention of chemical knowledge, improved ability to apply
              chemical  concepts to new problems, enhanced appreciation of the relation 
              between chemistry and other disciplines, and skills that enable  them to work
              effectively in multidisciplinary teams.
