Title       : CAREER: Methods and Mechanisms for Micro Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9875367

Award Number: 9875367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl F. Bohringer karl@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875367
Bohringer
There exist important applications that are difficult or
              impossible to realize with current technology. For example, the following two
              items are directly related to NSF strategic areas: (a) techniques to
              efficiently move, sort, or mix small particles (e.g. cells in biotechnology
              applications); (b) methods for massively parallel assembly of microfabricated
              components (e.g. for advanced manufacturing technology of high resolution
              display or imaging arrays). Towards the general goal of micro manipulation we
              identify three major directions along which we pursue our
              research:
(1)	microfluidic manipulation of parts;
(2)	massively parallel
              micro assembly; and
(3)	computational tools for modeling and
              simulation.

Our goal is to build practical devices for micro manipulation,
              and to develop the underlying scientific concepts and enabling technologies.
              Microfluidic manipulation is the basis for analysis and synthesis devices in
              many biotechnology applications. Parallel microassembly is an enabling
              technology that will allow the efficient manufacture of a new generation of
              complex microsystems from simpler or standard components. In analogy to the
              development of ICs, the growing complexity of microsystems will require
              sophisticated computational tools for modeling and simulation.

One of the
              key items on the educational agenda of this project is to provide students with
              hands-on engineering experience and with training in state-of-the-art
              technology.  Our new MEMS laboratory provides opportunities to perform exciting
              research at undergraduate, masters, and PhD. level. The newly developed class
              "UWEE 539: Micro Electro Mechanical Systems" that the P1 will teach for the
              first time in Fall '98 will emphasize practical, interdisciplinary training in
              microtechnology, and it will provide the students with a cooperative learning
              experience. Working in MEMS labs at Cornell, Stanford, and Berkeley has taught
              the P1 that in this interdisciplinary field of research teamwork is extremely
              important. Students will be guided to work in teams organized for example by
              role (designing and testing - checking and verifying), or by complementary
              field of expertise.
***





