Title       : PECASE: Collaborative Negotiation Methodology for Large-Scale Infrastructure
               Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9875557

Award Number: 9875557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Feniosky Pena-Mora feniosky@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Feniosky Pena-Mora
9875557
ABSTRACT 
---------

The objective of the
              proposed CAREER program is to develop a negotiation
methodology and tool for
              large-scale collaborative infrastructure projects.
The proposed methodology
              and tool will help: 1) organize negotiation
knowledge into a structure that
              enables systematic and scientific
exploration; 2) formally model the
              structural and substantive issues of
negotiations in large-scale
              infrastructure projects; and 3) understand and
model how communication
              technologies influence the pattern of such
negotiations.  In addition, the
              proposed methodology and practical tool
will help engineers and designers
              establish negotiation strategies for
mitigating and resolving engineering
              conflicts in large-scale
infrastructure projects. Such a comprehensive
              negotiation methodology and
tool is expected to provide benefits for the
              entire life cycle of the
project by reducing costs, avoiding delays,
              eliminating counterproductive
negotiation plans, and improving negotiation
              skills among engineers working
on large-scale infrastructure projects.

In
              addition, the project will develop an integrated research laboratory
              and
classroom alliance aimed at improving the understanding of negotiation
              and
collaboration in the domain of large-scale engineering systems. 
              This
effort will place tomorrow's communication and collaboration
              technologies
along with the understanding of how to use it most effectively,
              into the
hands of the next generation of professionals. This will be
              accomplished
through a unique research-industry-education-research feedback
              loop created
by the participation of five universities, two corporate
              entities, and one
public agency. The core of the research will be achieved
              through a formal
analysis cycle starting with information acquisition,
              formalization,
systematization, testing, refinement, and ending with
              information
dissemination. In this program, practice, research and education
              are
expected to work in an integrated fashion to understand and
              master
negotiation strategies in large-scale infrastructure projects
              requiring
collaboration between global teams. 

The proposed program
              provides excellent benefits both, from the research
and educational
              perspectives in analyzing systematic negotiation strategies
for large-scale
              infrastructure projects.  From the research perspective,
the key intellectual
              contribution of this work is the acquisition,
formalization, systematization,
              testing and dissemination of a partially
formalized structure of the existing
              negotiation knowledge, where the
fundamental questions about collaboration and
              negotiation could start to be
answered.  From the educational perspective, the
              proposed class will
provide a forum in which the impact of a negotiation
              methodology addressing
the issues of time and distance on project life cycle
              will be explored.
Finally, the class will include the participation and
              guidance of seasoned
industry professionals in a controlled environment with
              real-world data. 




