Title       : CAREER: Magnetic Anisotropy in Cobalt Alloy Films used in Hard Disk Recording
               Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1999   
File        : a9875545

Award Number: 9875545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Ross caross@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875545
Ross

This CAREER proposal concerns the magnetic properties of thin
              cobalt-alloy films used in hard disk recording media.  The goals of the
              research component of the proposal are to determine the origin of in-plane
              magnetic anisotropy, which is observed in films deposited over non-planar
              substrates, and which is critical in determining the recording performance of
              hard disk devices.  The educational goals, related to this application, are
              designed to equip students for careers in the data storage industry.

Data
              are stored in hard disks as magnetization patterns written into a sputtered
              cobalt-alloy thin film, usually deposited onto a chromium underlayer.  Surface
              scratches are commonly introduced into hard disk substrates before sputtering
              to improve the tribological behavior of the head-disk interface.  However, when
              the Cr/Co-alloy bilayer film is sputtered onto a scratched or grooved
              substrate, it is found that the in-plane coercivity, remanence and squareness
              are higher parallel to the grooves.  This anisotropy can be large, even for
              shallow grooves, but the origin of the anisotropy is not well understood.  The
              goal of this research is to clarify how the structure of the magnetic films is
              affected by substrate topography, and to explain how this leads to magnetic
              anisotropy and affects device performance.  Additionally, the importance of the
              epitaxial relation between the Cr and the Co-alloy in determining magnetic
              properties will be investigated.  This research has significance in the hard
              disk industry as well as in other magnetic thin-film devices such as sensors or
              elements in magnetoresistive readback heads.

The proposed work will use
              unique submicron lithography facilities established at the NanoStructures
              Laboratory at MIT to prepare large-area substrates with controlled submicron
              topographies.  This will allow the anisotropy created by deposition over
              well-defined substrate features to be measured.  The major objectives of the
              proposed work are: - to quantify the contribution of specific substrate
              topographic features (grooves, ridges, steps) to magnetic anisotropy in
              Co-alloy films - to relate the anisotropy to structural features of the film,
              including grain shape, c-axis orientation, internal stress, and the epitaxial
              relation between the Cr and Co-alloy layers - based on these findings, to
              propose methods for controlling magnetic anisotropy in thin films - in
              collaboration with an industrial partner, to fabricate magnetic media with
              controlled surface features, in order to demonstrate how the magnetic recording
              properties of a hard disk can be modified by design of the surface
              topography.

The educational element of this proposal will focus on
              development of links between students and the magnetics industry, with the aim
              of strengthening knowledge transfer between university and industry and
              enhancing the career prospects of students in this important sector.  This
              multi-billion dollar industry provides many opportunities for employment, yet
              its strong demands for well-prepared graduates are not being met by traditional
              education and training in electronic materials science and engineering.  Course
              development will include an emphasis on magnetic devices and materials in
              lectures and laboratory classes, the introduction of a short course including
              guest lecturers from industry and a visit to a local company, the creation of a
              Magnetic Devices interest group to help students and industrial research groups
              interact effectively, and outreach activities to high school
              teachers.
***



