Title       : Career: Non-parametric Multi-scale Statistical Models for Natural Signals and
               Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1999   
File        : a9875866

Award Number: 9875866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Viola viola@ai.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports the study of image processing and vision. Vision is
              perhaps the most complex and powerful capability that we possess. Intriguingly
              vision develops gradually as we grow from infancy to adulthood. This research
              focuses on two related questions: What is the fundamental structure of visual
              images that allow this type of learning? What algorithms can be used to learn
              this structure? Answers to these questions have bearing on the recognition of
              complex visual patterns, the generation of computer graphics images, and the
              study of human perception. The technical emphasis of this effort is based on
              the observation that the distribution of natural images is far from uniform. On
              the contrary, real images have complex and important statistical structure that
              can be exploited for image processing, recognition and analysis. Based on these
              insights, the investigator has developed a non-parametric multi-scale
              statistical model for images that can be used for recognition, image processing
              and in a ``generative mode'' to synthesize high quality textures. In this
              effort the theoretical underpinnings of these algorithms as well as the
              application to other processing problems are studied. In addition, the award is
              supporting the development of a class and textbook on the statistical structure
              of natural images. While emphasizing fundamentals, the course draws together
              advances in computer vision, image processing, digital television, image
              compression, the psychology of vision, and the neural basis of vision.


