Title       : CAREER: Linking Signals to Cell Cycle and Polarity in Filamentous Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a9875976

Award Number: 9875976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Kron skron@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Kron's laboratory uses a simple eukaryotic cell, the budding yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae, to ask how organisms coordinately control cell shape
              and cell proliferation as they respond to environmental stimuli. Proper cell
              shape requires control over the organization of the cytoskeleton and of
              interactions between cells and their surroundings.  Progress in the cell
              division cycle must be tied to availability of nutrients and to cell
              growth.

In this CAREER proposal, Dr. Kron focuses on the filamentous growth
              response to nitrogen starvation, a model developmental switch in yeast. 
              Nitrogen-starved yeast undergo a dimorphic switch and grow in chains of cells
              that extend out from the colony center, foraging for nutrient.  Filamentous
              cells are distinct from cells that grow on rich media.  They form long tubular
              buds rather than small round buds.  This may result from the long period of bud
              growth before onset of mitosis and the marked polarization of actin and
              secretion to the bud tip during the budded period.  Previous work revealed a
              MAP kinase signaling pathway that receives the nitrogen starvation signal and
              induces the dimorphic switch but the link from signal to altered cell cycle
              progression and polarized growth remained unclear.  Now, manipulation of the
              cell cycle machinery has shown that it is necessary for the MAPK pathway to
              turn off the cell cycle kinase Cdc28 and delay mitosis to induce filamentous
              differentiation.  Remarkably, a simple delay in mitosis is sufficient to induce
              cells to polarize and differentiate into filamentous cells even without a MAPK
              signal.  These results establish a path from signal to cell cycle to
              polarity.

Dr. Kron's career development goals are to use budding yeast and
              the filamentous growth response as a model system with which to reveal
              molecular connections linking cell shape and cell division and as a teaching
              tool with which to show young scientists how decisive experiments expose order
              behind complex phenomena.  Toward this end, the research section of this
              proposal addresses two open questions: 1) How does the MAPK signal impinge on
              the cell cycle machinery? and 2) How does the cell cycle machinery control cell
              polarization?  Dr. Kron proposes to identify mutations in Cdc28 that block
              signal transduction from the MAPK pathway to the cytoskeleton.  He will then
              seek genes that when overexpressed can repair the defects in signaling and
              polarization.  These will be tested to determine whether they are the missing
              links that connect signal to cell cycle or cell cycle to cytoskeleton.

The
              teaching section focuses on the hypothesis that for promising young biology
              students to bloom into successful researchers, they should learn about research
              early in their undergraduate careers.  Dr. Kron will teach a course to
              first-year students who have 'placed out' of introductory courses based on
              outstanding secondary school preparation.  This course will focus on teaching
              how science moves forward rather than on listing what has already been done. 
              Dr. Kron will bring students and postdoctoral fellows from his own and
              colleagues' research groups to join him in the classroom and laboratory to
              describe and demonstrate their own work as examples.  The students will discuss
              current literature, perform experiments with unknown outcomes and complete the
              course with mini-projects drawn from Dr. Kron's studies of yeast growth and
              development.  Finally, the students will be offered the opportunity to continue
              their work with Dr. Kron or to begin research in other laboratories at the
              university as a start on their research careers.

