Title       : CAREER: A Gait Powered, Active Above-Knee Prosthesis: Synthesis and Mechanical
               Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a9875530

Award Number: 9875530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim D. Reisinger REISINGE_K@POPMAIL.FIRN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on active prostheses, which are capable of generating
              and sustaining knee joint torques. Active porstheses are advantageous over
              conventional passive prostheses, since the latter cannot generate knee torques
              in response to the amputee's demands or in opposition to externally applied
              torques and thus have limited usefulness for activities requiring weight
              bearing on a partially flexed knee. The project investigates a unique power
              source - the dynamics of the gait cycle - to provide sufficient energy that can
              be recovered, stored and used by active prostheses for torque generation. A
              knee-ankle actuator that can recover energy from the gait cycle and generate
              knee joint torques for gait and stair climb will be modeled, designed, and
              built.   An extensive experimental study will evaluate its energy recovery and
              active torque generation capab - ilities.  The education component focuses on
              the development of biomechanical engineering courses, targeted at graduate
              students and upper level undergraduates, that promote interaction between
              engineering students and clinical and medical professionals, emphasizing the
              importance of communication and collaboration for improved treatments and
              devices. A biomechanics laboratory supporting analytical and experimental
              research projects will be developed to facilitate research efforts and to
              provide experimental support to course topics. Other educational objectives
              include promoting distance learning, and encouraging women and underrepresented
              minorities to pursue careers in engineering.

