Title       : CAREER: Protein Unfolding by Energy Dependent Proteases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a9875857

Award Number: 9875857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Matouschek matouschek@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9875857
The goal of this project is to determine the mechanism of unfolding of
              substrate proteins during degradation by ATP-dependent proteases.  Most protein
              degradation in cells outside the vacuole or the lysosome is catalyzed by
              ATP-dependent proteases.  Unfolding of the substrate protein is a critical
              early step in the degradation process.  Degradation of short-lived proteins is
              essential for a wide range of cellular functions including cell cycle control,
              signal transduction and antigen presentation.  Proteolysis of misfolded
              proteins is part of the cellular response to stress.  Barnase, whose folding is
              well characterized in vitro, was chosen as an artificial substrate protein for
              the ATP-dependent proteases lon-protease, Clp-protease, mitochondrial
              AAA-protease and the proteasome. Barnase unfolding during degradation will be
              compared to spontaneous unfolding to determine whether protein unfolding is
              catalyzed by the proteases.  Destabilized barnase mutants will be used as
              models for misfolded proteins and barnase mutants with C-terminal degradation
              tags will be used as models for short-lived regulatory proteins.  If unfolding
              is catalyzed, the mechanism of catalysis will be determined.  The educational
              aim of this award is to teach undergraduate students the prerequisites for a
              biochemical and biophysical understanding of cell biological processes.  For
              this purpose a laboratory course on quantitative biophysical techniques will be
              developed.

Lay summary

Proteins are chains made from subunits called
              amino acids.  To perform their biological function, proteins fold into a
              specific three-dimensional shape.  However, there are essential processes in
              the cell for which proteins must unfold again, such as when damaged or
              regulatory proteins are degraded by proteases. Failure to degrade regulatory
              proteins and misfolded proteins leads to abnormal cellular function.  This
              proposal investigates how proteases unfold proteins.
Biology has reached a
              stage where it is possible to determine the
detailed mechanisms of processes
              in the cell.  To prepare students for this new era in experimental biology, a
              laboratory course on quantitative methods in cell biology will be developed. 

