Title       : CAREER: Orthopaedic Biomechanics Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2001   
File        : a9875838

Award Number: 9875838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjolein C.H. van der Meulen mcv3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875838
van der Meulen
This Career Development proposal develops an integrated
              four-year plan for Orthopaedic Biomechanics at Cornell University. The proposal
              develops three specific objectives: (1) to understand the relationship between
              in vivo mechanical loading and skeletal functional adaptation from analytical
              models of trabecular bone adaptation experiments; (2) to integrate
              biomechanical engineering into the mechanical engineering curriculum; and, (3)
              to introduce mechanical and biomechanical engineering to precollege students,
              particularly women.

The relationship between skeletal loading and bone
              functional adaptation will be examined in analytical models of trabecular bone
              adaptation experiments being performed at the Hospital for Special Surgery. A
              device has been designed to apply a known compressive force to the trabecular
              bone of the rabbit distal femur. Three-dimensional micro-computed tomography
              scans of the loaded region will be converted into large-scale finite element
              models. These models of trabecular morphology will be used to understand the
              interaction between applied loading and trabecular bone adaptation. This
              proposal will: (1) develop three-dimensional simulations of experimental
              adaptation which will relate experiments and analyses at the microstructural
              level; (2) determine in vivo loading for the experiments; (3) measure and
              incorporate experimental parameters; and, (4) develop next generation material
              models which are more precise than the current uniform, isotropic approach. The
              goal of this work is to improve the ability to model and interpret in vivo
              adaptation experiments, leading ultimately to the ability to simulate and
              predict future experiments. The outcome will have implications for the
              understanding of skeletal pathologies such as osteoporosis. 

As part of the
              education plan, biomechanical engineering case studies and projects will be
              integrated into the undergraduate design curriculum. The foundation of these
              projects will be similar to the proposed research: integration of experimental
              and analytical methodology. The addition of interesting, realistic
              interdisciplinary projects will provide students experience with problem-based
              and cooperative learning and will help develop engineering skills to ensure
              future success. Bone functional adaptation will also be incorporated into the
              curriculum. In addition, an integrated case-based graduate curriculum is being
              implemented for first year biomechanics students.

Finally, workshops and
              outreach programs will introduce precollege students to mechanical and
              biomechanical engineering. Hands-on biomechanics and mechanical dissection
              workshops will introduce precollege students to mechanics fundamentals. The
              focus will be on developing pipeline programs to present engineering to girls.
              


