Title       : Leptin and Reproduction in Free-Ranging Bats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9875871

Award Number: 9875871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric P. Widmaier widmaier@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Kunz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9875871
Widmaier
The existence of a circulating factor that regulates body
              weight in mammals has long been postulated.  This hormone, now known as leptin,
              was identified in 1994, and found to be secreted from adipose (fat) tissue. 
              Leptin signals the brain to reduce appetite and increase metabolic rate. 
              Recently, it has become apparent that leptin levels in the blood are elevated
              during pregnancy in several mammalian species, including human beings.  This,
              and other evidence, has led to the hypothesis that leptin may play previously
              unrecognized but important roles in the maintenance of pregnancy and the
              preparation for lactation.  The work proposed in this application is designed
              to investigate this hypothesis, first by determining what tissues secrete
              leptin during pregnancy, then by determining what factors control its
              secretion, and ultimately determining what functions leptin performs in the
              pregnant animal.  These goals will be facilitated by the ability to measure
              small amounts of leptin production from animal tissues in the culture dish. 
              Dr. Widmaier proposes that the placenta becomes a significant source of
              circulating leptin during pregnancy and that reproductive hormones like
              estrogen and cortisol stimulate leptin production in placenta.  Dr. Widmaier
              also proposes that the brain becomes less sensitive to leptin during pregnancy,
              permitting an increased appetite during pregnancy.  These questions will be
              examined in free-ranging bats.  A better appreciation of the hormonal
              correlates of reproduction will not only improve our ability to treat
              reproductive disorders in people, but will increase our ability to successfully
              maintain populations of ecologically important animal species.  Finally, a
              better appreciation of the actions of leptin and the control of its secretion
              will improve our understanding of body weight pathologies in human and animal
              populations.
