Title       : CAREER: A Unified Framework for Analysis and Synthesis of Feedforward ANNs,
               Integrating Fault Tolerance (FT), Generalization, Intrinsic Capacity/Redundancy
               and Learning Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1999   
File        : a9875705

Award Number: 9875705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dhananjay Phatak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875705
Phatak
SUNY Binghamton
The goals of this project will be to
              (1)Generate and/or extend fundamental results unifying the inter-related
              attributes of fault tolerance, generalization and intrinsic capacity/complexity
              of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) into coherent framework which will enhance
              the on-going research in robust, fault tolerant and reconfigurable control
              systems within the department. (2) Train present and future
              engineers/scientists in the new emerging technologies by developing courses in
              ANNS, their applications, and their implementations (digital and analog VLSI,
              and optical); an parallel distributed architectures/systems. Research
              development will be continually integrated into the curriculum. WWW and
              state-of-the-art multimedia tools will also be incorporated. (3) Provide a
              bridge at the ANN architecture level, between the current strengths of the EE
              and Industrial Engineering Department in VLSI hardware implementation, robust,
              fault tolerant control and intelligent systems, respectively. (4) Expand
              industrial partnership (both under the auspices of the recently created
              Engineering. School-wide Center for Intelligent Systems as well as through
              individual initiative) to increase the practical relevance of the
              research.
Neural or connectionist computation is an emerging technology with a
              variety of potential application such as classification, estimation, control,
              etc. As ANNs mature into commercial systems, they are likely to be implemented
              in hardware. Their fault tolerance and reliability are therefore vital to the
              functioning of the system in which they are embedded. Due to their similarity
              with biological systems, the fault tolerance properties of ANNs have been taken
              for granted or treated as a subsidiary issue. However, the PI's prior research
              demonstrates that the fault tolerance of ANNs comes at the cost of significant
              amount of redundancy. Furthermore, merely providing redundancy is not enough;
              better learning algorithms and synthesis methods must be developed in order to
              achieve a satisfactory fault tolerance. Also fault tolerance is closely related
              to generalization, which is in turn connected with the complexity of the task
              at hand. Despite the close connection, which is in mm connected between these
              attributes, they have been analyzed separately for the most part a in previous
              work. This project develops a new, more unified approach.

