Title       : CAREER: A Rational Framework for In-situ Geotechnical and Pavement
               Characterization by Wave Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a9875495

Award Number: 9875495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bojan B. Guzina guzina@wave.ce.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9875495 
Bojan B. Guzina 
University of Minnesota 

CAREER:  A Rational
              Framework for In-situ Geotechnical and Pavement Characterization by Wave
              Methods 

ABSTRACT   

The aim of this project is to provide an advanced
              analytical and experimental basis for site characterization by wave methods and
              to integrate the fundamentals of elastic wave propagation and non-destructive
              testing into the civil engineering curriculum.  Making use of current
              computational power, research will be conducted to develop a hybrid technique
              for realistic site characterization that would account for the
              three-dimensional nature of the induced wave propagation, soil stiffness,
              density and damping in a systematic and rigorous manner.  It includes the
              developments in forward and inverse wave propagation analyses and their
              implementation into an effective field technique for seismic sounding of
              geotechnical sites and pavements.  In addition to revealing the in-situ wave
              velocity and attenuation profiles, the new method will be capable of furnishing
              the independent stiffness and mass density information that is typically not
              available from seismic measurements.  A comprehensive delineation of dynamic
              soil, rock and asphalt properties by means of the proposed technique may find
              use in a wide range of applications such as planning of geotechnical sampling
              programs, design of foundations to dynamic loads, evaluation of the soil
              liquefaction potential, and pavement monitoring and repair.  To facilitate the
              implementation phase of the project, a collaboration with the Minnesota
              Department of Transportation has been established which will provide access to
              an appropriate field testing equipment and a unique experimentation site.  The
              foregoing research program will be conducted in conjunction with a curriculum
              development effort to foster the growing use of non-destructive testing in
              civil engineering.  To this end, efforts will be directed to design a new
              course on wave methods in civil engineering, and to develop a set of digital
              instructional modules that would introduce students to the fundamentals of
              elastic wave propagation and their applications to field and laboratory testing
              by wave methods.  
