Title       : CAREER: Exploring Nanostructures Based on Atomically Ordered 2D Dopant Patterns
               in Si
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a9875129

Award Number: 9875129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tsung-Cheng Shen tcshen@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875129
Shen
This CAREER project explores nanoscale science and technology in
              semiconductor materials and electronics. The research activity is aimed at
              opening a new interface between materials science and nanotechnology. A novel
              strategy is employed for fabricating nanoscale conducting pathways in silicon
              by epitaxially encapsulating atomically ordered 2D dopant patterns; this
              involves (1)patterning H-terminated Si surfaces by desorbing H-atoms with an
              e-beam from a scanning tunneling microscope (STM), (2)dosing with
              dopant-containing precursors such as PH3 and B2H6 which react with bare Si but
              not with Si-H surfaces. The precursor molecules form self-ordered arrays when
              adsorbed onto bare Si, which help to avoid dopant clustering and ensure uniform
              coverage within the STM-exposed regions, (3)overgrowth of epitaxial Si to
              activate individual dopants and encapsulate these nanoscale circuit patterns
              into bulk silicon. A primary objective is to study electron transport between
              nanoscale dopant patterns controlled by a gate voltage. When electrically
              activated, the Bohr radius for individual donors such as P or As is roughly 2.5
              nm, so that electrically each dopant atom is ~5 nm in diameter at low
              temperatures. Wavefunctions on different donor sites begin to overlap at
              separations of ~10 nm, causing tunneling and preventing carrier freeze-out at
              average densities in excess of 108 cm-3. The ability to accurately position
              dopants on a scale smaller than 10 nm thus implies the potential for detailed
              control over wavefunction overlap and a possible means to fabricate artificial
              conducting lattices of any desired 2D geometry. 3D circuits may be realized by
              repeating the three-step process.
Selective deposition and decomposition of
              precursor molecules on various Si hydride surfaces and epitaxial growth of Si
              layers over the dopant-saturated patterns will be systematically studied.
              Processes from initial surface preparation to final electrical contact will be
              assessed for preservation of the nanoscale buried dopant patterns.
              Low-temperature characterization techniques will be developed to monitor the
              electrical properties of the fabricated structures.
%%%
The project addresses
              fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic materials
              and advanced devices. The scope of the project will expose students to
              challenges from materials growth, surface physics, surface chemistry, and
              device physics. An important feature of the program is the emphasis on
              education, and on the integration of research and education to enhance learning
              through discovery through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant research area. Integrated skills and knowledge in
              these areas will provide a solid basis for future careers in materials science,
              physics, and electron device technology.

