Title       : CAREER: Deformation Mechanisms in Thin Metal Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a9875119

Award Number: 9875119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shefford P. Baker shefford.baker@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875119
Baker

This CAREER grant explores the special mechanical properties
              that arise in very small volumes and integrates it with a modern education
              program in the area of mechanical properties of materials.  The research
              focuses on deformation mechanisms in thin metal films on substrates.  It is now
              recognized that the mechanical behavior of such films may be very different
              from that of the same metals in bulk form. The mechanical properties and the
              behavior of dislocations in thin metal films on substrates are examined in
              detail via a unique combination of efforts.  Stress measurements are conducted
              using a unique ultra-high-vacuum sputter deposition combined with a substrate
              curvature measurement system.  Advanced microstructural characterization is
              carried out using transmission electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction
              methods.  Mechanical behavior and microstructure are simulated using finite
              element and discrete dislocation dynamics methods. By comparing the results of
              these efforts, detailed knowledge is generated on how microstructural and
              dimensional constraints on deformation lead to unique film behavior. The
              educational portion integrates a modern view of mechanical properties into the
              Cornell materials curriculum, bringing specialized knowledge regarding
              mechanical properties in small dimensions to individuals in both academe and
              industry.  Three courses in mechanical properties are planned: a broad
              introduction for undergraduates, a high level graduate level course, and a
              specialized course at the graduate level which focuses on aspects on mechanical
              properties specific to small dimensions.  Opportunities are offered for
              interested external learners to obtain up-to-date information regarding
              mechanical properties in small dimensions through a series of tutorials and an
              electronic course for remote learners.
%%%
This detailed study of dislocation
              interactions and of dislocation behavior near film/substrate and
              film/passivation interfaces is important to understanding bulk behavior.  Since
              metal films on substrates are critical elements in a range of high-technology
              applications, the research should generate knowledge of immediate use to
              industry, in particular with respect to understanding and improving reliability
              in microelectronics, micromechanical and optical devices, and coatings. 
              
***

9875119
Baker

This CAREER grant explores the special mechanical
              properties that arise in very small volumes and integrates it with a modern
              education program in the area of mechanical properties of materials.  The
              research focuses on deformation mechanisms in thin metal films on substrates. 
              It is now recognized that the mechanical behavior of such films may be very
              different from that of the same metals in bulk form. The mechanical properties
              and the behavior of dislocations in thin metal films on substrates are examined
              in detail via a unique combination of efforts.  Stress measurements are
              conducted using a unique ultra-high-vacuum sputter deposition combined with a
              substrate curvature measurement system.  Advanced microstructural
              characterization is carried out using transmission electron microscopy and
              x-ray diffraction methods.  Mechanical behavior and microstructure are
              simulated using finite element and discrete dislocation dynamics methods. By
              comparing the results of these efforts, detailed knowledge is generated on how
              microstructural and dimensional constraints on deformation lead to unique film
              behavior. The educational portion integrates a modern view of mechanical
              properties into the Cornell materials curriculum, bringing specialized
              knowledge regarding mechanical properties in small dimensions to individuals in
              both academe and industry.  Three courses in mechanical properties are planned:
              a broad introduction for undergraduates, a high level graduate level course,
              and a specialized course at the graduate level which focuses on aspects on
              mechanical properties specific to small dimensions.  Opportunities are offered
              for interested external learners to obtain up-to-date information regarding
              mechanical properties in small dimensions through a series of tutorials and an
              electronic course for remote learners.
%%%
This detailed study of dislocation
              interactions and of dislocation behavior near film/substrate and
              film/passivation interfaces is important to understanding bulk behavior.  Since
              metal films on substrates are critical elements in a range of high-technology
              applications, the research should generate knowledge of immediate use to
              industry, in particular with respect to understanding and improving reliability
              in microelectronics, micromechanical and optical devices, and coatings. 
              
***


