Title       : Fabrication of Nanoparticle Assemblies in Ordered Polymeric Matrices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a9875256

Award Number: 9875256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Genzer Jan_Genzer@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875256
Genzer
Hybrids comprising dispersions of nanoparticles in insulating
              matrices represent a novel class of materials.  Unusual optical, electrical and
              magnetic properties are expected in nanocomposites with controlled spatial
              distribution of the embedded nanoparticles.  These can be utilized in the
              fabrication of future generation devices, such as high-density magnetic storage
              materials, molecular semiconductors, or optical coatings transparent to some
              wavelengths but opaque to others.  This CAREER award will investigate the
              formation, organization, and physical properties of nanocomposites made of
              periodically modulated arrays of nanoparticles embedded in self-organized
              two-component polymer matrices deposited onto solid substrates.  The
              organization and spatial distribution of the nanoparticles will be adjusted by
              tailoring the structural properties of the host polymer material.  In
              particular, by using mixtures of diblock copolymers (or mixtures of diblock
              copolymers and homopolymers) or by using laterally phase-separated polymer
              blends, the dimensions of the structural features in the polymer matrix, and
              thus the distribution of the embedded nanoparticles, will range from several
              nanometers to several micrometers,  respectively.  A fine control over the
              morphology of the nanocomposite will be achieved by suitably adjusting the
              molecular parameters of the polymers (molecular weight, processing temperature,
              copolymer architecture, and mixture composition) and tuning the interactions at
              the matrix/substrate and matrix/particle interfaces.  Initial research efforts
              will focus on studying the formation and morphology of the mesoscopic
              structures, investigating the interplay between the polymer/particle
              interactions, and probing the ordering mechanisms as a function of the host-and
              guest- properties.  Subsequent work will be devoted to determining the optical,
              electrical, magnetic, and transport properties of the newly generated
              structures.
%%%
The research program will be complemented by a comprehensive
              teaching curriculum.  Both undergraduate and graduate education in the areas of
              polymeric materials and self-assembly will be advanced by:  teaching a course
              about experimental methods in interfacial polymer science (with the emphasis on
              capabilities and application of experimental techniques); developing a new
              course on self-assembly in materials; emphasizing cooperative learning; and
              applying a number of different tutoring styles in the classroom and the
              laboratory.  These educational efforts will offer students an opportunity to
              broaden their education scope, learn to work in teams, and master experimental
              and communication skills.  The overall goal is to prepare the students for
              employment or for future graduate studies in engineering.
***        

