Title       : Novel Regulation of the Transcription Initiator Factor, GABP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a9875271

Award Number: 9875271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Martin martinma@health.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Martin
GABP plays a central role in coordinating expression of numerous
              respiratory genes, including that of mitochondrial transcription factor 1,
              which, in turn, regulates  mitochondrial gene transcription and DNA
              replication.  Thus, GABP activity directly links nuclear and mitochondrial gene
              expression. Moreover, the DNA-binding activity of the GABPa subunit is
              sensitive to cellular redox state, offering a potential mechanism for negative
              feedback regulation of respiratory gene expression. GABP is composed of two
              subunits, GABPa and GABPb which form heterodimeric and heterotetrameric
              complexes bound to DNA containing one or two GABP binding sites, respectively.
              The aims of the project are two-fold. Firstly, the project will define and
              characterize the role of GABPa as a redox sensor, through redox changes at
              three cysteines in the DNA binding and dimerization domains of the GABPa
              subunit. The research will examine by site-directed mutagenesis and deletion
              analysis,  the functional consequences of sulfhydryl modification of GABPa
              cysteines on DNA binding and dimerization with GABPb. The physiological impact
              of  mutant GABP proteins expressed in cultured cells will be assessed and may
              help illuminate the processes of mitochondrial biogenesis and electron
              transport chain assembly. GABP binds to a single GABP binding site in vitro as
              a dimer.  Transcriptional activation by GABP requires the a2b2 heterotetrameric
              form of the protein, yet promoters containing a single GABP binding site are
              known to be regulated by GABP.  Clearly, other mechanisms capable of
              facilitating tetramer assembly on a single PEA3/EBS site must exist. As a
              second objective, the project will characterize the assembly of GABP dimer and
              tetramer complexes  in  the presence and absence of DNA by analytical
              ultracentrifugation.   Regions of GABPa and GABPb proteins involved in
              regulation of tetramer assembly will be identified through analysis of mutants
              altered in tetramer complex assembly. Identification of sequences in GABPa and
              GABPb that facilitate assembly of the GABP hetero-tetramer complex may offer
              insights into physiological mechanisms (e.g., phosphorylation) for regulating
              tetramer formation.

Eukaryotic cells generate energy through  activities
              associated with the subcellular organelle known as the mitochondria. The
              correct regulation of this process is essential for the growth and maintenance
              of all cells. The research will provide valuable insights into the mechanisms
              by which mammalian cells coordinate the essential activity of mitochondrial
              energy production.  Through the characterization of the gene regulator, GABP,
              this research will further the understanding of mitochondrial biogenesis and
              regulation of cellular energy production.

