Title       : CAREER: Dynamic Freight and Fleet Management: Modeling, Algorithm Development
               and Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9875675

Award Number: 9875675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amelia C. Regan aregan@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Dynamic Freight and Fleet Management: Modeling, Algorithm Development and
              Implementation

The proposed project involves the development of an
              integrated research and teaching program.  Its educational aim is to define the
              goals of a graduate program in transportation systems engineering (systems
              analysis and applied operations research) which includes a significant
              logistics component, to create a graduate sequence in freight network analysis
              and logistics and to guide the development of a four course undergraduate
              sequence in computer and mathematical methods for Civil and Environmental
              Engineering.  

The research focus is in the area of dynamic freight and
              fleet management. Commercial vehicle operations are increasingly dominated by
              operations which require that decisions be made in real-time, as changes in
              customer demands, traffic network conditions, and the availability of resources
              (vehicles, drivers, repair equipment, etc.) occur.  The rapid development of
              advanced information technologies suitable for use in real-time operations has
              outpaced the development of algorithms and implementable systems to support
              dynamic fleet management.  The proposed research involves algorithm development
              aimed specifically at time-constrained and stochastic fleet and freight
              management systems coupled with modeling efforts which focus on the
              representation of freight transportation networks with a sufficient degree of
              operational realism in order to draw reasonable inferences into the likelihood
              of successful implementation of the algorithms developed. Applications include
              trucking operations, (long haul truckload, less-than-truckload and intermodal
              drayage between maritime ports, railheads and air freight terminals), local
              package pickup and delivery operations and urban service fleets.





