Title       : CAREER: Cosmology: Theoretical Research, Data Analysis with Student Involvement,
               and Curriculum Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1999      
File        : a9875031

Award Number: 9875031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharat Ratra ratra@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,1217,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Abstract
AST 98-75031
Ratra

The current flood of cosmological data,
              including cosmic microwave background (CMB) anisotropy observations, enables
              inter- comparison of a broad range of cosmological models. The CMB (and other)
              data will be compared with several models to determine the tightest possible
              constraints on cosmological parameter values, and so test theories of the very
              early universe. The successful conclusion of this program will have profound
              consequences for astronomical and laboratory searches for dark matter in the
              Universe, extragalactic astrophysics, general relativity, and very high-energy
              particle physics. The excitement engendered by, and the conceptual simplicity
              of CMB anisotropy experiments makes it possible to directly involve
              undergraduates in frontier research, and to expand the physics curriculum to
              include aspects of modern cosmology research.

This integrated research and
              education plan for career development will take advantage of opportunities
              afforded by the new data. Physics undergraduates will mathematically
              characterize CMB anisotropy experiments and determine the angular scales to
              which they are sensitive (their "window functions"). A Web site will be
              developed to disseminate these window functions, thus providing a uniform and
              highly accurate characterization of all CMB experiments (a resource that will
              be of great use for theorists and experimentalists). Novel but observationally
              consistent cosmogonies will be developed. CMB anisotropies will be computed in
              these models, for a wide range of cosmological parameters. Improved statistical
              techniques (that account for experimental systematic uncertainties) will be
              developed to use these predictions, in conjunction with the CMB experimental
              window functions and data, to constrain cosmological parameters. Correlation
              techniques will be used to compare the microwave data to possible foreground
              contaminant data, to assess the amount of, and remove any non-CMB foreground
              contamination. Results from analyses of many CMB experiments will be combined
              with those from analyses of other cosmological data to determine the tightest
              possible constraints on cosmological-parameter values, and so test cosmic
              structure formation models. The favored models will be used to make predictions
              for what should be seen by the MAP and Planck Surveyor space missions.
An
              upper-level undergraduate and graduate cosmogony curriculum, that incorporates
              topics of current research and uses interactive multimedia tools, will be
              developed. This will be complemented by focussed lecture series, reading
              courses, and special departmental colloquia from well-established cosmologists.
              The goal is to help students develop the quantitative reasoning abilities
              needed for research in this exciting area of modern physics, and that will
              serve them well for possible employment in any technology-related field.  The
              research of the Kansas State University Physics Education Group on effective
              physics teaching and learning will be utilized while designing this curriculum.
              Their expertise, assistance, and infrastructure will be used to extend this
              curriculum to the introductory level, to sustain the natural curiosity of
              students for things astronomical, and to attract students from traditionally
              under-represented groups to physics. The longer-range goal is to develop a
              partially Web-based, introductory cosmogony course into a completely Web-based
              distance-learning one.
The extensive overlap between the educational and
              research activities is deliberately designed to ensure that they reinforce each
              other. This ambitious but realistic and achievable career development plan will
              significantly advance fundamental cosmogonical knowledge while simultaneously
              strengthening many different aspects of modern science education at Kansas
              State University.

