Title       : CAREER: Coordinated Application of Constitutive Models, Simulation and
               Experiment for Study of Metal Forming Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a9875154

Award Number: 9875154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armand J. Beaudoin abeaudoi@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                	Deformation properties of metals are typically established in a controlled
              laboratory environment.  The resulting mathematical models are then applied to
              complex processes of the modern industrial facility -- with success often
              impaired by the disparity between theory and practice.  This Career Award
              supports research into the coordination of experimental test regimes and
              detailed computer models for metal behavior.  Augmenting experimental trials
              with computer simulation, detailed examination is made for processing pathways
              having complexity between a routine laboratory test and a plant production
              practice. The goal is to improve the predictive capability of computer models,
              then utilize the simulations to further development of novel, more efficient
              processes. 
	This exercise of physically motivated models in a manner that
              bears insight to practical industrial processing quite naturally encourages
              application of classroom knowledge to real-world practice.  Projects for
              incremental improvement - motivated through industrial liaison - are of ideal
              scope for the senior-level undergraduate design course. Here, the undergraduate
              gains gentle introduction to modern engineering practice.  The
              multidisciplinary aspect of the research necessarily leads the graduate student
              toward interaction with researchers in both industry and government
              laboratories.  Viewed as a whole, this research and educational program renders
              a path for professional development with both a foundation in basic science and
              application to industry.

