Title       : CAREER: Activation of the Vibrio fischeri Luminescence Operon via Quorum Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9875479

Award Number: 9875479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Stevens ams@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1156,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Stevens

LuxR from Vibrio fischeri is the best understood member of a new
              family of bacterial activators of transcription.  These activators are involved
              in the cell density-dependent phenomenon of quorum sensing and response to
              self-generated acyl homoserine lactone environmental signals.  The goal of this
              research project is to determine the molecular mechanism of transcriptional
              activation employed at the luxI promoter during quorum sensing.  The primary
              focus will be to further define the roles of LuxR and RNA polymerase (RNAP) in
              this process using a combination of genetic and biochemical approaches.  Active
              full-length LuxR will be purified and its activity characterized in vitro. 
              Specific regions of RNAP that are essential for transcriptional activation at
              the luxI promoter will be identified.  The residues on LuxR that are essential
              for transcriptional activation at the luxI promoter will be further defined. 
              Intergenic suppressors that identify protein-protein interaction sites between
              LuxR and RNAP will be isolated.  Finally, intragenic suppressors within LuxR
              that define interdomain interactions will also be isolated.  The knowledge
              gained from these studies will be relevant to the growing number of bacterial
              systems that have been found to use a quorum sensing and response regulatory
              scheme.  The incorporation into the instructional curriculum of the latest
              findings and theories coming out of emerging research fields like quorum
              sensing, is essential to the training of the next generation of
              microbiologists.  Thus, an educational plan has also been developed with the
              primary goal of exposing undergraduate and graduate students to the current
              field of research in molecular microbiology, with a particular emphasis on
              microbial physiology and genetics.  This will necessitate a coordinated
              discussion of curriculum at the departmental level followed by the design and
              implementation of appropriate new lecture and laboratory courses. To help
              optimize the quality of the students' learning experiences in these and other
              courses, the instructor will continue to gain knowledge in the areas of
              learning theory, instructional design, assessment and educational technologies.
               As a result of these efforts, modern molecular microbiology will become a
              standard part of the departmental curriculum used to educate and train students
              for their future professional careers in microbiology and related disciplines.
              

The idea that bacterial cells are capable of intercellular communication
              and coordinated behavior as multicellular units through a process known as
              quorum sensing is a relatively new, but important concept in the field of
              microbiology. Bacterial cells are able to control these processes at the level
              of gene expression through the activity of protein molecules know as
              transcriptional regulators. LuxR is the name given to the best understood
              member of a family of transcriptional regulators whose members all have similar
              functions. This LuxR family of transcriptional regulators controls the
              expression of a range of target genes involved in a number of bacterial
              processes of scientific, medical, agricultural and economic importance. 
              Several of them, including LuxR, are found in bacteria that enter either
              helpful symbiotic, or harmful pathogenic associations with plant, animal or
              human hosts. A detailed knowledge of the precise molecular and biochemical
              functions of the LuxR family of transcriptional regulators may be useful for
              identifying compounds that interfere with these associations. This research
              focuses on further defining some of these properties for LuxR.



