Title       : CAREER: Image-Based Methods and Technologies for Three-Dimensional Computer
               Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9875859

Award Number: 9875859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard McMillan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Image-based rendering (IBR) is a new approach to computer graphics in which the
              underlying mode used to represent an environment is composed of a set of images
              rather than a collection of geometric primitives with associated surface
              properties. IBR offers several advantages over traditional computer graphics
              approaches.  First, image-based representations allow users to graphically
              explore objects and scenes that are captured from the real world. Second, these
              representations may be captured directly using digital cameras that exist today
              and which will become more prevalent in the future.  Finally, the display
              algorithms for IBR require modest computational resources, making them
              practical on desktop computers.

This research plan will address several
              major challenges in image-based rendering. The first is the development of new
              algorithms to overcome the limitations of existing image-based rendering
              techniques including: reducing the dependence of these algorithms on
              correspondence information, extending IBR techniques to accommodate dynamic
              environments, devising techniques to support immersive scene representations,
              and devising compact view-dependent representations. A second set of challenges
              that will be addressed is the automatic acquisition of image-based scene
              representations. This will be done by tightly coupling an array of randomly
              accessed image sensors with the computational elements required to generate the
              desired rendering. The benefit of this approach is that it can be architected
              to handle real-time scenes while making optimal use of available communication
              bandwidth and performing the minimum computation necessary. The third challenge
              addressed by this research is the need for high-performance image-based
              rendering hardware. The history of computer graphics has taught us that getting
              systems into the hands of early application developers is crucial to the
              field's development because it provides important feedback that shapes the
              future research agenda. High-performance hardware is a key step toward placing
              IBR techniques into the hands of application developers.

The results of this
              research will benefit many different areas such as remote telepresence for
              deep-water or interplanetary exploration and medical applications. The research
              will also provide a new generation of tools for special effects in the motion
              picture industry, visual impact studies, architectural visualizations, military
              simulators, and video games.



