Title       : CAREER: Capturing the real world for computer graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9875365

Award Number: 9875365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Curless curless@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advances in digital camera and optical technology are rapidly changing the face
              of computer graphics and computer-aided geometric design.  Just a few years
              ago, these domains were primarily driven by painstaking user interaction. 
              Objects and their surface properties were modeled almost exclusively by hand
              
or were reconstructed from real measurements using scanned color textures,
              fragile computer vision techniques, and slow shape measurement methods based on
              touch probes.  In the past decade, largely due to the availability of
              geometrically stable imaging technology such as charge-coupled devices (CCD's),
              compact light sources such as laser diodes, and cost-effective custom optics,
              the ability to bring the real world into the computer has grown at an explosive
              rate.  Using these technologies we can acquire the shape and appearance of
              objects large and small.  This capability has applications in numerous fields
              including
mechanical design, reverse engineering, industrial inspection,
              medicine, special effects and games, and dissemination of museum
              artifacts.

This project will investigate a number of methods for bringing
              the shape and appearance of the real world into the computer.  In the area of
              shape capture, the research will span the 3D scanning pipeline: from improved
              range finding methods, to faster and more concise registration and
              reconstruction algorithms.  Further, traditional 2D images will be used to
              augment the pipeline at all stages.  In the area of appearance 
capture, two
              novel directions will be explored: modeling and rendering radiance functions
              over surfaces and sample-based methods for representing the manner in which
              objects of unknown geometry reflect and refract light.  The first direction
              promises to overcome some of the limitations of current, purely image-based
              rendering methods, while the latter represents a new paradigm for modeling
              light transport among real and synthetic objects.  The educational goals of the
              project include involving graduates and particularly undergraduates in both
              teaching and research.  In addition, a new "3D photography" course will be
              
developed.  Through lectures and hands-on projects, students will learn the
              principles and practice of capturing the shape and appearance of real world
              objects and then converting them into representations suitable for industrial
              design and computer animation.

