Title       : CAREER: Spatial Aspects of Pedogenesis and Soil Organic Carbon in the Great
               Lakes Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9875015

Award Number: 9875015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda R. Barrett barrett@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER research program addresses integrated, long-term research and
              educational activities that focus on the geography of soils as they relate to
              environmental issues in the Great Lakes region.  Soils assume an important role
              in global climate change because they constitute a sizable terrestrial carbon
              pool subject to alteration at a variety of time scales. Human land-use
              activities may affect the amount of carbon stored in the subsurface horizons of
              the acid, sandy parent materials common in northern Michigan by altering the
              delicate balance between processes of soil development and soil degradation
              (depodzolization).  This research explores the mechanisms by which soils
              develop and degrade, as well as the spatial distribution of these mechanisms in
              the upper Great Lakes region.  Comparison of soil development rates along a
              latitudinal transect will be accomplished by intensive sampling of four strand
              plain beach ridge chronosequences.  The seasonal movement of ions in soils on
              the beach ridges will be studied by long-term monitoring of the soil solution. 
              Human-induced soil degradation will be investigated by comparing soil solutions
              from soils under forest and non-forest vegetation types.  Organic carbon
              dynamics in subsurface horizons will be examined by a carbon isotope analysis
              using AMS radiocarbon dating of the organic carbon from different depths. 
              Differences in ages of this organic carbon under forest and non-forest
              vegetation are expected to reflect the magnitude of the depodzolization
              processes taking place in the non-forest sites.

Research activities will be
              complemented by educational activities designed to introduce undergraduate and
              graduate students with little science background to a variety of environmental
              issues.  Specific emphasis will be placed on soils and the role of soil as a
              terrestrial carbon pool.  At the undergraduate level, activities will focus on
              the development of Internet-based, student-centered learning activities for use
              as modules in two introductory courses.  Two new graduate courses will be
              developed, and they will use a project-based approach to help students explore
              environmental issues in geography and land use planning, including one course
              in which soil maps and other digital geospatial data will be used to estimate
              regional soil carbon pools.




