Title       : CAREER: Fast and Accurate Computations of Applied Eigenproblems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a9875201

Award Number: 9875201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ren-Cang Li rcli@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qiang Ye  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Eigenproblems appear ubiquitously all across applied science and 
engineering,
              and their efficient computations have become an 
integral part of related
              research and teaching. The research 
component of this proposal is concerned
              with numerical linear 
algebra problems that have significant impacts on
              related 
applications. Although the existing general purposed software
              
libraries such as LINPACK, EISPACK, and LAPACK solve many common 
eigenvalue
              and singular value problems quite efficiently, many 
problems from applied
              science and engineering such as primary 
eigenvector computations for object
              recognition in image 
processing can be solved much more efficiently if their
              own 
intrinsic characteristics that are mostly ignored by general 
purpose
              libraries are incorporated properly. This project
demonstrates that point of
              view with a preliminary and promising 
study that combines numerical linear
              algebra techniques and 
characteristics of image data to attack a huge
              eigenvalue 
(singular value) problem for a large set of high resolution
              
images. The research objective is to exploit in depth the structural
              properties of applied problems from their 
application background and,
              consequently, will develop accurate 
and efficient algorithms. The research
              into relative perturbation theory and highly relative accurate methods for
              matrix computational problems has been extremely active in the last ten years,
              and exciting advances are being made. The results could have a significant
              impact on research in other disciplines that previously used conventional
              algorithms to carry out eigenproblem computations.  The education component of
              this project is to implement a set of ideas and concrete projects, including
              the exploitation of new information technologies for more effective teaching
              such as avoiding too much time for students' note taking, keeping constantly in
              touch with struggling students, and bringing math material alive in the
              classroom.  The project is also concerned with modifying the curriculum of the
              existing two-semester numerical linear algebra courses to include applied
              problem lectures that ultimately will lead to a new course on solving applied
              computational problems.


