Title       : CAREER: New Synthetic Methods via Allyl Organometallics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1999  
File        : a9875013

Award Number: 9875013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Cook Gregory.Cook@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9146,9150,9178,MANU,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Cook's research explores new allylmetal chemistry from a nucleophilic
              as well as an electrophilic viewpoint.  Nucleophilic allylmetal species are
              well-known, but few if any act as nucleophiles toward other C-C pi bonds such
              as alkynes.  In fact, involvement of an allylindium in a competitive reaction
              with a terminal alkyne and an ester showed a distinct preference for reaction
              with the alkyne.  Further exploration of the factors controlling this reaction
              will be forthcoming from Cook's laboratory.  Electrophilic allylmetal chemistry
              is afforded by (pi-)allylpalladium species.  Professor Cook's group has devised
              a scheme whereby ring-opening, reversible, and catalytic formation of an
              allylpalladium results in epimerization of a stereogenic center to a single
              configuration.  Linking this process with nucleophilic addition to the
              transient allylpalladium has the potential to provide elaborate polyfunctional
              intermediates for elaboration into such products as optically pure non-natural
              amino acids.  Professor Cook's teaching initiative is highlighted by efforts to
              involve college chemistry teachers in a summer research program, including
              representatives of the Tribal Colleges.  Additionally, web-based instructional
              media are slated for further development, to include molecular animations in
              addition to an already-popular web site that offers course notes, general
              resources, and an anonymous mail form to enhance communication between student
              and professor.

With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program
              supports the research and teaching efforts of Dr. Gregory R. Cook of North
              Dakota State University.  Professor Cook's research deals with novel,
              fundamental chemical reactions that are employed for the construction of
              deceptively simple molecules that are often used in the pharmaceutical
              industry.  The fundamental nature of the processes being studied means that
              they could prove to be highly significant and have broad impact in chemistry. 
              Professor Cook's teaching initiatives include exposing teachers at small
              colleges (including the Tribal Colleges) to the excitement of scientific
              discovery in the laboratory setting, and developing communications and teaching
              tools that employ the latest web-and internet-based tools.
