Title       : CAREER: Synaptic Remodeling in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9875025

Award Number: 9875025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yishi Jin jin@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Synaptic Remodeling in C. elegans
Yishi Jin

Abstract
Synapses are
              specialized subcellular structures by which a neuron communicates with other
              neurons or muscle cells.  Most synapses formed during early embryogenesis are
              maintained precisely to ensure functional stability throughout the life of an
              animal.  However, preexisting synaptic connections can change in response to
              various environmental and growth-related signals.  The proposed research
              focuses on elucidating the molecular genetic mechanisms controlling synapse
              formation and remodeling in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. 
C. elegans
              is an excellent organism to study events occurring at synapses because of the
              simple anatomy and powerful genetics.  Six motor neurons are chosen as
              experimental objects because they remodel their synaptic patterns during
              development.  In young larvae, they receive synaptic inputs from the dorsal
              side of the animal and innervate ventral body muscles; in older larvae and
              adults, they receive synaptic inputs from the ventral side and innervate dorsal
              body muscles.  
A fluorescent marker is used to observe the synapses of these
              neurons in living animals.  Three sets of experiments will be carried out:
              first, to examine how the timing of the synaptic remodeling is regulated;
              second, to identify other genes involved in this process in genetic screens for
              mutants that exhibit defects in the synaptic patterns of these neurons; third,
              to analyze the function of the syd-1 gene, which appears to regulate synapse
              formation in the C. elegans nervous system.  
	Training in neurobiology is an
              integral part of an undergraduate biology education.  Neurobiology at
              University of California at Santa Cruz is underdeveloped because of the
              shortage in faculty with research interests in neurobiology.  The education
              goal in this proposal is to establish a coherent undergraduate curriculum in
              neurobiology and to incorporate the proposed research into undergraduate
              education. 
	Studies using simple organisms have been proven to be invaluable
              to the understanding of mechanisms that are evolutionarily conserved throughout
              the animal kingdom.  This work shall shed light on the understanding of other
              kinds of neural plasticity, such as those involved in learning, memory,
              adaptation, and aging. 

