Title       : CAREER: Combining Research and Education in Developing Fully Integrated Wireless
               Transceivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9875770

Award Number: 9875770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Kuhn wkuhn@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875770
Kuhn
The research proposed in this career plan addresses key issues in
              development of RF integrated circuits (RFICs) operating at L-Band through
              C-Band frequencies. In particular, the problems associated with creating
              completely integrated RF circuits and systems will be studied. These problems
              include the need for on-chip bandpass filtering to enable the realization of
              classic heterodyning transceiver architectures, and to improve dynamic range
              performance of newer, direct conversion (zero-IF) and image-reject mixer-based
              designs [3]. Such filters can be created through the application of on-chip
              inductors and Q-enhancement techniques. Practical problems in realizing this
              technology will be addressed and related technologies will be developed,
              including the design of bandpass Sigma-Delta analog-to-digital converters
              (ADCs) and creation of techniques for successfully integrating RF circuitry
              with baseband digital circuitry on a single die.

The proposed research will
              be carried out with the assistance of students in a new undergraduate RF
              integrated circuits course that closely approximates the project team
              environment found in industry today. Student teams will work together to
              design, build, and test core components of integrated RF transceivers in
              CMOS/BiCMOS Silicon technologies operating at 900, 1800, and 2400 MHz in years
              1 and 2, with extension to complete integration and higher frequencies (6 (}Hz)
              in years 3 and 4. With oversight and direction provided by the PI and a core
              team of graduate students supported by the project, this class will allow
              undergraduate and graduate students alike to understand and evaluate recent
              advances in the field, to contribute to current research, and to build the
              team-oriented design skills they will need to remain competitive throughout
              their careers. Publication of research results and educational techniques
              developed will extend the reach of the project beyond Kansas State University,
              assisting other researchers in the field and other schools with interests in
              developing similar educational programs.

Development of the proposed
              technology will enable future wireless system designers to create true
              single-chip and embedded radio hardware solutions with performance exceeding
              that of integrated direct-conversion and image-reject designs currently being
              developed, and approaching that of superhet products based on larger and more
              expensive discrete devices. Attendant reductions in both size and cost of
              wireless link components will extend the reach of wireless technology into
              important new applications in the next decade.

