Title       : CAREER: Brain Electric Source Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a9875344

Award Number: 9875344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bin He bhe@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875344
He
Brain activity is spatially distributed in three dimensions of the
              brain and evolves with time.  Recent advances in medical imaging technology,
              such as functional MRI, have greatly increased our ability to image brain
              functions with high spatial resolution.  However, no single brain imaging
              technology is currently capable of providing both near millimeter precision in
              localizing regions of activated tissues and sub-second temporal precision for
              characterizing changes in patterns of activation over time.  While
              electroencephalograms offer excellent temporal resolution to characterize
              rapidly changing patterns of brain activation, conventional EEG techniques are
              limited due to their inability to provide spatial information regarding brain
              activity.  Thus, it is of great importance to develop technologies, which can
              non-invasively image brain activity with high spatial and temporal resolution.
              

A coherent research and teaching plan is proposed for the CAREER program. 
              The focus of the research is to develop Brain Electric Source Imaging (BESI)
              methodologies to achieve high-resolution spatio-temporal mapping of the human
              brain.  The successful development of BESI methodologies will significantly
              advance the state-of-the-art in the field of biomedical engineering, and have
              an important impact on the fields of neurology and neurosurgery. 

In order
              to achieve the proposed research objectives, the following aims will be
              addressed: (1) Boundary Element Head Modeling - to develop engineering methods
              to link the cortical potential with the scalp potential in a realistically
              shaped inhomogeneous head, (2) Brain Source Image Reconstruction - to develop
              imaging algorithms reconstructing cortical potentials from scalp potentials and
              determine optimal system parameters in a realistic setting, (3) Experimental
              Validation - to validate experimentally the proposed BESI methods in a
              realistic head phantom, and (4) Initial Clinical Testing - to initially test
              the proposed BESI methodologies from intraoperative cortical recordings in
              epilepsy patients.

An innovative teaching plan, tightly linked with the BESI
              research, will include: (1) development of two new courses (a) "Neural
              Engineering" (Graduate course), and (b) "Introduction to Neural Engineering"
              (Senior/Graduate course), (2) development of internet-based neural engineering
              courseware facilitating effective teaching and distance learning, and (3)
              initiation and development of a new curriculum in Neural Engineering.

