Title       : CAREER: Nitric Oxide-Generating Polymers: Biofunctional Materials for the
               Prevention of Thrombosis and Restenosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9875607

Award Number: 9875607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. West jwest@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875607
West
Restenosis is a prevalent and life threatening complication of
              angioplasty and other vascular procedures used to re-open occluded arteries. 
              Approximately 45% of all angioplasty procedures fail due to restenosis. 
              Restenosis is due in large part to the proliferation and migration of smooth
              muscle cells to form of an occlusive layer of tissue, similar to scar tissue,
              within the arterial wall.  Though the mechanisms of restenosis are as yet
              poorly understood, it is clear that initial thrombosis following vascular
              injury plays an important role and that numerous growth factors and cytokines
              are involved in stimulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation, migration, and
              matrix production.  Nitric oxide (NO), produced by endothelial cells in
              uninjured arteries, acts to limit smooth muscle cell proliferation, prevent
              platelet aggregation, increase the rate of endothelial cell proliferation and
              migration, and attenuate leukocyte adhesion.  All of these actions are expected
              to decrease the incidence and extent of restenosis after vascular injury, such
              as that caused by angioplasty.

The proposed research involves the
              development of biofunctional polymeric biomaterials that produce NO under
              physiological conditions and that can be crosslinked via photopolymerization to
              form hydrogels in situ, allowing one to coat the surface of the damaged artery
              or a cardiovascular device with a thin layer of NO-producing hydrogel.  The
              proposed materials have potential as a therapy for thrombosis and restenosis
              and as a novel tool to study the cellular and molecular actions of NO without
              systemic effects.  Two classes of NO-releasing polymers will be synthesized,
              one based on S-nitrosothiols (which produce NO for hours to days) and another
              based on NO/nucleophile complexes (which produce NO for weeks to months), with
              polyethylene glycol (PEG) composing the bulk of the material for
              biocompatability and acrylate termini to allow rapid photopolymerization into
              hydrogel materials.  The efficacy of these novel materials for the prevention
              of smooth muscle cell proliferation and the stimulation of endothelial cell
              proliferation will be assessed using cultured cells.  Platelet aggregation will
              be assessed, and prevention of thrombosis will be evaluated in an ex vivo
              parallel plate blood flow assembly.

This research project will provide
              hands-on training for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students.  This
              proposal addresses several additional educational goals.  Dr. West will develop
              a novel biomaterials module for the undergraduate bioengineering laboratory
              course:  this course will be designed to maximize the integration of teaching
              with research and thus encourage undergraduate students, as well as more
              faculty members, to participate in the undergraduate research program.  All of
              the researchers involved in the project described above will actively
              participate in community outreach programs, including visiting local public
              high schools to present their research and educate the community about advances
              in bioengineering.

