Title       : CAREER: Geometric Tools for Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9875024

Award Number: 9875024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Santosh S. Vempala vempala@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9875024
Vempala

The goal of this research is to develop several tools
              for the design of efficient algorithms and apply them to fundamental
              algorithmic problems in computer science, as well as to modelling and solving
              some of the new challenges in the field. 

The design of approximation
              algorithms lends itself to a particularly geometric interpretation.  There are
              two steps involved: (1) Find a Relaxation, i.e., a set that encloses the set of
              solutions to the original problem and is easier to solve, (2) Find a Rounding,
              i.e., a mapping from a solution of the relaxation to a true solution.  The
              first idea this project sets out to explore is that of a Convex relaxation. 
              The set of solutions to the original problem can be viewed as a convex set
              (viz. Their convex hull) and any convex set enclosing this is a relaxation. 
              The quality of a relaxation is dependent on how well it estimates the true
              optimum of the problem.  Building on the past success of this approach, the
              project pursues promising relaxations for two fundamental problems, finding the
              Minimum Sparsity Cut (or Conductance) of a graph, and the Minimum Traveling
              Salesman problem in a directed graph.

The second idea is based on a
              technique of Lovasz and Schrijver, Called "lift-and-project," to progressively
              refine any given convex relaxation.  Although the technique has so far been
              used only to solve special cases of NP-hard problems in polynomial time, it
              appears to be well-suited for approximation algorithms, and one objective of
              this research is to adapt it for this purpose.  A natural candidate for this
              approach is the problem of finding the Maximum Acyclic Subgraph of a directed
              graph.

The next two ideas are techniques for rounding.  Random Projection
              has recently enjoyed much success as an algorithmic tool, for problems ranging
              from VLSI layout to finding nearest neighbors.  Here it is developed by
              refining its application to the problem of learning the intersection of
              half-spaces (convex bodies).

It is often the case that a relatively small
              subset of the solutions to a relaxation, upon rounding, leads to the worst case
              performance of the algorithm, whereas on average, near-optimum solutions to the
              relaxation exhibit much better performance.  To exploit this, the idea is to
              find a Random Near-Optimum of the relaxation, and then round this to a true
              solution.  The problem of finding a random near-optimum can be solved
              efficiently via a random walk.  Two candidate problems where this strategy
              might improve the quality of approximation are the Maximum Cut problem and the
              Minimum Bandwidth problem.

The last tool is a fast algorithm for
              approximating a given matrix with another matrix of small rank.  Standard
              methods to compute such low-rank approximations take time that is polynomial in
              the size of the matrix.  In the context of problems such as information
              retrieval on the internet, this can be prohibitively expensive.  I contrast,
              the running time of the new algorithm depends only on the quality of the
              desired approximation and not on the size of the matrix.  This algorithm will
              be applied as a tool to speed up existing (polynomial-time) algorithms for
              several applications, including linear equations, searching for nearest
              neighbours, and text and image retrieval.

These ideas are being integrated
              into education in the form of two courses, one at the senior undergraduate
              level, and the other at the graduate level.  The former would be based on the
              basic concepts and successful ideas that come out of this research, while the
              latter would be exploratory and present promising directions and relatively
              difficult results.



