Title       : CAREER: Coded Modulation for High-Speed Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9875482

Award Number: 9875482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Goeckel goeckel@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One of the major goals of modern communications is to develop a system that
              provides users high-speed ubiquitous access to information.  Such a system
              requires a wireless component; however, because of the limited amount of
              bandwidth available and the signal fading due to the multipath inherent to the
              wireless environment, the wireless component can be the bottleneck of the
              system.  Thus, the communications research community is called upon to provide
              focused research on bandwidth efficient communications over multipath fading
              channels and to educate students so that they have the
necessary skills to
              contribute to this and future systems.  As detailed below, this project is
              addressing these issues through: (1) advances in coded modulation for
              high-speed wireless systems, (2) a comparison of system architectures for the
              physical layer of high-speed wireless systems, (3) broadly applicable
              innovations in the instruction of students, and 
(4) a program of
              undergraduate research in communication theory.

The two main architectures
              that are being considered for future high-speed wireless communication systems
              are a coded single-carrier system employing a decision feedback equalizer (DFE)
              at the receiver and a coded orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM)
              system.  In this project, the problem
of designing coded modulation for the
              OFDM system is being formally developed.  By viewing this problem in the more
              general framework of frequency domain coded modulation (FDCM), design rules are
              being developed that lead to systems that can efficiently tradeoff complexity
              for improved bit error 
probability and amplifier efficiency relative to
              traditional OFDM systems.  Furthermore, this project is analyzing the utility
              of the resulting systems as a hybrid between coded single-carrier systems
              employing a DFE and coded OFDM systems; this provides a unified comparison of
              the most widely considered 
system architectures for high-speed wireless
              communications.  The educational portion of this project employs three
              complementary methods that strive to foster student learning through
              innovations that supplement traditional classroom instruction.  The first
              method will be the continuation of the
introduction of supplements that
              support active learning in traditional courses, such as the introduction of
              games of chance for course points in an undergraduate probability class.  The
              second method will be the development of a capstone wireless communications
              course that will allow graduate students and advanced undergraduates to
              integrate their knowledge in various communication system components in a
              team-oriented environment 
that stresses overall system performance.  Finally,
              the third method will be the continuation of a funded undergraduate research
              program, which aids promising undergraduate engineers by providing one-on-one
              attention in an active research environment.

