Title       : PECASE: Modeling, Analysis and Control of Subexponential Traffic Streams in
               Multimedia Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9875156

Award Number: 9875156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Predrag R. Jelenkovic predrag@ctr.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Increasing empirical evidence has demonstrated the presence of subexponential,
              heavy-tailed, long range dependent and self-similar statistical characteristics
              of traffic streams in modern multimedia networks.  Examples of traffic streams
              with subexponential characteristics range from variable bit rate (VBNS)
              compressed video to various Web and Internet related applications.  Traffic
              streams with these characteristics differ radically from conventional voice
              streams.  The difference is not only quantitative, but qualitative as well.  
              For example, when observed on a slow time scale voice traffic averages out and
              shows very little fluctuations while VBNS video traffic exhibits a dynamic
              statistical behavior on multiple time scales; this is often termed self-similar
              behavior.  Furthermore, large deviations from the typical behavior of a
              subexponential random sequence occur in a completely different manner than with
              an exponential (e.g., voice) stream.  Understanding these novel and intriguing
              statistical phenomena is of utmost importance when designing efficient and
              reliable wired, or wireless, multimedia communication networks.

The most
              common way of increasing the efficiency of communication networks is through
              the sharing of network resources, e.g., link capacity and buffer space.  This
              process leads to the degradation of quality of service (QoS) that is perceived
              by individual network users.  The design objective is to maximize the
              efficiency subject to the QoS constraints, e.g., delay distributions and loss
              probabilities. This design process naturally breaks down into the following
              three areas: 1) statistical data analysis and traffic modeling; 2) performance
              analysis and control; 3) construction of numerical and software tools for
              network design.  These three areas of research are inherently interconnected
              and an effective solution used for any one of them must be based on the
              advances in the other two areas.  Therefore, a comprehensive and integrated
              research agenda is suggested.

The focus of this proposal is on fundamental
              problems that are important for developing current technologies, e.g., Atm.,
              TCP/IP-based and wireless data networks, as well as being potentially
              applicable to future network designs.  The scope of the proposed research
              ranges from probability theory to software engineering.  The impact is not only
              limited to multimedia communication networks, but is also important for
              understanding the problems in operations research, finance and insurance theory
              where subexponential models play an important role.

In addition to the
              proposed research, a curriculum that integrates theory with computing is
              presented.  Great scientific advances have often occurred through an interplay
              of theory and experiment.  From this perspective the researcher believes it is
              essential that engineers are exposed early in their careers
to theoretical and
              experimental knowledge in a unified fashion.  This enables them to recognize
              the potential and limitations of both theory and experimentation and use it
              successfully to their advantage.  This approach
also speeds up the learning
              process by demonstrating theoretical results on real world problems and teaches
              students how to abstract the essential information from the experimental
              observations into ever-lasting design principles.


