Title       : CAREER: Structure and Function in Restriction Endonucleases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9875917

Award Number: 9875917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Dupureur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dupureur
9875917

1. TECHNICAL

Restriction enzymes are the simplest
              biological agents of
site-specific nucleic acid chemistry and as such serve as
              molecular
laboratories for dissecting natural activities and engineering new
              ones.
In spite of the importance of the metal ion dependence of
              restriction
enzyme mechanisms, it is unclear how many metal ions bind these
              enzymes.  In order to propose relevant reaction mechanisms, detailed
              measurements of metal ion affinity, stoichiometry, and substrate coordination
              in restriction enzymes must first be developed and conducted in a direct and
              comprehensive fashion.  As evidenced by the null activity of enzymes mutated
              distal to the active site, metal ion-mediated catalysis also
appears to be
              tightly coupled to conformational changes, which prompted the  hypothesis that
              these mutations compromise critical metal ion-substrate interactions in the
              active site.  This study applies an unique combination of instrumental methods
              and international, industrial, and academic collaborations to the issues of
              metal ion binding and conformational behavior in restriction endonucleases.  To
              better understand underlying themes in endonuclease function, two
              representative enzymes will be compared.  The first specific aim of this study
              is to determine the affinities and binding stoichiometries for required
              divalent metal ions.  These experiments are coupled to studies of the
              importance of metal ion-substrate interactions in the active site, using a
              combination of isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), site-directed
              mutagenesis, phosphorothioate substitution, and paramagnetic resonance methods.
               The staggered-end cutter EcoRI endonuclease and the blunt-end cutter PvuII
              endonuclease serve as the  representative restriction endonucleases.  The
              second specific aim is to examine the extent and nature of metal ion and
              substrate-induced conformational changes in restriction enzymes.  Isotopic
              labeling and multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods are
              applied to PvuII endonuclease, the smallest type II restriction enzyme yet
              characterized.  Parallel to the execution of research plans, two advanced
              graduate courses will be developed.  The first course introduces advanced
              spectroscopic methods to the study of protein structure and function and serves
              a growing and vital biophysical chemistry community on campus.  Complementary
              to this is a course which develops the scientific writing skills among advanced
              biochemistry graduate students through a discussion of both the structure and
              language of proposals and involves the participation of both academic and
              industrial collaborators.

2. Non-technical

	Restriction enzymes are
              proteins that recognize and cut specific
sequences of DNA with the assistance
              of metal ions.  These "molecular
scissors" are powerful tools of
              biotechnology.  There is considerable
interest in expanding the repertoire of
              these enzymes, that is, developing new enzymes with new specificities.  The
              approach of this study is to understand how existing enzymes work.  This study
              is divided into parts: First, to understand how the metals ion help the enzyme
              cut DNA, comparing the metal ion binding properties of two representative
              restriction enzymes, PvuII endonuclease and EcoRI endonuclease. Instrumental
              methods are applied to determine how many metal ions bind each enzyme, where
              they bind, and how the enzyme-bound metal ions interact with the DNA. This
              helps us understand what is required for DNA cutting.  The question of how the
              conformation or shape of PvuII endonuclease changes when it interacts with
              metal ions and different DNA sequences is also studied. To accomplish this,
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, an instrumental method which is
              sensitive to slight changes in enzyme conformation is applied.  Together, these
              two aims help us understand how DNA sequence recognition and metal ion-assisted
              DNA cleavage are related in these enzymes.  Concurrent with and complementary
              to these research activities, two new elective graduate courses will be
              developed.  The first is a survey of spectroscopic methods as applied to
              problems in protein structure-function and will involve faculty members with
              expertise in this area.  The other elective is a course in the structure and
              language of research proposals and will include discussions led by study
              section
members and scientists from industry.



