Title       : CAREER : The Evolution and Genetic Regulation of Sexual Fate in Nematodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9875398

Award Number: 9875398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Ellis ronellis@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Like most nematodes, Caenorhabditis remanei has two sexes: XO animals become
              males and XX animals become females. However, Caenorhabditis elegans is
              hermaphroditic: XO animals are male and XX animals develop as self-fertile
              hermaphrodites. These hermaphrodites appear female in most respects, but
              produce sperm during larval development which can be used for
              self-fertilization. Thus these species provide a system to study how well
              defined differences in sex-determination arose. In C. elegans, two genes appear
              to directly control the decision to make sperm: fog-1 and fog-3. Mutations in
              either gene cause all germ cells to differentiate as oocytes, even in males.
              Thus, one simple model is that these genes would be active only in male C.
              remanei and that a crucial step in the evolution of hermaphroditism involved
              their expression and function in XX individuals of C. elegans. Four approaches
              will be used to test this model. 1) The C. remanei homologs of fog-1 and fog-3
              will be isolated and sequenced. In addition, RNA-mediated interference will be
              used to determine the function of each gene in C. remanei. 2) Comparison of the
              promoters for these C. elegans and C. remanei genes should aid in identifying
              regulatory elements that control transcription. Any identified elements will be
              tested in transgenic animals. 3) Comparison of the protein products of these
              genes will help to identify crucial domains and potential regulatory sites.
              These products will also be tested in transgenic animals. 4) C. elegans will be
              genetically analyzed to find and characterize new genes that regulate fog-1 or
              fog-3 which will be subjects for future study in C. remanei. The introductory
              Genetics course will be amplified to include new material from human genome
              studies, as it becomes available. Discussion of ethical issues raised by human
              genomic studies will also be added to the course and new computer technology
              will be utilized in order to teach students about the power and limitations of
              the genetic databases available on the Internet.

Insight into the evolution
              of sexual differences in animals will be enhanced by the results of this
              investigation of two nematodes with different modes of reproduction. The use of
              information from the extensive database for C. elegans will be used to
              introduce undergraduate students to the technology necessary to effectively use
              available databases. The Introductory Genetics course will be expanded to
              encompass new information from the Human Genome Project and to discuss ethical
              issues arising from that project.

