Title       : CAREER: Cycloaromatization Approach to Graphite Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a9875123

Award Number: 9875123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Anthony anthony@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,9161,9178,AMPP,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Anthony's research focuses on the design and synthesis of organic
              materials for electronic devices.  The synthetic work involves the preparation
              of graphite oligomers by the derivatization, cyclization, and aromatization of
              alkynylnaphthalenes and -thiophenes.  The reactions to be employed include
              particularly the Bergman cyclization of arenediynes.  The target molecules are
              polyaromatic compounds having a variety of shapes, whose physical properties
              are a matter of some conjecture.  Professor Anthony is particularly interesting
              in testing these new materials as FET's (Field-Effect Transistors).  The
              classroom goals of Professor Anthony are to motivate students to become better
              learners by putting them in situations where they will need -- and want -- to
              uncover the knowledge required to solve a particular problem.  For instance,
              guiding the student through the properties of functional groups in an enzyme
              active site will enable the formulation of a "drug" molecule having
              complementary functional groups.  The students then might wonder how to
              synthesize their (own) "drug" molecule, which leads them into the panoply of
              organic synthetic transformations.  Upper level course development includes
              incorporation of the latest supramolecular and materials chemistry.

With
              this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program supports the research and
              educational activities of Dr. John Anthony of the Chemistry Department of the
              University of Kentucky.  Dr. Anthony's research efforts center on the creation
              of graphite-like structures on a molecular level that have exacting sizes and
              shapes.  Of the several applications of materials that make up these molecules,
              electronic devices such as field-effect transistors are among the most
              exciting.  Professor Anthony's teaching endeavors rely on new ways to put the
              student in charge of their own learning, using strategies based on student
              design of a pharmaceutical molecule and the challenge of planning its
              synthesis. Upper-level curricular offerings  will be invigorated by an infusion
              of the latest materials and supramolecular chemistry.
