Title       : CAREER: Classroom Instruction to Promote Authentic Experimentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9875485

Award Number: 9875485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark Allen Chinn cchinn@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9152,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is grounded in a theoretical framework that specifies
key
              epistemological features of scientific experimentation.  On the basis
of this
              framework, the project will develop a computer-based environment in
              which
seventh graders can conduct simulated experiments in the domain of
              cell
biology.   The simulated experiments will be designed to capture many
              of
the crucial epistemological features of authentic
              scientific
experimentation.  The computer-based experimentation environment
              will then
be used in a series of studies to investigate how students learn
              complex
forms of scientific reasoning.  A main focus of the studies will be
              to
investigate the sociocognitive processes by which computer
              simulations
promote complex learning during classroom instruction.  The
              planned studies
include two large classroom experiments that will provide a
              rich, detailed
picture of how seventh graders' reasoning and knowledge of
              cells change,
moment to moment, during classroom instruction.  The classroom
              instruction,
using an instructional method called Collaborative Reasoning
              about
Evidence, will interleave whole-class discussions with small-group work
              in
which students conduct and discuss simulated experiments.  The studies
              will
aim to provide a fine-grained analysis of how whole-class discussions
              and
group interactions mediate students' learning.  In sum, this program
              of
research is intended (a) to provide new insights into how to teach
              students
to reason about epistemologically authentic experimentation and (b)
              to
produce tested instructional software, materials, and methods that
              teachers
can readily access and use in their classrooms.



