Title       : CAREER: Beams of Fast Exotic Nuclei and the Origin of Heavy Elements in Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9875122

Award Number: 9875122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Glasmacher glasmacher@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9875122
Glasmacher
This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project,
              supported in the Nuclear Physics Program, focuses on research and education
              with particle beams of exotic nuclei. The research encompasses an experimental
              study of unstable nuclei with an extreme neutron-to-proton ratio.  These exotic
              nuclei are close to the nuclear driplines, the locus in the chart of nuclides
              where the binding of nucleons ends.  Even though nuclear shells are well
              established close to the valley of stability, theoretical models have predicted
              the possibility of a drastic change of conventional nuclear shell structure as
              the nuclear driplines are approached.  Such a dramatic change in nuclear
              structure poses particular challenges for our understanding of the rapid
              neutron capture process in stars.  This so-called r-process accounts for the
              generation of more than half of all elements heavier than iron in the universe.
               Since measurements of masses, half-lives, and deformations on the very
              neutron-rich nuclei in the r-process path are extremely scarce, theoretical
              models are currently used to calculate these properties.  In the absence of
              experimental data on very neutron-rich nuclei the predictive power of currently
              used theoretical models is untested.  To remedy this situation, the research
              proposed here will use different experimental techniques to measure basic
              properties of exotic nuclei, produced at the NSCL by fragmentation of beams of
              stable nuclei.  Enhancing scientific literacy at all levels is the goal of the
              proposed educational activities.  This effort will focus on three specific
              target groups: high-school students traditionally underrepresented in science,
              current pre-college science teachers, and undergraduate students (especially
              prospective teachers).  An expansion of the NSCL summer outreach program
              ("Physics of Atomic Nuclei") is proposed.  The purpose is to allow high-school
              students from groups traditionally underrepresented in science to experience
              the excitement and joy of science in an active research environment early
              enough in their careers that they can choose to pursue a career in science.  At
              the same time middle and high-school science teachers are invited to the NSCL
              to get direct exposure to basic research and to learn how they can integrate
              basic research results into their classes.  At Michigan State University,
              science education of undergraduate students in general and prospective teachers
              in particular, takes place in large lecture classes.  Implementation of an
              active learning environment that makes use of modern technological teaching
              aides in such large lecture classes taught by the principal investigator is
              proposed.  The format will shift from a traditional, teacher-centered classroom
              toward an interactive, student-centered forum where students can examine their
              own and new ideas, learning through conceptual understanding rather than
              listening alone.  Segments in this interactive environment will highlight basic
              nuclear physics research at the NSCL and thus emphasize the relevance of
              introductory physics concepts through their connection to cutting-edge basic
              research.


