Title       : CAREER: Qos-enabled Customizable Middleware for Global Distributed Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9875988

Award Number: 9875988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini Venkatasubramanian nalini@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,4097,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Global information systems consist of asynchronous, autonomous components that
              are open and distributed.  These components will need to handle multiple media
              types and satisfy varying Quality-of-Service(QoS)
requirements such as
              responsiveness, reliability, availability, security and cost-effectiveness. 
              Adapting to changing system conditions and application requirements is often
              difficult and error prone. Distributed
systems services can potentially
              interfere with each other in non-compatible ways, especially in the presence of
              QoS requirements.

This research plan proposes the formulation, specification
              and implementation of a new paradigm for developing QoS-enabled customizable
              middleware for the global information infrastructure. The customizable and safe
              distributed systems middleware infrastructure developed, called ComPOSE/Q
              (Composable Open Software Environment with QoS), has the ability to effectively
              address the challenges posed by the evolving infrastructure.  The primary
              distinguishing feature of ComPOSE/Q is that it provides "composable distributed
              resource management", i.e., it allows the concurrent execution of multiple
              resource management policies in a distributed system in a safe and correct
              manner.  Safe composability of resource management mechanisms is required to
              provide cost-effective QoS in a wide area distributed infrastructure.  The
              research develops a semantic model for representing QoS, middleware components
              and techniques for reasoning about their interaction.  The work is based on a
              formal meta-architectural model of middleware that permits customization of
              policies for placement, scheduling synchronization and management
              of
components.  The meta-architecture allows for the separate specification of
              system policies from application requirements and hence permits either to be
              customized independently to adapt to changing system conditions and application
              requirements. To ensure non-interference, CompOSE/Q implements core resource
              management services -- remote creation, distributed snapshot and directory
              services that are composable and can be used as a basis for creating more
              complex activities.  The proposed methodology will be validated by using the
              CompOSE/Q middleware to develop systems support for network-centric and mobile
              computing environments.

The accompanying educational objectives are to
              strengthen the graduate and undergraduate computer science curriculum at the
              University of California, Irvine in the principles, practice and applications
              of wide-area
distributed computing and multimedia technologies.  This will
              involve the establishment of an Instructional Multimedia Laboratory that
              facilitates teaching both introductory and advanced courses in multimedia,
              distributed systems and information management.  The long-term vision of the
              lab is to catalyze multidisciplinary application-oriented endeavors that are
              increasingly the driving force for innovative research as the world becomes
              highly interconnected and computerized.


