Title       : CAREER: Optimization, Probabilistic Checking of Proofs and Error-correcting
               Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a9875511

Award Number: 9875511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Madhu Sudan madhu@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research explores three seemingly unrelated areas in the interface of
              computing: Optimization, Logic, and Information Transmission.  Optimization is
              the study of algorithms (methods usable by computers) to solve large search
              problems; Logic is the study of fundamental questions such as "What is a proof
              of a mathematical statement?", Information transmission studies methods to
              improve the communication reliability when data is transmitted over noisy
              wires.  Recent discoveries involving deep mathematics have established
              intricate links between these three areas.  This research project exploits
              these links to investigate central questions in all three areas.  The scope
              varies from a novel approach for studying optimization problems to improved
              methods for reliable communication and progress in the field of mathematical
              logic.  The project will also introduce new courses and material at the
              graduate and undergraduate level to bridge gaps between mathematics and
              computer science.

Recent discoveries in theoretical computer science have
              revealed new connections between the complexity of finding approximate
              solutions to optimization problems and probabilistic notions of verification of
              proofs.  This connection has already emerged as a powerful tool in the analysis
              of optimization problems.  This research project exploits this new tool to
              classify entire classes of optimization problems. The resulting classification
              may provide one of the first systematic approaches to the study of optimization
              problems.  The project also investigates related qu4estions about the nature of
              probabilistic checking of proofs and their efficiency with respect to new
              parameters.  Scope of the project includes progress in the study of
              optimization and logic, as 3ell as improved methods for recovery from noise in
              information transmission.  The education program focuses on the newly emerging
              themes in the area between mathematics and computer science and designs courses
              on probabilistic methods in logic and algebra to deal with the new needs.

