Title       : CAREER: Lung Ventilation in Lizards and the Evolution of Amniote Respiratory
               Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a9875245

Award Number: 9875245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Brainerd brainerd@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The proposed career plan integrates research on the anatomy and physiology of
              vertebrate respiration with the development of two new, inquiry-based courses
              in vertebrate anatomy and comparative physiology.  These courses will depart
              from the traditional lecture-and-exam format of most college courses, and will
              instead emphasize the development of students' research-related intellectual
              skills.  The research component of the proposed career plan focuses on the
              evolution of breathing mechanisms (lung ventilation) in vertebrate animals. 
              The PIs current understanding of the evolution of lung ventilation is wholly
              inadequate.  The PIs know that the primitive condition is to use a mouth pump
              (buccal pump) to force air into the lungs under positive pressure (as seen in
              frogs and lungfish) and that the derived condition (as seen in reptiles, birds
              and mammals) is to rotate the ribs and suck air down into the lungs (aspiration
              breathing).  The PIs currently have little information, however, on how or why
              this dramatic transition from buccal pumping to aspiration breathing occurred. 
              Physiological traits, such as breathing mechanisms, generally cannot be
              inferred from fossilized bones; therefore, we must rely on living animals that
              exhibit intermediate states between different mechanisms.  Unfortunately for
              studies of lung ventilation, researchers have generally assumed that no living
              animals exhibit an intermediate state.  The PIs have recently discovered,
              however, that some lizards utilize both a buccal pump and an aspiration pump
              during exercise.  The breathing mechanism of lizards may therefore be a "living
              fossil" of an intermediate mechanism between pure buccal pumping and pure
              aspiration breathing.  The proposed research incorporates comprehensive
              anatomical and physiological studies of lung ventilation in a wide range of
              lizard species, with the goal of using this living fossil model to understand
              the dramatic evolutionary transition that occurred between buccal pump and
              aspiration breathing in vertebrate animals.

