Title       : CAREER: Semiconductor Tectons: Materials at the Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2001   
File        : a9875940

Award Number: 9875940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey F. Strouse strouse@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875940
Strouse
The goal of this CAREER project is two-fold: 1)to develop
              synthetic methodologies to allow the systematic assembly of II-VI nano-scale
              semiconductors into periodic electronic networks; 2)to study the electronic
              coupling between components of the array. Assembly will be pursued by the
              adaptation of crystal engineering techniques to semiconductor clusters (< 3 nm)
              using site-specific modification of the cluster edges with self-assembling
              organic linkers. The final structure is a 3 dimensional diamandoid architecture
              composed of adamantanoid semiconductor clusters linked at the apex of the
              tetrahedral structures. Choice of the spacer and choice of the semiconductor
              cluster size can systematically tune the level of electronic coupling. Studies
              will be conducted to understand fundamental ways to systematically modify and
              network nano-clusters into a 3-dimensional structures. The approach to address
              these issues is to probe the synthetic preparation, ligand substitution and
              capping influence on Cd and Zn chalcogenide clusters consisting of variable
              core structures. Metallo-thiolates are structural analogs of adamantane and can
              be used to produce diamond lattices. Application of mass-spectroscopic
              techniques will be used for determination of the parent cluster purity, as well
              as directly addressing stability of cluster materials. Information on exchange
              dynamics in these materials will be probed by comparison of Raman and NMR data
              for the substituted clusters. Exploitation of tectonic approaches for
              self-assembling nano-materials using polymeric connectors will be pursued for
              applications in the assembly of compliant electronic materials. Materials
              assembled from polymeric spacers are inherently flexible. The flexibility can
              be utilized to control coupling in the lattice potentially allowing a new path
              for propagating information via lattice modulation rather than conventional
              electronic biasing. Development of such materials requires focus on both
              molecular scale assemblies of nanoscale materials and the characterization of
              electronic transport phenomena.
%%%
The project addresses fundamental
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high potential
              technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science,
              chemistry, and engineering knowledge at a fundamental level to important
              aspects of electronic materials. The scope of the project will expose students
              to challenges in materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An
              important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and on
              the integration of research and education.
***
9875940
Strouse
The goal of
              this CAREER project is two-fold: 1)to develop synthetic methodologies to allow
              the systematic assembly of II-VI nano-scale semiconductors into periodic
              electronic networks; 2)to study the electronic coupling between components of
              the array. Assembly will be pursued by the adaptation of crystal engineering
              techniques to semiconductor clusters (< 3 nm) using site-specific modification
              of the cluster edges with self-assembling organic linkers. The final structure
              is a 3 dimensional diamandoid architecture composed of adamantanoid
              semiconductor clusters linked at the apex of the tetrahedral structures. Choice
              of the spacer and choice of the semiconductor cluster size can systematically
              tune the level of electronic coupling. Studies will be conducted to understand
              fundamental ways to systematically modify and network nano-clusters into a
              3-dimensional structures. The approach to address these issues is to probe the
              synthetic preparation, ligand substitution and capping influence on Cd and Zn
              chalcogenide clusters consisting of variable core structures. Metallo-thiolates
              are structural analogs of adamantane and can be used to produce diamond
              lattices. Application of mass-spectroscopic techniques will be used for
              determination of the parent cluster purity, as well as directly addressing
              stability of cluster materials. Information on exchange dynamics in these
              materials will be probed by comparison of Raman and NMR data for the
              substituted clusters. Exploitation of tectonic approaches for self-assembling
              nano-materials using polymeric connectors will be pursued for applications in
              the assembly of compliant electronic materials. Materials assembled from
              polymeric spacers are inherently flexible. The flexibility can be utilized to
              control coupling in the lattice potentially allowing a new path for propagating
              information via lattice modulation rather than conventional electronic biasing.
              Development of such materials requires focus on both molecular scale assemblies
              of nanoscale materials and the characterization of electronic transport
              phenomena.
%%%
The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical
              area of materials science having high potential technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science, chemistry, and engineering
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic materials.
              The scope of the project will expose students to challenges in materials
              synthesis, processing, and characterization. An important feature of the
              project is the strong emphasis on education, and on the integration of research
              and education.
***

