Title       : CAREER: Structural and Biochemical Studies of Essential Viral Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9875663

Award Number: 9875663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah S. Wuttke deborah.wuttke@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wuttke
MCB 9875663

1. TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

The goals of the research
              program are to use structural and biochemical methods to investigate the
              relationship between structure and function of three essential viral proteins,
              the 3AB protein and its cleaved progeny, the 3A and 3B proteins.  The
              poliovirus 3AB protein is an important, multifunctional protein that plays
              several critical roles in viral replication in members of the Picornaviridae
              family.   Multidimensional heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy will be used to
              determine the high-resolution solution structure of the 3A and 3AB proteins
              from human poliovirus.  The fundamental chemical nature of the interactions
              between 3AB and its biological partner, the viral polymerase, will be probed
              using biochemical, biophysical and structural methods.  Finally, the 3A and 3AB
              structures will be refined using dipolar couplings obtained by new methods for
              biomolecular alignment in a magnetic field.   Because the 3A and 3AB proteins
              are found in all picornaviruses, a better understanding of their structures and
              functions will provide important insights into the fundamental biochemistry of
              a large number of important viral systems, as well as advance our understanding
              of how protein/protein interactions modulate biological activity. The aims of
              the education program are to integrate bioinformatics and biomolecular
              structure analysis into the undergraduate biochemistry curriculum at the
              University of Colorado at Boulder.  The use of bioinformatics tools, such as
              sequence comparison, analysis of complete genome sequences, and visualization
              and manipulation of biomolecular structures are essential components of
              training in modern biochemistry. The explosion of information and tools
              available over the Internet, and the number of three-dimensional structures
              that have become available in the last few years indicate this aspect of
              biochemistry is only going to increase in impact over time.  This project will
              develop the tools needed to incorporate this powerful new area of biochemistry
              into the training of biochemistry undergraduate and graduate students in order
              to prepare them for their future in professional schools and industry.


2
              GENERAL ABSTRACT

The goals of the research program are to use structural and
              biochemical methods to investigate the relationship between structure and
              function of three essential viral proteins, the 3AB protein and its cleaved
              progeny, the 3A and 3B proteins.  These proteins are produced by an important
              family of viruses, the picornaviruses, whose members include the causative
              agents of polio and the common cold.  The three-dimensional structure of these
              proteins will be related to their biological functions.  The fundamental
              chemical nature of the interactions between these proteins and the protein
              partners they interact with will be probed using biochemical, biophysical and
              structural methods.  Because the 3A and 3AB proteins are found in all
              picornaviruses, a better understanding of their structures and functions will
              provide important insights into the fundamental biochemistry of a large number
              of important viral systems, as well as advance our understanding of how
              protein/protein interactions modulate biological activity. The aims of the
              education program are to integrate bioinformatics and biomolecular structure
              analysis into the undergraduate biochemistry curriculum at the University of
              Colorado at Boulder.  The use of bioinformatics tools, such as sequence
              comparison, analysis of complete genome sequences, and visualization and
              manipulation of biomolecular structures are essential components of training in
              modern biochemistry. The explosion of information and tools available over the
              Internet, and the number of three-dimensional structures that have become
              available in the last few years indicate this aspect of biochemistry is only
              going to increase in impact over time.  This project will develop the tools
              needed to incorporate this powerful new area of biochemistry into the training
              of biochemistry undergraduate and graduate students in order to prepare
              them
for their future in professional schools and industry.


