Title       : CAREER: Pioneering Nucleic Acid Based Computing: New Approachs and Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9875184

Award Number: 9875184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura F. Landweber lfl@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0522500   Early Technology                        
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
PROJECT SUMMARY

The wide-ranging goal of this research is to explore the
              interplay between molecular biology, computer science, and evolution, with
              emphasis on simulated molecular evolution as a vehicle for constructing nucleic
              acid based computers. This interdisciplinary approach combines theory and
              experiments from verv different fields to explore computation at the molecular
              level.

DNA computing has fueled a tremendous amount of excitement by
              offering a fresh paradigm for performing and viewing computations: it is
              biological mathematics, while also mathematical biology. Encoding of data in
              DNA strings coupled with the power of molecular biology allows the execution of
              computational operations on single strands of DNA in the laboratory. As a small
              drop of solution can house several quadrillion DNA molecules, DNA computers use
              much less energy and space than traditional computers. Consequently, they offer
              the tantalizing potential of one day outperforming electronic computers.
              Computing with DNA is also massively parallel, with billions and trillions of
              molecules undergoing simultaneous chemical reactions and performing
              computations almost spontaneously. The product of a radically different
              marriage of computer science to molecular biology, the fledgling field of DNA
              computers began in 1994, when Adleman surprised the scientific community by
              using DNA molecules, protein enzymes, and chemicals to solve an instance of the
              Directed Hamiltonian Path Problem.
This research proposes to expand the field
              of DNA based computers to RNA, specificaly:
(1) To develop a panel of RNA
              based tools for use in computation
(2) To use this repertoire of tools to
              tackle a wide class of mathematical search problems. 
(3) To address the
              limits of scalability of each aspect of the design of experiments,
(4) To
              carefully  examine the differences between RNA versus DNA for molecular
              computing
(5) To address a series of larger computational problems. 
While
              this will be the first project to exploit RNA for its computing potential, it
              will also be one of the first projects to use biological molecules to solve
              problems beyond the scope of previous proof-of-principle
              experiments.
Education Plan: A series of interdisciplinary courses, seminars,
              and conferences centered around DNA computing are planned. A seminar course
              will be developed on DNA computing for freshmen entering the fields of
              engineering, mathematics, the biological and physical sciences, as well as
              humanities. This course will introduce a new area of research to the next
              generation of scientists while at the same time educating non-science majors
              about the cutting edge field of molecular computers. Other educational plans
              include mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, teaching DNA Computing
              at a summer Workshop on Molecular Evolution, and participating in a science
              outreach program for high school teachers.

