Title       : Career: The Use of the Geotechnical Centrifuge for Physical Modelling of
               Geo-Environmental and Geotechnical Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9875883

Award Number: 9875883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Culligan-Hensley trishc@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9875883 
Patricia J. Culligan 
MIT 


CAREER:  The use of the geotechnical
              centrifuge for physical modeling of geo-environmental and geotechnical problems
              


Abstract 

This project will use the geotechnical centrifuge as (a) a
              research tool to investigate the behavior and remediation of organic
              contaminants in aquifer systems, and (b) an educational tool to integrate
              physical modeling studies into civil and environmental engineering curricula. 
              Geotechnical centrifuge modeling is an experimental method that allows the
              small-scale physical modeling of complicated problems affected by gravitational
              forces under realistic, but well controlled, boundary conditions.  By using
              this method, both soil stress distributions and gravity (or buoyancy)-driven
              fluid displacements can be replicated at a reduced scale in a laboratory
              environment.  Correct (scaleable) replication of these effects is not possible
              outside a centrifugal field unless a full-scale field experiment is carried
              out.  For this reason, the geotechnical centrifuge offers an ideal tool for the
              physical modeling of many geo-environmental and geotechnical engineering
              problems. 

The research component of this project proposes to use the
              geotechnical centrifuge to investigate (i) the effects of unstable nonaqueous
              phase liquid (NAPL) flow and soil heterogeneity on NAPL movement through the
              vadose zone; (ii) the mechanisms determining NAPL entrapment in saturated soils
              under a range of flow conditions, and (iii) factors affecting the performance
              of two recent NAPL remediation technologies, air sparging and
              surfactant-enhanced hydraulic flushing.  The results of this program will
              produce experimental results representative of field behavior that can be used
              to (i) quantify the timing and rate of aquifer contaminant loading due, for
              example, to a surface NAPL spill; (ii) provide estimates of NAPL volume in
              aquifers under given hydraulic conditions; and (iii) develop quantitative
              guidelines for the deployment of two emerging remediation technologies.  Data
              from the study will also be invaluable for the parameterization, testing and
              validation of conceptual transport models and numerical codes.  

The
              educational plan will use the geotechnical centrifuge as a vehicle for
              introducing hands-on-experience and problem based learning into the civil and
              environmental engineering (CEE) undergraduate curricula.  The objectives of the
              educational plan are to (i) develop a means of allowing CEE students to see the
              effects of their engineering design, and (ii) to explore whether the
              fundamentals of engineering mechanics can be better taught by exposing students
              to principles of physical modeling and scaling. 

The project will make use
              of the geotechnical centrifuge facility in the Department of Civil and
              Environmental Engineering at MIT.  This facility consists of a 1.0 m radius
              balanced arm centrifuge, which is capable of spinning a 90 kg package of soil
              around a central axis at 400 rpm, and a new 1.0 m diameter mini-drum
              centrifuge, which is capable of spinning a 1000 kg annulus of soil around a
              central axis at 1000 rpm. Both centrifuges will be used in the execution of
              this work. 


