Title       : Career: Differential Equations: Building a Theory of Student Reasoning and
               Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9875388

Award Number: 9875388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris L. Rasmussen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Advances in technology and the calculus reform movement have resulted in several
              recent curricular reform efforts in differential equations.  These reform
              efforts have decreased the traditional emphasis on analytic techniques for
              finding exact solutions to well-posed problems and increased the use of
              computing technology to incorporate qualitative and numerical methods for
              understanding the behavior of solutions to differential equations.  Research on
              student learning of differential equations, however, has lagged behind these
              curricula efforts.

This project will enlarge our understanding of how
              emerging analyses of student thinking, technology, context problems, and symbol
              use can be profitably coordinated to promote student learning of advanced,
              undergraduate mathematics, using differential equations as a specific case. 
              The proposed research project will illustrate how theory-driven work at the
              elementary and secondary level can inform, guide, and sustain the learning and
              teaching of university mathematics in technology-rich classrooms. Long-range
              research plans include analyses that focus on effective means by which
              university mathematics instructors proactively support students' mathematical
              development in technology-rich classrooms.

In broad terms, the research
              methodology employed in this project falls under the heading of "developmental
              research" and highlights the relationship between research and practice,
              centering on the learning-teaching process with particular attention to the
              mental activities of students.  Three, semester-long classroom teaching
              experiments and individual student interviews will be conducted over a period
              of five years.  Data sources will include videorecordings of all classroom
              sessions, videorecordings of student interviews, copies of student work, and
              records of project meetings.  Data analysis will follow the constant
              comparative method adapted for longitudinal classroom videorecordings and
              multiple data sources.


