Title       : CAREER: Micromechanical Model of Undrained Cyclic Soil Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9875334

Award Number: 9875334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Price   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9875334 
Thomas E. Price 
Mississippi State University 

CAREER: 
              Micromechanical model of undrained cyclic soil behavior   

Abstract  
              

The objective of this study is to extend existing Discrete Element Modeling
              (DEM) technologies to explicitly account for pore fluid response in saturated
              soils.  DEM methodologies act through consideration of the forces acting on
              individual soil particles within the soil mass, and are particularly well
              suited to problems in which large particle deformations are expected to occur. 
              The rapid growth in recent years of computing power has popularized the use of
              DEM in calculating the behavior of granular soils.  However, it has proven
              difficult to explicitly account for the response of the continuum pore fluid in
              computing the response of the soil mass.   

In this study, a
              three-dimensional numerical, micromechanical model of fluid-saturated
              cohesionless soil will be developed. The soil-phase discrete element model will
              interface with a finite element representation of the fluid continuum.  The
              fluid model has been developed from the well-known equations of motion for
              two-phase porous media. The resulting model will enable extensive numerical
              testing of soil samples, including soils for which insufficient empirical data
              is available to calibrate continuum models. Because of the micromechanical
              nature of DEM, the data obtained will be of significantly higher resolution
              than is possible through laboratory or field studies. The numerical model thus
              developed will provide a powerful tool to augment the existing database of
              analytic and empirical soil response data.  Potential application areas include
              fines migration beneath pavement slabs, earthquake-induced liquefaction, and
              environmental transport phenomena.   

Student participation throughout the
              course of the study will be enacted at both the graduate and senior
              undergraduate level.  Students not directly involved in the study will benefit
              by means of a course module on DEM to be added to the curriculum of a graduate
              computational mechanics course. Meaningful partnering with the Pavements and
              Airfields Division of the Corps of Engineers Geotechnical Laboratory will
              ensure applicability of the study findings. Finally, dissemination of the study
              results to more distant researchers will be achieved through publishing of the
              study results, through both conventional  

