Title       : CAREER: Astrophysics and Radio Pulsars: From the Forefront to the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9875897

Award Number: 9875897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria M. Kaspi vicky@space.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1215,5978,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Victoria M. Kaspi   AST  9875897

In 1054 AD, Asian astronomers
              witnessed a spectacular cosmic explosion whose afterglow was visible to the
              naked eye for months.  This "Guest Star" is known to have been the supernova
              explosion of a massive star. Left in its place is a glowing cloud, a supernova
              remnant commonly known as the Crab Nebula. At its heart is the compact, rapidly
              rotating, and degenerate stellar remnant of its progenitor core, a neutron
              star. The neutron star in the Crab Nebula is a radio pulsar. It is so called
              because of its bright beamed bursts of radiation in the radio regime,
              observable once per rotation period, like a lighthouse beacon.

The
              fundamental properties of the young neutron star population are yet to be
              determined.   It is not known whether the formation of objects like the Crab
              pulsar is common or unusual, what fraction of all young neutron stars is
              observable as pulsars, and what fraction of pulsars are born in supernova
              explosions.  It is not known what are the birth properties of neutron stars,
              namely how fast they typically rotate, the magnitude of their magnetic fields
              and the strength and composition of their winds. These issues are basic to an
              understanding of the fate and physics of massive stars, the supernova
              mechanism, and the Galactic population of neutron stars and supernova remnants.
              Pulsars are observed to be the fastest-moving stellar objects in the Milky Way,
              with some objects plowing through the interstellar medium at upwards of 1000
              km/sec. The origin of these speeds is very likely tied to the physics of their
              birth events, although exactly how is not known.
These questions and others
              will investigated by using leading radio and optical telescopes worldwide to
              make observations of the pulsars.  Among specific observational projects to be
              carried our are major searches for new pulsars and detailed follow-up of newly
              discovered sources, using radio and optical timing and imaging. This research
              is well suited to the training of students at both the graduate and
              undergraduate levels, and there will be major student involvement in the
              research projects.

Traditional university lecture techniques have a
              venerable history; they evolved long before many of today's modern
              technological advances became available. It should surprise no one if
              innovative teaching techniques, especially incorporating computer graphics in
              the classroom, improve the quality of physics education.  This improvement is
              needed to alter the prevailing culture that physics is out of the grasp of all
              but the cream of the crop. Pulsars, the topic of research, are also ideally
              suited for illustrating many of the salient points in the MIT course Physics
              III, "Waves and Vibrations."  Computer and scientific illustration
              enhancements, as well as a decidedly interactive lecturing technique, will be
              incorporated into Physics III lectures.  Overall, astronomy has the virtue that
              it is easily accessible to the general public, including children. It is a
              valuable "hook" with which to foster an appreciation for science early in life.
              An outreach program targeting elementary school children thus lays the
              foundation for science literacy later in life. Furthermore, the involvement of
              undergraduate and graduate students in such programs fosters a tradition of
              outreach among tomorrow's scientists, while simultaneously developing their
              presentation skills and confidence. Specific outreach ideas that will be
              implemented as part of this project will include a Virtual Pen Pal program in
              which Physics graduate students respond to elementary school children's science
              queries using personalized World Wide Web page responses, slide shows at local
              elementary schools, and Astronomy Night at local summer camps.

