Title       : CAREER: Gas-Phase Chemistry of Thermal and Plasma CVD of Ti-Si-N Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9875062

Award Number: 9875062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmela Amato-Wierda ccaw@hopper.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875062
Amato-Wierda
This CAREER project represents a combination of research
              and educational activities in materials synthesis, processing, and
              characterization. Real time, in situ experiments which determine the type,
              quantity, and energy of gas-phase species during thermal and plasma enhanced
              CVD (PECVD) are the focus of the research activities. The aim is to progress
              toward a mechanistic understanding of how gas-phase species interact with a
              surface in thin film growth. Molecular beam mass spectrometry will be used to
              analyze gas-phase species during thermal and plasma CVD reactions. The quantity
              of gas-phase neutral, ion, and radical species, and their kinetics and
              mechanisms, will be correlated with CVD process variables and film properties.
              The chemical system chosen for these studies is the thermal and plasma-enhanced
              CVD of Ti-Si-N ternary diffusion barriers, which are candidates for future
              metallization technology in semiconductor devices. Chemical precursors include
              tetrakis(diethylamido)titanium and TiI4 as titanium sources, silane and
              disilane for silicon sources, ammonia and hydrazine as N sources.
The
              education aspect involves the design and implementation of a new
              upperclassmen/first-year graduate student laboratory-based course on Materials
              Synthesis/Processing and Characterization. The course features three
              concurrent, semester long, inquiry-based laboratory projects drawn from
              industrial interactions and current research in materials science. Students are
              required to formulate, implement, and defend research objectives. The course
              will have an interdisciplinary enrollment from chemistry, physics, and
              engineering. The course has dedicated equipment including: differential
              scanning calorimeter, thermal gravimetric analyzer, dynamic mechanical
              analyzer, gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer, gel permeation chromatograph,
              four-point conductivity probe, powder/thin film x-ray diffractometer,
              sputtering system, and a CVD reactor.
%%%
The project addresses fundamental
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic materials
              and advanced devices/circuits. The scope of the project will expose students to
              challenges in materials synthesis, processing and characterization. An
              important feature of the program is the emphasis on education, and on the
              integration of research and education.
***

