Title       : Career: Molecular and Genetic Analysis of the Yeast EBP2 Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9875283

Award Number: 9875283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. McAlear mcalear@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research project will focus on using molecular techniques to characterize a
              new family of proteins (the Ebp2 proteins). The Ebp2 proteins are significant
              because they are required for eukaryotic cellular division.  Since the
              molecular and genetic techniques available in yeast provide powerful approaches
              for studying basic aspects of cellular biology, the EBP2 homolog from S.
              cerevisiae will be studied.   Preliminary analysis indicates that yeast Ebp2p
              is an essential nucleolar protein, and that ebp2 mutants suffer from defects
              related to rRNA metabolism and chromosome segregation. In order to gain a
              greater understanding of the role that Ebp2p plays in cellular metabolism, new
              ebp2 mutants will be created and characterized. Random and site-directed
              mutagenesis will be used to alter critical residues within the Ebp2 protein,
              and these mutations will be studied to determine the effects that they have on
              nucleolar metabolism and nuclear division. The genetic approaches of suppressor
              analysis and synthetic lethality will be used to identify proteins that
              interact with Ebp2p. To further define the role that Ebp2p plays in nuclear
              metabolism, microscopic analysis will be used to probe nuclear structure in
              wild type and mutant ebp2 cells. The Ebp2 protein will also be investigated to
              determine if it is associated with chromatin and whether it functions in
              chromosome condensation of the nucleolar rDNA repeat sequences. 
Since the
              analysis of a novel protein in yeast (Ebp2p) offers a great opportunity to
              engage students in basic research, these studies will be coordinated with the
              education of students in molecular genetics. Also, in collaboration with the
              Project to Increase Mastery of Mathematics and Science (PIMMS), a Biotechnology
              Workshop will be developed to train high school and middle school teachers in
              experiments in basic molecular biology and genetics. These workshops will use
              yeast and bacteria as model organisms, and they will emphasize hands-on
              approaches for teaching basic concepts of genetics to high school and middle
              school students. 


