Title       : CAREER: Rendering Algorithms for Tactile and Haptic Display of Multidimensional
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9875658

Award Number: 9875658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Barner barner@eecis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This career plan focuses on the broad challenges of designing every-citizen
              interfaces (ECIs) to the National Information Infrastructure (NII) and fully
              integrating individuals with disabilities into the education and employment
              mainstream. These are complementing challenges as full access to the NII is
              becoming integral to not only education and employment, but also leisure time
              pursuits. Access is of particular concern to individuals with physical,
              sensory, and other disabilities who often find current interfaces difficult or
              impossible to use. This career plan consists of a tightly coordinated set of
              research, education, and mentoring activities designed to address the NII
              interface and educational needs of individuals with disabilities.

Within the
              broad objectives, the specific research activities of this plan focus on the
              development of rendering algorithms that will allow individuals with visual
              impairments access to multidimensional data through haptic and tactile means.
              Information that is multidimensional, such as complex mathematical expressions
              or recorded sensor data, is generally displayed in an inaccessible visual form.
              While tactile and haptic hardware technology continues to advance and can be
              brought to bear on this problem, relatively little research has been applied to
              the development of rendering algorithms for the effective display of
              information. This research will address the following fundamental issues:

  
              Optimal data decomposition for low-relief tactile and dynamic haptic display -
              Methods for extracting data features, including edges, contours, region
              boundaries, and textures that faithfully represent the underlying data will be
              developed.

   Optimal feature and multiresolution display - Display methods
              that are optimized for the low tactile and kinesthetic bandwidth will be
              developed. These methods will present data features in a form that can be
              comprehended tactilely and haptically. Moreover, these display methods will
              allow for a multiresolution display in which detail level can be easily
              controlled.

The tactile and haptic rendering research will also develop
              multimodal methods and formalize this area of research borrowing from the more
              developed fields of sonification and general visualization.

The research
              objectives are closely integrated with a complementing set of education and
              mentoring objectives, including the development of related courses and the
              implementation of mentoring activities for students from underrepresented
              groups in the high school through graduate school levels. The specific
              educational and mentoring objectives include:

     Course Development -
              Courses will be developed that give students a theoretical foundation in areas
              critical to ECI design and will also introduce them to a wide array of
              problems, including disability related issues. Students will also work with
              community organizations to solve real-world problems and learn in a
              problem-based setting.

  Mentoring activities - Mentoring activities include
              an Internet based mentoring program for high school students with disabilities,
              summer internships and research opportunities, and advisement of a campus
              disability issues focused student organization.

The education and mentoring
              activities will be conducted in conjunction with the research activities, for
              instance through the use of research projects as teaching examples in courses
              and the inclusion of interns in research teams. Moreover, results from the
              research efforts will form new paradigm teaching tools that can be integrated
              into the curriculum. Through these coordinated efforts, the body of knowledge
              on ECI design will be advanced as will the opportunities available to
              individuals with disabilities.
