Title       : CAREER: Advanced Microfabricated Magnetics for Power and RF Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1999   
File        : a9875204

Award Number: 9875204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Sullivan charles.r.sullivan@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875204
Sullivan

Through the combined efforts of researchers and
              manufacturers all over the world, the capabilities of microprocessors continue
              to grow exponentially as predicted by Gordon Moore in 1965.  Progress in
              numerous fields is on track to continue to uphold Moore's Law.  But a new
              obstacle looms: powering very high-current, very low-voltage processors.  The
              difficulties in delivering this power with sufficient stability and fast enough
              response time have earned the industry nickname the Power Wall.  This project
              will develop innovations in microfabricated magnetic components that will allow
              microprocessor power delivery with performance well beyond the capabilities of
              other techniques now being studied, and will lay the foundations for advanced
              magnetics in a wide range of applications.

Future microprocessors will
              typically require supply currents on the order of 100 A. The power requirement
              is mitigated by scaling supply voltages to lower levels, but the resulting low
              impedance makes stable power delivery more difficult.  A small-size,
              fast-response power converter will need to be located immediately adjacent to
              the processor.  Portable, battery powered systems impose even more stringent
              efficiency and size constraints.  Improved inductors are critical for meeting
              these requirements.  State-of-the-art inductors remain the largest and most
              expensive components in power converters, and they limit the efficiency and
              response time.  A new technology-such as microfabrication-must be applied.  But
              existing microfabricated magnetics exhibit poor efficiency, poor power density,
              or both.

This project will introduce several innovative approaches that will
              dramatically boost performance.  New magnetic materials will achieve low
              hysteresis and eddy-current losses, yet allow operation with high flux density
              in the 5-20 MHz range.  These properties will be obtained by using composite
              materials comprising nanoscale particles of magnetic metal in a ceramic matrix,
              deposited by vacuum evaporation.  In these materials, the ceramic will insulate
              the particles to prevent eddy currents, while the ultrafine particles will
              reduce coercivity and hysteresis loss.  In addition, a newly proposed
              fabrication process will use anisotropic silicon etching and other
              microfabrication techniques to form inductors in a configuration optimized for
              low-impedance high-current applications.  The result will be higher power
              density and efficiency with a streamlined process flow that will simplify
              magnetic material deposition.  Inductors using the new material and process
              will be fabricated and tested, and applications will be developed in
              cooperation with industrial partners including Intel Corp. and Volterra, who
              will collaborate on implementation of circuits and provide financial
              support.

The new magnetics technology will have a broad range of
              applications including power conversion in other systems and inductors for RF
              communications circuits; the new magnetic materials are expected to have good
              properties up to frequencies on the order of 1 GHz.

The project is designed
              to capture synergy between research and education.  Students including
              first-year undergraduates, upper-level undergraduates, and Ph.D. candidates
              will be actively involved in the research program.  To meet the significant
              challenges associated with providing undergraduates with a meaningful research
              experience, successful, proven programs in undergraduate research will be
              combined with refinements in student teaming.  The research program will be
              structured to provide opportunities for useful and satisfying work at
              appropriate skill levels for undergraduates, by taking advantage of the unique
              opportunities afforded by work in microfabrication.

Outreach and curriculum
              innovation will help develop the next generation of engineers.  Outreach
              activities involving high-school and junior-high-school students will attract
              them to engineering; courses that let undergraduates sample the fun of
              real-world problem solving will inspire them to continue; and a streamlined
              class in power electronics and electromechanical energy conversion based on
              modem applications will encourage them to study this critical area.
***

