Title       : CAREER: Performance Evaluation of Gigabit Ethernet Networks, A Systems and
               Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a9875177

Award Number: 9875177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Christensen christen@csee.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   It is evident that both ATM and Ethernet networks will comprise the
              "network of the future". Ethernet
networks are rapidly transitioning from
              half-duplex CSMA/CD to full-duplex switched operation. While much of the
              current research in ATM networks is relevant to both types of networks, there
              are significant remaining problems in the area of Ethernet networks that
              urgently need to be addressed.  These problems include:
     1. The traffic
              characteristics of future gigabit applications have not yet been predicted. 
              Current traffic
models may not be applicable for gigabit applications. 
              Therefore, better knowledge of traffic from
expected gigabit applications is
              needed to be able to predict network performance.
     2. For high-speed
              networks, memory speed limits output buffered and shared memory switch
              architectures to low port densities.  For this reason, scheduling algorithms
              which achieve high throughputs for input buffered only ATM switches have been
              the subject of recent research.  Yet, there do not exist scheduling algorithms
              or switch architectures which accommodate variable length packets and Quality
              of Service (QoS) in input buffered only switches and full-duplex repeaters.
  
                3. While switched operation will likely be predominant in future networks,
              inefficiencies in gigabit half-duplex CSMA/CD Ethernet still remain and need to
              be addressed.
     The objective of this four year CAREER program is to
              address these problems. Existing traffic models are
largely based on time
              series analysis of traffic traces resulting in a limited understanding of the
              causes of observed traffic characteristics.  New knowledge will be gained by
              instrumenting application and protocol implementations to study the user
              behavior, source data objects, and application and protocol behaviors of
              expected gigabit applications.  Using the resulting traffic models as input to
              performance models that will be developed, methods for highly scalable, input
              buffered only switches to provide high throughput and efficient support for
              bursty, best-effort data traffic and guaranteed-service traffic streams will be
              advanced.  The hypothesis is that by using traffic shaping at each input port,
              the scheduling algorithm can be made simple and scalable. The applicability of
              packet bursting and spacing, priority queueing, and selective PAUSE flow
              control will be studied.  To support CSMA/CD on large span, half-duplex Gigabit
              Ethernet networks with high-data rates, the current minimum 64-byte packet size
              must effectively be increased to 512 bytes to allow for correct collision
              detection.  The IEEE 802.3 Gigabit Ethernet standard uses packet bursting to
              transmit small packets.  A more efficient and interoperable method of operation
              whereby late collisions are permitted, can be detected, and handled correctly
              will be studied.
     A systems and experimental approach will be used to
              tackle the problems.  A laboratory of Gigabit Ethernet
attached personal
              computers and servers will be built. This laboratory will be used for direct
              perimentation, as a facility for parallel execution of simulation models, and
              for related educational activities at both the graduate and undergraduate
              levels.  A tool for parallel independent replications of simulation models will
              be developed and made generally available.  Much more significantly, new ideas
              in traffic modeling, new knowledge in switch scheduling for variable length
              packets with support for QoS, and new methods for using CSMA/CD in large span,
              half-duplex Ethernet networks will be presented in appropriate conferences and
              journals, and to standards bodies.  To solicit input and generate external
              participation, a WWW site with a bulletin board will be established for
              researchers and developers from academia and industry to share software tools,
              new ideas, and findings.  In addition, a workshop will be held.  New ideas will
              thus be seeded into the research community.
     Education Plan
The College
              of Engineering at the University of South Florida currently has a new
              undergraduate degree track
in Information Systems . A graduate track in
              Information Systems is under consideration.  This CAREER program will advance a
              strong networking and performance modeling focus for this Information Systems
              degree track.  New courses and curricula will be developed and research results
              will be brought into the classroom.  The emphasis will be on experimental and
              hands-on projects where students will work in teams to solve real world
              problems using cutting-edge knowledge.  The educational materials developed as
              a result of this project will be used as a contribution to ongoing ACM and
              IEEE-CS efforts to develop curriculum guidelines for Information Systems
              programs. To encourage undergraduate students to pursue graduate education in
              engineering, portions of this CAREER program have been explicitly identified
              for undergraduate student research involvement.
