Title       : CAREER: Bayesian Simulation Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9875508

Award Number: 9875508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geof H. Givens geof@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Computer simulation models are widely used in diverse scientific disciplines for
              understanding the relationships between variables; examples include models of
              pharmacokinetics, ecosystems, epidemiology, climate, and biological
              populations.  Evidence related to such models and their predictions arises both
              from observed data and from the opinions of experts whose expertise is amassed
              over years of experience and study rather than being based on any particular
              set of data.  Statistical methods to combine these two types of information
              will be developed to help researchers make overall inferences about
              simulations, particularly future projections and the uncertainties therein. 
              The statistical innovations developed will also deal with the difficult
              situation when expert opinions conflict.  These methods will be flexible,
              powerful new tools for non-statisticians and scientists in diverse fields to
              enhance what they learn from their own simulation modeling.

Several
              instructional initiatives are also planned, with the primary goal of student
              recruitment and interdisciplinary cross-fertilization.  They are designed to
              nurture an early enthusiasm for applied statistics and then to serve as a
              conduit to direct students towards undergraduate and graduate degrees in the
              field, as well as to provide a pipeline of statistically literate students of
              the scientific workforce.  The proposed research will also enrich graduate
              education by providing opportunities for students in several disciplines to
              interact and participate in relevant research.  A key area of student
              participation will be the development of an interactive computer program that
              can be used by scientists from diverse disciplines engaged in simulation
              modeling to draw statistically sound inferences from their simulation
              experiments.  In this sense the project should benefit the broader scientific
              community.

