Title       : Career: Self-Organization of Amphiphilic Block Copolymers for the Preparation of
               Highly Ordered Materials: A Research and Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9875848

Award Number: 9875848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paschalis Alexandridis palexand@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9875848
P. Alexandridis
SUNY

The ability of amphiphilic
              molecules to organize at various configurations and lengthscales allows
              multiple levels of organization, often with remarkable precision.  In
              additional to all living creatures being manifestations of such
              self-organization (e.g. lipid cell membranes), numerous technical products and
              processes that involve, e.g., surfactants and copolymers, are taking advantage
              of properties (compartmentalization, compatibilization, rheological) afforded
              by self-organization.

The present investigation focuses on amphiphilic block
              copolymers, macromolecules consisting of hydro(solvo)philic and
              hydro(solvo)phobic blocks (or grafts), that are very interesting from the
              aspect of both formulations and materials synthesis, and offer advantages over
              typical surfactants.  The macromolecular nature of the amphiphilic block
              copolymers affords great flexibility in setting the desired morphology, and
              allows a considerable variation of the length- and time-scales characteristic
              to the microstructure.  An important degree of freedom (compared to
              "solvent-free" block copolymers) is the presence of selective solvent(s), that
              can modulate the phase behavior and structure, and also act as suitable media
              for chemical synthesis.

The goals of the research are two-fold:  to achieve
              a desired microstructure via means of self-organization of amphiphilic block
              copolymers and to stabilize such microstructure for the synthesis of
              microporous materials.  To this end, it is planned to study the self-assembly
              of amphiphilic block copolymers under equilibrium conditions and utilize this
              knowledge to prepare formulations offering desired compartmentalization and
              release properties, use shear for aligning microdomains and inducing order over
              long ranges, investigate mass transport in ordered systems in the context of
              structure formation and dissolution, and explore the synthesis of ordered
              materials via the crosslinking of the amphiphiles participating in the
              structure or via polymerization in the  solvent domains.

In the education
              front, having recognized the fact that the pharmaceutical, personal care
              products, and food industries, where amphiphiles are primarily used, are
              emerging fields for employment of chemical engineers, it is proposed to develop
              a curriculum wit courses on colloids, polymers, surfaces, and advanced
              materials, and incorporate research term-projects into these courses and
              involve undergraduate students at various steps of the proposed research.  On a
              more general level, cooperative learning and learning by objective will be
              introduced to all courses, with a specific interest in the Introduction to
              Chemical Engineering sophomore course. Outreach activities to high schools and
              to community colleges will aim in introducing chemical engineering as well as
              colloids and polymers to abroader audience. Overall, the educational plan aims
              in promoting creativity, providing an enriching environment for graduate and
              undergraduate research, and fully integrating research and educational
              activities.  

   

