Title       : PECASE: Perceptual Issues in Data Visualization: Conveying 3D Shape and Depth
               through Texture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9875368

Award Number: 9875368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria L. Interrante interran@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Visualization - the visual representation of information through images -
is
              vital in a broad range of scientific and medical applications. A
              good
visualization conveys the essential information in a complex
              dataset
clearly and effectively, emphasizing important features and
              minimizing
extraneous detail. The usefulness of a particular visualization
              technique
can be quantified in terms of the extent to which it improves
              task
performance for a given application.  This makes it possible to
              compare
different methods or to pick optimal parameter values for a given
              method.
The process of designing an effective visualization, however, remains
              for
the most part a black art, terribly ad hoc, largely guided by
              intuition.
The PI's research is a quest for a deeper understanding of the
              science
behind this art, guided by theoretical and experimental insights from
              human
visual perception.  This can be used to enhance all computer
              interfaces
that use elements studied here.

Specifically, the focus of the
              research is to investigate
perceptually-based methods for more effectively
              conveying the
three-dimensional shape and relative depth of smoothly curving
              surfaces in
scientific datasets. Key applications for this work include
              the
visualization of superimposed isovalue surfaces in 3D scalar fields,
              and
the combined visualization of external and internal structures in
              medicine
and CAD. The investigator will begin by using controlled
              observer
experiments to thoroughly evaluate texture as a device for enhancing
              the
perception of shape. This will identify and quantify the key aspects
              of
texture in interface design. The investigator will also pursue
              the
automatic generation of non-photorealistic, pen-and-ink
              style
representations of arbitrary polygonally-defined objects for interactive
              applications. 
The advantage of such techniques is that some datasets need to
              be represented in a more
subtly indicative style than traditional graphics
              renderings. Complementing
the research component of this project is an
              educational component,
directed at both undergraduate and graduate students,
              aimed at inspiring
interest and fostering creativity through hands-on
              experiences in
visualization.



