Title       : CAREER: Tomographic Body Modeling for Radiation Dosimetry Calculations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2001   
File        : a9875532

Award Number: 9875532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xie G. Xu xug2@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875532
Xu
The research plan part of this four-year NSF/CAREER program will
              develop adult male and adult female whole-body models for ionizing-radiation
              dosimetry calculations.  Monte Carlo methods will be investigated for adapting
              these models for clinical dosimetry studies.  The project will use
              CT/MR/photography images from the Visible Human Project to construct new
              tomographic models that are much more anatomically accurate than the existing
              simplified models. Fundamental studies will focus on five areas: 1) developing
              methods for adapting CT/MRI/photographic voxel data to construct body models;
              2) segmentation and processing of extremely large tomographic data sets; 3)
              integration of the 3-D and anatomically accurate models into state-of-the-art
              Monte Carlo computer codes; 4) simulation of clinical modalities in radiology,
              radiotherapy, and nuclear medicine; and 5) developing techniques for
              determining organ doses and effective doses to patients.

This innovative
              project defines a new and exciting area of research that involves
              interdisciplinary efforts in both radiological engineering and biomedical
              engineering.  Essential developments will provide, for the first time, the
              extremely fine (0.3 mm3 voxels) computational adult male and female whole-body
              models needed to make significant advances toward accurate 3-D Monte Carlo
              simulations of radiation transport and interaction in the human body under
              realistic clinical conditions.  Results from a preliminary study at Rensselaer
              have demonstrated the feasibility of the proposed approach and identified key
              issues to be further addressed.  This project is an ambitious undertaking, but
              Rensselaer's experience and recent progress by the scientific community in the
              proposed areas of investigation argue cogently that these goals are indeed
              achievable.  This project will advance the state of the art in tomographic data
              processing, radiation dosimetry, and Monte Carlo simulation.  It will
              eventually revolutionize the way clinical radiation dosimetry is performed by
              opening doors for patient-specific organ dose calculations, thus significantly
              improving the quality of clinical diagnosis and treatment involving radiation. 
              The successful execution of this project will also help establish a leadership
              role for the U.S. in this important research field.

The education plan
              focuses on four innovative activities, which are integrated into the research
              plan: 1) establishing a strong undergraduate research program in radiological
              and biomedical engineering, 2) adopting computers for interactive learning, 3)
              developing a new course/book in the proposed area, and 4) forming a university
              consortium.  These activities will enhance existing educational efforts, which
              are also addressed.


