Title       : CAREER: Genetics of Pattern Formation in the Arabidopsis Shoot Apex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1999   
File        : a9875371

Award Number: 9875371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia S. Springer patricia.springer@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9109,9178,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The shoot apical meristem (SAM) is the ultimate source of all above
              ground
tissues of the plant.  The SAM gives rise to leaves, stems, flowers,
              and
axillary buds, and is responsible for the pattern of the shoot. 
              Despite
the crucial role of the shoot apical meristem in plant development,
              almost
nothing is known about the mechanisms by which organs are produced from
              the
flanks of this structure.  Using a novel mutagenesis system, enhancer
              trap
(ET) and gene trap (GT) transposant lines that exhibit GUS reporter
              gene
expression in discrete domains in the SAM or surrounding cells have
              been
identified.  Two transposant lines show GUS expression specific to the
              SAM.
 The genes controlling GUS expression in these lines could play a role
              in
SAM identity and/or function.  Eight transposant lines have been
              identified
that show GUS expression in discrete, novel domains surrounding the
              SAM.
These expression patterns do not appear to reflect anatomical
              or
morphological features, but define new domains based on gene
              expression.
The genes controlling GUS expression in these lines may function
              to define
boundaries during organ initiation.  These lines were identified
              based on
GUS expression patterns, and the genes controlling that expression
              are of
unknown function.  A series of analyses will be performed in order to
              begin
to understand the role that these genes play in meristem function
              and
organogenesis.  The genes will be cloned and sequenced, and a
              detailed
characterization of their expression patterns will be performed.  In
              order
to identify genetic relationships between genes that function in
              the
meristem, GUS expression in our gene trap and enhancer trap lines will
              be
examined in backgrounds containing mutations that affect meristem
              function,
and in transgenic plants that ectopically express selected meristem
              genes.  

The educational component of this proposal is geared towards
              training
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in
              modern
methods in Arabidopsis research.  Arabidopsis thaliana is a model
              organism
for studies in plant biology.  The many available Arabidopsis
              resources are
of use to all plant biology researchers.  In order for plant
              biology
researchers to be able to take full advantage of the Arabidopsis
              resources
that are available, it is important that they be familiar with the
              standard
methods used in Arabidopsis research.  To this end, an intensive
              laboratory
course will be developed, that will teach standard Arabidopsis
              methods.
Materials from the PI's research program will be used for the
              laboratories.
 In addition, the PI will serve as a mentor to graduate students
              and
postdoctoral researchers who will carry out the research component of
              this
proposal.



