Title       : CAREER: A Direct In Situ Approach for Evaluating Liquefaction Characteristics of
               Soil Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9875430

Award Number: 9875430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen M. Rathje e.rathje@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Career research involves developing in situ techniques that can directly
              assess the liquefaction characteristics of near surface deposits, within 5 to
              10 meters of the ground surface.  More accurate and reliable determinations of
              liquefaction potential will be possible with these techniques and the state of
              knowledge regarding liquefaction will be advanced through various site
              investigations.

The research to be undertaken entails developing a
              liquefaction evaluation test that dynamically loads the soil in situ while
              measuring the induced strains and excess pore water pressures.  This testing
              technique will provide significantly more information regarding the
              liquefaction potential and pore pressure generation characteristics of a soil
              deposit than in currently possible with available empirically based
              liquefaction evaluation techniques.  Pore water pressure generation, migration,
              and dissipation during and after the induced shaking will be studied with
              embedded pore pressure transducers.  Data from pore pressure transducers in the
              field, along with numerical modeling of the pore pressure generation phenomena,
              will provide validation of various pore pressure generation models.  This is
              situ testing technique will allow the liquefaction characteristics and
              liquefaction potential of soil deposits to be assessed more accurately, the
              pore pressure generation characteristics of soil deposits to be evaluated in
              situ, and the state of knowledge regarding liquefaction to be advanced.

As
              an integral part of this project, engineering students will be prepared for
              both technical and non-technical issues through the use of engineering cases in
              class-rooms.  An engineering case is a written account of a real engineering
              project.  Reading and discussing relevant cases in both undergraduate and
              graduate level engineering courses can better prepare students for engineering
              careers.



