Title       : CAREER: Microwave Variable Impedance Transmission Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a9875235

Award Number: 9875235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Weller weller@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875235
Weller
The objectives described in this proposal address the
              development and application of advanced methods for realizing circuit elements
              which are fundamental to microwave and mm-wave component design. The research
              focuses on new microwave transmission line architectures whose electrical
              characteristics can be manipulated using electrostatically-controlled tuning
              elements. By eliminating the need for RF-active device control, and
              incorporating microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) processing techniques,
              these lines will offer great latitude for integration, and are inherently fit
              for incorporation into MEMS microsensor design. The related education plan
              introduces the study of modern microwave sensor systems, through foal-world
              applications demonstrating the combined use of microwaves and other
              sciences.

The methodology used to produce the tunable transmission lines
              derives from the equivalence of distributed lines to cascaded, electrically
              small, series inductor-shunt capacitor (LC) pairs. In the planned approach,
              transmission line sections will be synthesized from LC pairs, each of which
              incorporates micromechanical tuning elements. The characteristic impedance and
              propagation constant, which are the defining properties of the transmission
              line, can be adjusted over wide tuning ratios using this new approach; a
              realistic goal is to achieve impedance ratios of 20:1. The tuning elements are
              monolithic, electro-statically driven micromembranes which flex under applied
              DC bias. These geometries are readily fabricated using conventional
              integrated-circuit and MEMS processing techniques.

As integrated microwave
              and mm-wave circuit design is based on distributed transmission line
              technology, the potential impact of variable impedance transmission lines is
              significant. Fundamentally new approaches to the design of matching networks,
              filters, attenuators and couplers are among the possible uses of these lines.
              They are a Iow-power, essentially passive alternative to active (RF) device
              control, and thus an enabling technology for applications such as advanced
              phased array antennas, integrated sensor/communications systems, and
              RF-analog/digital chips.

The research efforts will concentrate on
              determining optimal geometries for the tuning elements and control electrodes,
              and on their utilization in the transmission line configurations. Issues
              relating to drive voltages, propagation loss, frequency bandwidth and phase
              compensation will be addressed. This work will be conducted using experimental
              characterization in combination with circuit-level and numerical
              electromagnetic modeling. The approach will be demonstrated in the design of
              mm-wave, variable matching networks and attenuators.

The education plan
              centers on the development of a Sensor System Design course. This senior level,
              project-based course will use a case study of a real-world, microwave sensor
              application as the focus of each semester offering. Individual students, or
              groups of two, will be responsible for the design and development of particular
              sub-systems, e.g., RF, communications and signal conditioning. A significant
              feature of this course is that each sensor will be conceived in collaboration
              with a USF research center or a local company, which will provide the relevant
              scientific background, assist in system architecture design, and manage the
              actual field-deployment of the sensor. Development risks are minimized by
              keeping commercial off-the-shelf versions of each sub-system on-hand, and by
              maintaining a strictly academic association with the collaborators. The design
              course will pursue the objective of helping students learn how to learn, while
              at the same time providing a broad exposure to system-level engineering
              applications. Opportunities to transfer course material to community youth
              groups are planned.
***

