Title       : PECASE: Mechanically Robust Micromechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9875817

Award Number: 9875817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don DeVoe ddev@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This CAREER project adopts an integrated research and education strategy
              centered on the development of mechanically robust three-dimensional
              mechanisms. By taking advantage of recent developments in silicon-based
              fabrication, a new approach to the parallel manufacture of mechanically robust
              spatial micromechanisms has become feasible. Such micromechanisms, with
              dimensions ranging from several microns to several millimeters, are uniquely
              capable of coupling macro-scale forces and disturbances to precise micro-scale
              motions. This effort represents an integrated research and education strategy
              centered around the development of mechanically robust silicon micromechanisms.
              The research component of this work focuses on developing a fundamental
              understanding of the manufacturing and design issues involved in silicon
              micromechanism fabrication. Novel MEMS processing techniques will be employed
              to study the design, circuit integration, microactuation, and packaging of
              silicon micromechanisms. Systems-level issues will be addressed, including VLSI
              and MEMS integration using focused ion beam manufacturing, powering and sensing
              techniques, on-chip thermal microactuation, on-chip feedback position control,
              and packaging of fabricated devices. The educational component of this work
              will combine research-based education with an industrial outreach program.
              Specific tasks include undergraduate and graduate-level MEMS courses, an
              industrial short course on microfabrication, and a multi-user micromechanism
              foundry service. 
     The development of supporting technologies for spatial
              silicon micromechanisms represents a significant advance in the field of MEMS.
              Micromechanisms with six degrees-of-freedom are feasible in the technology,
              allowing for a greatly extended design space compared to traditional devices.
              Potential applications include miniature robotics, high-precision medical
              tools, and arrays of large-displacement actuators for micro-scale
              manufacturing. The research is expected to extend the current design space for
              MEMS, and to contribute fundamental advances to micromechanism design and
              fabrication technology.

