Title       : CAREER : Understanding the Role of Process Variables on Properties of
               Multi-Phase Polymeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a9875321

Award Number: 9875321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramanan Krishnamoorti ramanan@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9875321
Krishnamoorti
The underlying theme motivating this CAREER education
              and research plan is the need to understand and disseminate fundamental
              scientific knowledge regarding materials, specifically polymeric materials,
              with the perspective of the final application of such knowledge.  The research
              plan will focus on understanding the role of process variables on properties of
              multi-phase polymeric materials.  Despite the widespread use of multi-phase
              polyolefin blends, little rigorous information regarding the effect of process
              variables such as pressure and shear are available on their phase behavior. 
              With the focus on recycling of polymers, with minimal sorting or raw materials,
              and the advent of novel metallocene catalysts has highlighted the need to
              understand the melt state and crystalline state phase behavior of polyolefin
              blends.  Using model polyolefins, specifically ethylene rich ethylene-butene-1
              random copolymers, we propose to study the effect of pressure on the melt state
              liquid-liquid phase behavior and the solid state structure of the blend.  By
              carefully controlling the molecular weight and the comonomer composition of
              each of the components, the bulk ambient pressure melt state phase behavior and
              component crystallization behavior can be carefully tailored.  With this
              capability, using high pressure small angle neutron scattering, small angle
              x-ray scattering and small angle light scattering we envisage to gain a
              thorough understanding of the parameters governing the solid state structure
              and properties.  Further, by focusing on thin film behavior in both the melt
              and the solid state, we plan to establish the three dimensional structure in
              such films using atomic force microscopy and neutron reflectivity.  Issues such
              as the effects of confinement on the crystallization characteristics and on the
              melt state phase behavior will be investigated.  Such information is vital in
              understanding the role of interphases in controlling the final structure and
              hence properties.  Finally, preliminary studies relating the final properties
              in the solid state to the structure and processing are
              proposed.
%%%
Integrating non-traditional disciplines such as materials and
              polymer science to the fundamental scientific core of chemical engineering is
              essential for the continued success of this discipline.  Additionally, the
              demands of an urban university located in the heart of the nation's
              petrochemical and polymer industries, require unique techniques for training,
              re-training and dissemination of knowledge.  Mentoring of undergraduate and
              high school students in materials research is proposed.  It is also proposed to
              use the latest technological innovations such as video link ups as well as the
              web as tools to supplement traditional classes.  In addition an introductory
              course for senior undergraduates and graduate students elucidating the
              principles and practice of polymer science and engineering is envisaged. 
              Finally, a short course is also planned in order to update industrial audiences
              of the latest advances in the area of nano and micro structured materials.
***
               

