Title       : CAREER: Providing Interactive VOD Services in Multicast Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9875513

Award Number: 9875513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lixin Gao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,4097,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator (PI) will study efficient schemes that provide
              interactive video-on-demand (VOD) services in multicast networks.  Interactive
              VOD services allow a subscriber to select the content of
his/her choice at any
              time, and are likely to become one of the most successful services in the 
              emerging broadband integrated services digital networks. The great challenge in
              the design of a VOD system is to address
the bottleneck on the server
              network-I/O bandwidth for delivering videos to a large number of users. At the
              core of this design issue is the problem of efficient scheduling of server and
              network resources so as to satisfy various requests from a diverse set of
              clients. This research is a systematic study of efficient schemes for
              scheduling server and network resources. In addition, the PI will explore
              avenues that facilitate
interactive operations without making excessive
              demands on server and network resources. The PI will also build a testbed
              incorporating the proposed schemes on the very high performance Backbone
              Network Service
(vBNS) and the Internet Multicast Backbone (Mbone). The
              testbed will allow the researcher to address implementation issues and to
              experiment with the proposed schemes and additional issues arising from these
              experiments.

Education Focus:
The PI is committed to a career in
              undergraduate computer science education. Since coming to Smith College --a
              four-year liberal arts college for women, the PI has incorporated multimedia
              and networking concepts into the computer science curriculum at all levels.
              Multimedia networking is an essential and important aspect of the ``information
              revolution''.  The proposed research provides an ideal framework for
              undergraduate women's participation. The research project described requires
              extensive simulations to bolster the analyses and algorithm designs. The
              implementation of and experimentation with the testbed described will provide a
              long-term undergraduate research program. Through the project described in this
              proposal, the PI plans to continue supervising undergraduate women to do
              research in multimedia networking. She also plans to attract more undergraduate
              women to major in computer science and mentor
women in this field through
              being a role model, one-to-one interaction, and student career advising. These
              are all activities strongly supported by Smith in the form of financial and
              administrative resources, outreach programs.


