Title       : CAREER: Efficient Distributed Resource Allocation Algorithms, with Application
               to Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9875221

Award Number: 9875221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Rulnick rulnick@ece.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              While there is a definite need for engineers well versed in areas such as
              algorithms, economics, and management, there is little opportunity to add these
              areas to an already crowded engineering curriculum.  Hence it is incumbent upon
              engineering educators to diversify the existing curriculum to incorporate these
              topics wherever possible.  It is of interest, then, that certain kinds of
              engineering problems give rise to these subjects naturally.  For example, in
              networking and communications it is not uncommon to encounter systems that
              would benefit from decentralized operation, and possibly even fully distributed
              or market-type" operations, in which the distributed actors are allowed to
              perform independently and free of centrally imposed constraints.  The engineer
              must then must ensure that the "market" leads to the desired (e.g., fair or,
              more commonly, efficient) operational solution.  This project involves research
              in wireless communication networks and the integration of algorithm design,
              economic, and management issues arising therein into the engineering
              curriculum.  

Power control is an important element in modern wireless
              communication networks, and is essential in networks based on IS-95 or code
              division multiple access.  This project's research is directed toward power
              control systems which, unlike conventional power control systems, do not follow
              a received-power balancing or signal-to-interference ratio balancing algorithm.
               Instead, the ne3w systems target minimum energy consumption for a given
              quality of service.  They also differ from their predecessors because they
              optimize dynamically and cooperatively - a sufficiently high interference
              levels, a transmitter begins to decrease its power.  By contrast, essentially
              all existing power control systems call for nodes to increase power when faced
              with increased interference, in some cases to the point of saturation at all
              mutually interfering nodes.  Power control systems based on the new approach
              have the potential to outperform conventional systems significantly, in terms
              of offering better stability and equivalent throughputs at considerably lower
              average powers.  While the benefits are system-wide, the actions that lead to
              them are purely selfish from the standpoint of the transmitter, and require no
              explicit coordination with other nodes.  This research aims to exploit these
              principles for the development of improved power control algorithms and, more
              generally, for efficient distributed resource allocation algorithms applicable
              to a variety of engineering problems.





