Title       : CAREER: A Study of Temperature in Rapid Thermal Engineering of Glass Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9875860

Award Number: 9875860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted Bennett bennett@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator proposes to study pulsed laser deposition and thermal
              processing of glass films for micro-technologies.  Thermal engineering is the
              single most powerful technique for controlling the thermo- physical,
              electrical, optical, and mechanical properties of films.  In pulsed laser
              deposition and processing of glass films, the time-scale and the energy cascade
              process prevent notions of classical equilibrium transport from providing even
              a first order accurate description of some aspects of processes.  This program
              will explore the plurality of "temperature" in microscale systems, and
              establish interrelationships between characteristic values.  Typical questions
              such as what is the relationship between the microstructural temperature of a
              glass and the translational temperature of the vapor used to deposit the film
              and how is the translational temperature of a vapor plume related to the
              temperature of the sputttering target will be examined.  Facets by which the
              processing temperatures can control film properties will be studied.

Coupled
              with the research is a program to expand the core competencies of mechanical
              engineers to include microscale thermal engineering.  The course "Thermal
              Nature of Matter" will be developed to give a nontrivial background into energy
              storage and transport at the atomic level.  This class will combine new
              processing techniques with a fundamental understanding of microscale thermal
              science.
     
