Title       : CAREER: Reorganization of the Vertebrate Golgi Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9875939

Award Number: 9875939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin S. Glick bsglick@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The Golgi apparatus is organized into stacks of membrane-enclosed cisternae,
              but the processes that generate this remarkable structure are still poorly
              understood. Conventional models represent the Golgi as a series of stable,
              well-defined subcompartments. However, emerging data favor a 'cisternal
              maturation' model that views the Golgi not as an independent organelle, but as
              a dynamic outgrowth of the endoplasmic reticulum. Golgi cisternae are
              postulated to form de novo by the fusion of ER-derived vesicles, which are
              produced at specialized subdomains called transitional ER (tER) sites.

The
              goal of this research is to understand the processes that create tER sites and
              Golgi stacks. As part of this effort, the current proposal focuses on
              characterizing the mechanisms that mediate reorganization of the Golgi
              apparatus. The Golgi of vertebrate cells undergoes dramatic rearrangements
              under certain conditions, including depolymerization of microtubules and
              passage of the cells through mitosis. Based on the cisternal maturation model,
              it seems plausible that some of these reorganization events involve the transit
              of Golgi components through the ER, followed by the emergence of new Golgi
              structures next to tER sites. This hypothesis will be tested by a combination
              of biochemical assays and fluorescence microscopy studies.

The research
              portion of this proposal has two Specific Aims:

1. TO DEVELOP A BIOCHEMICAL
              ASSAY THAT WILL REVEAL WHETHER GOLGI PROTEINS TRANSIT THROUGH THE ER DURING
              GOLGI REORGANIZATION. Transit through the ER will be detected by the action of
              ER-localized glucosidases. These glucosidases will initially be blocked with
              specific inhibitors, thereby loading the Golgi with proteins that contain
              glucosylated oligosaccharides. After removal of the inhibitor, Golgi
              reorganization will be induced, and then Golgi proteins will be analyzed for
              the presence or absence of glucose residues.
2. TO ANALYZE THE LINK BETWEEN
              tER FUNCTION AND GOLGI REORGANIZATION USING FLUORESCENCE MICROSCOPY. The
              cisternal maturation model predicts that the distribution and activity of tER
              sites will influence Golgi reorganization. This prediction will be tested using
              fluorescence microscopy. For example, if a drug treatment initially causes
              Golgi proteins to return to the ER, the reorganized Golgi structures should be
              found near tER sites. To examine the dynamics of tER sites, these sites will be
              labeled with a Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) fusion construct.

These
              experiments will synergize with ongoing analysis of budding yeasts in the Glick
              laboratory. By elucidating conserved aspects of the tER-Golgi system, these
              studies aim to provide a unified molecular description of Golgi stack
              formation.

This research plan is closely integrated with Dr. Glick's CAREER
              education objectives. In his undergraduate and graduate cell biology classes,
              the Golgi serves as a useful example for illustrating three key lessons: 1,
              cell biological processes are best understood by synthesizing data from diverse
              model organisms; 2, cells were designed not by a logical engineer, but by an
              opportunistic evolution; and 3, one must always be willing to reconsider basic
              assumptions.  More generally, a recurring theme from Dr. Glick's explorations
              of the Golgi is the importance of viewing each question from multiple
              perspectives. This point is emphasized strongly in Dr. Glick's teaching, which
              focuses on developing students' capacity for critical thinking. In turn, the
              exercise of formulating and presenting these insights stimulates the teacher's
              own thinking about research-related questions.

