Title       : CAREER: Achievable QoS and Scheduling Policies for Integrated Services Wireless
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1999     
File        : a9875209

Award Number: 9875209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Capone jcapone@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In integrated services wireless networks, geographically distributed
              heterogeneous applications must share a common wireless channel.  To coordinate
              the sharing of the transmission resources, a multiple access   protocol such as
              time-division multiple access (TDMA) or code-division multiple access (CDMA) is
              required. To control QoS in an integrated services network, usually both call
              admission and resource management   (scheduling  at the packet level) among 
              the admitted calls are needed.

At call admission, it must first be
              determined if there exists a slot allocation (as in the case of TDMA) or power
              management (as in case of CDMA) policy that can deliver a target QoS  to each
              application in the
network.   To answer this question, the region of
              achievable QoS (set of  performance  vectors that  can  be  delivered under any
              admissible policy) needs to be identified.  The region of achievable QoS will
              depend on  the underlying channel conditions and the multiple access
              technology.  Each access technology has its inherent advantages and
              disadvantages in combating the effects of the wireless channel and in its ease
              of accommodating variable rate service while delivering diverse QoS
              requirements.  The determination of the region of achievable QoS leads to the
              development of call admission and scheduling functions.

The PI has been
              conducting research in the area of integrated services over wireless networks
              for the past  five years  and now proposes to translate some of his and others
              prior research into viable technology
and educational tools through the
              development of an integrated services wireless network (ISWN) test-bed.   The
              ISWN project is multifaceted in the sense that it contains educational,
              development, and research components.  The project will be implemented in three
              phases:  system design and specification, development  of novel approaches to
              support multi-media traffic and software implementation in an operational
              system.


