Title       : CAREER: Adaptive Signal Processing for Coded Time-Varying Wireless
               Multiple-Access Communications Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9875314

Award Number: 9875314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaodong Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

There is at present a worldwide effort to develop next-generation wireless
              communication systems. It is envisioned that many of the future wireless
              systems will incorporate considerable signal processing intelligence in order
              to provide advanced services such as multimedia transmission. In general,
              wireless channels can be very hostile media through which to communicate, due
              to substantial physical impediments, primarily radio-frequency interference and
              the time-varying nature of the channel. The need to provide universal wireless
              access at high data rates (which is the aim of many emerging wireless
              applications) presents a major technical challenge, and meeting this challenge
              necessitates the development of advanced signal processing techniques for
              multiple-access communications in non-stationary interference-rich
              environments.


This research involves the development of adaptive signal
              processing algorithms and architectures for application in future wireless
              communications systems featuring high user mobility, high data rate and high
              quality of service. The primary emphases of this research are on advanced
              receiver signal processing techniques, and on advanced transmitter signal
              processing techniques for wireless systems. The first of these focuses on
              developing adaptive signal reception techniques for jointly combating various
              impairments in time-varying wireless channels, such as radio-frequency
              interference (narrowband interference, multiple-access interference, impulsive
              ambient noise), multipath fading, channel dispersion, etc. A particular
              approach that will be examined in depth is the exploitation of the redundancy
              introduced by channel coding at the receiver for interference mitigation and
              channel tracking. The second addresses adaptive signal transmission techniques
              in time-varying wireless channels for improving network capacity. Specifically,
              adaptive antenna array transmission techniques and adaptive frequency hopping
              techniques are being studied, with the focus on rapid adaptivity to dynamic
              channel environments. This research is expected to culminate in the formulation
              of novel signal processing techniques and system design concepts applicable to
              future wireless communication systems. It is also anticipated that this
              research will influence many current and next generation communication systems
              planners and designers, to bring the promise of many new research techniques
              into the arena of wireless communications.


