Title       : CAREER: Regulation of Membrane Traffic by the Arl1 Protein in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a9875782

Award Number: 9875782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471458             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne G. Rosenwald rosenwaa@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This project has two broad objectives. First, a laboratory research program
              that supports education and training of graduate students and provides
              significant "hands-on" training in research for undergraduate students will be
              developed and implemented. Second, new strategies for teaching biology at the
              molecular level at both the graduate and undergraduate level in classroom and
              laboratory settings will be developed and implemented.

These research
              efforts will advance our understanding of a critical process for eukaryotic
              cell function, the movement of macromolecules between membrane-bound
              compartments (organelles). The regulation of this process, particularly how
              organelles maintain their unique assortment of protein and lipid components is
              currently not well understood. This research will address the question by
              examining the function of a protein hypothesized to regulate this process, the
              Arl 1 protein of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a guanine
              nucleotide-binding protein that binds alternately GDP and GTP. The hypothesis
              upon which the research portion of the proposal is based is the following: the
              Arl 1 protein, like its close relatives the Arf proteins, is a modulator of
              membrane traffic in a nucleotide-dependent manner and as a result is a member
              of a novel signaling pathway. This portion of the project has three goals, (1)
              examination of the interactions between Arl 1 proteins and guanine nucleotides,
              (2) determination of the role of Arl l protein in regulation of membrane
              traffic, and (3) isolation and characterization of proteins that interact with
              Arl 1 protein. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be significantly
              involved in achieving these goals.

To achieve the second objective, the
              undergraduate core curriculum for Biology will be revised to integrate several
              courses, Introduction to Biology, Biochemistry, and Genetics. This integrated
              curriculum will in turn form the basis for a newly approved Concentration in
              Molecular and Cellular Biology that will include many different course
              offerings, including Cell Biology, Developmental Biology, Population Genetics,
              and advanced seminars in current topics like signal transduction. In
              Biochemistry, the emphasis will shift from memorization of details to gaining
              an understanding of the underlying conceptual framework for this discipline.
              Necessary skills for rational scientific discourse, such as analytical
              thinking, writing, and oral skills, will be emphasized. Collaborative learning
              exercises will be implemented to augment the current lecture-based format. Use
              of existing computer technologies, as well as development of new computer-based
              tools, will further strengthen course work.  Additional programs will be
              undertaken to enhance mentoring and community outreach.


