Title       : CAREER: Exploring the Evolution of Galaxies and Large Scale Structure at z>1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9875448

Award Number: 9875448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Elston elston@astro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Richard Elston will carry out a five-year observational program to
              study the formation of galaxies and the large-scale structure in the Universe.
              The core of the program is the first systematic study of the clustering of
              galaxies at redshifts between z = 1 and 2. By observing the galaxies in the
              universe in this redshift range, we are seeing the Universe as it was about 7-9
              billion years ago.  The measurement of the number and richness of galaxy
              clusters when the universe was young provides a direct constraint on the
              amplitude of the initial power spectrum of the universe, from which all
              structures formed.  Additionally, this cluster data will be used to determine
              the mass density (Omega) and test for the presence of the cosmological constant
              (Lambda). 

Prof. Elston has developed a technique to search for distant
              clusters of galaxies in the near-infrared (IR).  The galaxies that populate the
              clusters tend to be red and therefore emit the bulk of their light in the
              near-IR.  Thus, the clusters tend to stand out much more prominently in the
              near-IR than in the optical. It has been shown the contrast of the clusters can
              be further enhanced by selecting galaxies with near-IR wavelength bands J-K
              >-1.8.  This makes it possible to select only galaxies at z > 1. This new
              technique was recently tested by observing a small galaxy cluster at z = 1.27
              in a small near-IR survey that was just completed.   The plan is to carry out a
              very wide field near-IR survey of 18 square degrees to K < 20.5 and J < 22.5.
              Due to the extreme optical faintness of the galaxies and since there is a lack
              of strong spectral features in the optical wavelengths for galaxies with 1.3 <
              z <2.3, galaxy redshifts using a near-IR multi-object spectrometer will be used
              to observe the galaxies.  The obtaining the spectra for thousands of possible
              cluster members in the IR was beyond the capability of any previously existing
              astronomical instrument. The new FLAMINGOS infrared wavelength instrument,
              which Prof. Elston is building and is to be completed in the fall of 1999, will
              be used for these observations.

A scientific education program aimed at
              elementary school students; undergraduate university students and graduate
              students in astronomy will be integrated with this observational research
              program.  Prof. Elston will organize an elementary school program that will
              bring both faculty and graduate students into elementary school classrooms
              throughout Alachua county Florida. Well focused "hands on" programs in
              astronomy will be presented in the classrooms. The will provide a teaching
              experience for graduate students.

A new observational lab course for
              undergraduate majors and minors will be developed.  Groups of students will
              organize, carry out, and report on an observational project using a remotely
              controlled telescope with a CCD camera.  Students will be encouraged to
              participate in all aspects of the observational and instrumentation
              programs.

Prof. Elston will be involved in heading an effort to restructure
              the graduate curriculum at the University of Florida.  Students need to have a
              fairly broad education.  An instrumentation course will be organized where a
              team of graduate students will build a CCD camera, interface it with a
              computer, take it to a telescope and complete an observational program. This
              program will teach the "real world" skills of team problem solving and
              management, while exposing the students to applied research areas such as
              instrumentation and computational science.  Graduate students will be
              encouraged to integrate at least a small amount of instrument development with
              their thesis research program. There will be lectures by persons from industry
              and regional laboratories to speak to the students about alternative career
              paths.
***


