Title       : CAREER: Atomic-Scale Microscopy and Spectroscopy: New Tools for Condensed Matter
               Physics Research and Interdisciplinary Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a9875565

Award Number: 9875565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Yazdani ayazdani@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875565
Yazdani
 
The recent advances in scanning probe microscopies are the
              unifying motivations for the proposed four-year CAREER development program,
              which integrates research at the forefront of condensed matter physics with an
              interdisciplinary educational program.  The research program proposes
              experiments in three critical and related areas of the physics of 
              superconductors: the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity, the
              suppression of  superconductivity in two-dimensions, and the interactions of an
              unconventional superconductor with local perturbations. It is the
              high-resolution tunneling microscopy, together with the imaging and atomic
              manipulation capabilities of our state-of-the-art scanning tunneling microscope
              (STM), that make the proposed research possible.  With this tool, we can make
              significant contributions to research in superconductivity and, moreover, we
              are in a position to address a wide range of problems in condensed matter
              physics.  The educational component of this program involves the development of
              a new course to provide theoretical and practical knowledge of STM and related
              instruments to advanced undergraduates  and beginning graduate students in a
              wide range of disciplines, from physics to biology. 
%%%
Using the newly
              developed scanning probe microscopes, it is now possible to image, manipulate,
              and probe properties of a variety of materials, from semiconductors to
              biological samples on very short length scales.  Using these techniques
              experiments will be performed in three critical areas of the physics of
              superconductors.  This research program is complemented by the development of a
              new course in scanning probe microscopy, which will introduce state-of-the-art
              techniques to graduate and undergraduate students in a wide range of
              disciplines in the physical and biological sciences. 
***

