Title       : Science as a Model Building Enterprise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9875989

Award Number: 9875989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92513              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Teller prteller@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Many take science to provide exact laws and as striving to complete a unified
              and exact picture of an objectively given world. In the last decade a competing
              view describes science as providing models of limited parts of the world, where
              the models describe only in limited respects and with limited degrees of
              accuracy. Prior work by a number of investigators suggest that this "model
              view" gives a much more accurate account than do traditional approaches of the
              intellectual product of science as it is actually practiced. However, many
              believe that the model view nonetheless faces crippling difficulties.

	This
              project will show that when one takes the model view as an account of the
              intellectual product of science as it is actually practiced, the objections can
              each be met or shown to be misplaced. It will be concluded that as an account
              of science as practiced the model view gives a better account than traditional
              approaches which describe science as providing us with theories composed of
              exact laws.

	The claim that the model view also provides us with the best
              available account of the (intellectual) aims of science is more contentious.
              Traditional approaches endorse "convergent realism", the view that science
              seeks to fill in an increasingly accurate, comprehensive and unified
              description of the objectively given world. The project will examine certain
              objections to this traditional view and show that when they are met the model
              view also provides the most plausible picture of the intellectual aims of
              science. The view to be advocated maintains that limited models give us real
              and objective, though always limited, understanding of restricted parts of the
              world and that we reasonably remain agnostic about the idea that what
              objectively exists is something which also could be given a completely unified
              and humanly accessible description.
