Title       : Career: Development Program in Research and Education: Molecular Engineering of
               Responsive, Self-Assembled Surfaces of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9875467

Award Number: 9875467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vinay K. Gupta vgupta@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9875467
V. K. Gupta/U. of  Ill. Urbana-Champaign 

Research
              Summary: The overall thrust of the research is to endow surfaces a capability
              for interacting intelligently with their environment.  The proposed CAREER
              project focuses on fulfilling a pre-requisite to intelligent surfaces -
              enhancing the sensitivity of surfaces.  By using self-assembling surfaces, two
              main questions will be addressed:

First, how can surfaces be formed that
              re-structure in response to selective wavelengths of light and show dramatic
              changes in interfacial properties such as wettability?  A hierarchical strategy
              will be explored based on magnifying properties of photo-isomerizable, small
              molecules that impact wetting (e.g., geometry and polarity) and organizing the
              molecules onto a solid substrate to further amplify the interfacial response. 
              Important questions to be answered are - can energetic barriers to assembly of
              polar molecules on a surface be overcome, and what molecular parameters impact
              the photo-stimulation efficiency?

Second, how can a surface's sensitivity to
              selective chemical species in its environment be controlled to permit only
              certain molecules to associate with the surface?  By focusing on molecular
              associations promoted primarily by the goodness-of-fit we will study the case
              where the host molecule is tethered at a surface so that it is neither
              completely mobile nor completely immobile.  A central objective will be to
              understand the role of structural organization and reorganization of the
              surface during association.  The influence of surface density of the hosts,
              steric barriers in accessing the host cavity, and molecular flexibility of the
              tethers of hosts to solid surfaces will be clarified.

Besides identifying
              principles for engineering surfaces, optical control of interfacial properties
              such as wettability will permit transport of fluids at micrometer scales (e.g.,
              in miniaturized laboratories on chips), auto-cleaning or defogging of surfaces,
              and modulating surface-adsorption of proteins.  Chemically selective surfaces
              will enable novel separations and detection of bio/chemicals.

Educational
              Plan: The proposed educational plan aims to enhance the core competency of
              students at both undergraduate and graduate levels by building on the expertise
              of the PI.  Specifically, two new courses will be developed that focus on (a)
              Optical Methods in Chemical Engineering (for graduate students) and (b)
              Chemical Surface Physics (undergraduate students).  The former will equip
              graduate students for their research careers and train them in the theory and
              practice of methods involving scattering or polarization of light and
              evanescent optical fields.  Undergraduate students in chemical engineering will
              be introduced to hard (e.g., metals and dielectrics) and soft surfaces (e.g.,
              polymers and molecular films), their properties and the methods to modify them.
               This course will be a significant addition to the undergraduate curriculum
              because interfacial engineering constitutes an increasingly important aspect of
              products and processes that involve chemical engineers (for example,
              photolithography, protective coatings and thin films, lubrication,
              biocompatible surfaces).

In addition, scientific learning and inquiry will
              be fostered through directed instruction and mentoring of graduate and
              undergraduate students participating in the proposed research program. 
              Finally, the undergraduate core curriculum will be improved by revision of two
              existing upper-level courses.  A course on mass transfer operations will
              integrate technologies that are reshaping chemical separations (e.g., membrane
              technology and reverse osmosis) and rely on molecular-level phenomena.  A
              capstone Process Design course will stress importance of non-technical
              components such as oral communication skills and financial analyses along with
              schooling in principles of safety and protection of environment to impart a
              strong yet comprehensive engineering education.


