Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Research and Education Program for the Development and Use
               of Computational Approaches in Biological Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9875689

Award Number: 9875689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent J. Hilser vince@hbcg.utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Hilser
MCB 9875689

1. Technical

This work involves a combined research
              and education initiative aimed at
the development of structure-based models of
              biological function, which can
be used as research tools in biochemistry and
              cell biology labs as well as
in structural and biophysical labs.  The research
              component involves the
development and experimental validation of an
              ensemble-based description of
molecular recognition.  This computational
              model, which will provide a
quantitative link between structure and energy,
              will be tested and refined
by comparison to the experimentally determined
              thermodynamic parameters for
the binding of the Src-homology-3 (SH3) domain 
              SEM5 with numerous variants
of its putative peptide ligand, Sos.  The
              resultant ensemble-based view
should not only provide the structural and
              thermodynamic origins of the
affinity, it should allow access to the
              determinants of specificity as
well.  As the model is intended to be used as a
              research tool for deriving
hypothesis, interpreting results, and directing
              research efforts,  all
elements of this algorithm will be coded into
              Mathematica  notebooks which
can be distributed upon request to suitably
              equipped labs both within UTMB
and outside of the University.  The education
              component involves developing
a Mathematica-based curriculum in the Department
              of Human Biological
Chemistry and Genetics (HBC&G).  In addition to the
              co-development of a
Mathematica -based syllabus for three courses, the
              education plan centers
around introductory courses for students and faculty,
              wherein students (and
faculty) are taught various strategies for incorporating
              computational
approaches in their own research.

2. Non-technical

Recent
              advances in computer technology, coupled to the near exponential
growth of
              biological databases have spawned the rapidly growing field of
bioinformatics.
               From within this emerging field, numerous computational
efforts have focused
              on integrating different types of data in tackling
complex biological
              problems.  Indeed, such is the case in this work, where
research efforts are
              centered on integrating the structural (e.g. Protein
Data Bank) and
              thermodynamic databases to derive models for molecular
recognition,
              allosterism, and signal transduction.  The task at hand in
this new
              computational era in biology is not only to develop the methods
themselves,
              but to provide a medium through which these methods can be
disseminated among
              groups, and to provide access to strategies for
incorporating these methods in
              a diverse array of research specialties.
The goal of this combined research
              and education initiative is to promote
the use of these computational
              approaches by developing useful methods,
implementing a convenient and
              accessible medium of interaction (i.e.
Mathematica ), and providing students
              and faculty with training in both the
methods and the medium.


