Title       : CAREER: Combinatorial Development of the Catalytic Asymmetric Aldol-Tishchenko
               Reaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a9875488

Award Number: 9875488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Morken morken@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,9178,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Morken is studying the sequential Aldol-Tischenko reaction that has
              been found to undergo catalysis by lithium alkoxides.  A variety of chiral
              lithium alkoxides as well as alkoxides of other metals such as magnesium will
              be tested for their ability to catalyze the reaction while imparting control
              over its absolute stereochemistry.  In order to simultaneously assess the
              reactivity of large numbers of catalysts, a thermographic screening technique
              will be employed.  Since the Aldol-Tischenko reaction sequence has the
              potential to create a single 1,3-diol monoester from three different component
              aldehydes or ketones, a synthesis of the anticancer agent epithilone will be
              attempted.  The key three-component assembly of the formal target molecule will
              create two asymmetric centers, a new C-C bond, and the ester functionality of
              the incipient macrolactone.  Professor Morken's teaching focus is on the
              introduction of a multidisciplinary approach to scientific problem-solving. 
              This will occur primarily in the laboratory portion of introductory chemistry
              courses, starting with sophomore honors organic students.  The experimental
              focus will be the use of combinatorial synthesis for the preparation of
              Diels-Alder adducts that will be characterized using simple biochemical
              screens.

With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program supports the
              teaching and research activities of Dr. James P. Morken of the University of
              North Carolina, Chapel Hill.  The research aspect of these activities involves
              the combination of two or three molecules into a single unit while controlling
              its ultimate stereochemistry (three-dimensional structure).  A specific
              anticancer compound, epithilone, is targeted as a demonstration of the power of
              this method to rapidly assemble a complex molecule from simpler component
              parts.  Professor Morken's teaching efforts emphasize a multidisciplinary
              approach to the undergraduate teaching laboratory where combinatorial chemistry
              will be used as a vehicle for discovery-based learning.  Students will carry
              out reactions on solid supports and use a number of techniques to characterize
              their products, which will include some that are known to be active in
              biochemical assays.
