Title       : Cognitive Functions of the Postrhinal Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9875792

Award Number: 9875792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca D. Burwell rebecca_burwell@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9107,9178,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT
Proposal # : 	IBN-9875792
PI Name:	Rebecca Burwell

Brown
              University has a dual mission as an active research institution and a strong
              liberal arts college. Thus, the expectation is that the PI  will not only
              establish a research program as an independent investigator, but that she will
              contribute to the educational goals of the university. The career development
              plan includes two educational objectives:
1) To direct a program of
              neuroscience outreach and mentoring for Brown undergraduates belonging to
              groups that are underrepresented in neuroscience, and 2) To continue and expand
              involvement of undergraduates in my own research program. The PI has planned an
              outreach program that will interface with existing programs on campus that have
              the goal of increasing diversity in all academic disciplines. In particular,
              this CAREER Award will support summer research fellowships for science
              concentrators that are interested in neuroscience and belong to groups that are
              underrepresented in neuroscience fields. Students will do research in a
              neuroscience lab in collaboration with a faculty mentor throughout the
              summer.
The research objectives are part of an overall plan of research that
              will examine the cognitive functions of the cortical regions surrounding the
              posterior rhinal sulcus in the rat, including the entorhinal and perirhinal
              cortices and the newly defined postrhinal cortex. The PI  contributed to the
              neuroanatomical findings that led to more precise boundaries for the rat
              perirhinal cortex and provided the conceptual basis for defining the rat
              postrhinal cortex, a region that exhibits considerable homology with the monkey
              parahippocampal cortex. Subsequent studies indicated that the interconnections
              among the perirhinal, postrhinal/parahippocampal, and entorhinal cortices and
              their cortical afferentation are even more similar between the monkey and the
              rat than previously thought. Thus, the rat now clearly provides an excellent
              model for understanding the function of the cortical regions that surround the
              hippocampus. A role in recognition memory has already been identified for the
              perirhinal cortex, but the parahippocampal cortex does not appear to contribute
              to object recognition memory in monkeys assessed in the standard DNMS task. The
              proposed experiments will employ multidisciplinary approaches to examine the
              hypothesis that the postrhinal/parahippocampal cortex contributes to the
              processing of visuospatial information.


