Title       : CAREER: Design of Bioceramics for Controlled Protein Adsorption and Biological
               Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1999   
File        : a9875326

Award Number: 9875326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Burkett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9875326
Burkett

The primary research goal of this Faculty Early CAREER
              Development project is to develop a fundamental understanding of protein
              adsorption on ceramic surfaces in terms of the effects of surface chemistry and
              topology on protein conformation, orientation, and spatial arrangement.
              Protein-zeolite interactions provide a model system for studying the effects of
              surface chemistry and topology on protein adsorption.  A series of zeolite and
              molecular sieve materials will be prepared such that surface geometry and
              surface chemical composition are varied systematically and independently, and
              the effects of each of these parameters on protein adsorption will be studied
              at the molecular level.  The research activities involve selection, synthesis,
              and characterization of appropriate zeolites and molecular sieves; detailed
              surface characterization of these materials by transmission electron microscopy
              and atomic force microscopy; and selection and characterization of proteins for
              study that represent a range of sizes, shapes, and electronic charges, and have
              precedent for use in model studies or are relevant to future applications.
              Correlation of the observed protein conformational and orientational effects
              with the influence of physicochemical, topological, and microstructural
              properties of the underlying ceramic matrix should provide a rational basis for
              the development of classes of biologically non-native ceramic materials as new
              candidates for biomedical use; for example, there is a need for new coatings
              that promote deposition and bonding of new bone to orthopedic implants by
              controlling the adhesion of osteoinductive proteins and cells.   The unifying
              theme within the research activities and the educational efforts is cultivation
              of a molecular perspective within the multidisciplinary field of biomedical
              materials design, synthesis, and development.  The educational component
              involves establishment of a coherent, concerted educational effort in
              biomedical materials within the undergraduate and graduate curricula in the
              Department of Materials Science and Engineering at MIT. 

The primary
              research goal of this Faculty Early CAREER Development project is to develop a
              fundamental understanding of protein adsorption on ceramic surfaces in terms of
              the effects of surface chemistry and topology on protein conformation,
              orientation, and spatial arrangement.  In order for a protein to function while
              adsorbed to a surface, it must be situated not only such that the
              three-dimensional conformation of amino acids at the active site is retained,
              but also such that the site is accessible to the external environment. 
              Protein-zeolite interactions provide a model system for studying the effects of
              surface chemistry and topology on protein adsorption. Results from these
              studies are relevant to a variety of applications that involve adsorbed
              proteins, including biocatalysis, biosensing, protein crystallization, and drug
              and vaccine delivery.  Of particular interest are the implications for the
              design and evaluation of ceramic materials for biomedical applications, since
              protein adsorption is the initial biological response to an implanted
              biomedical material and is thus a critical determinant of the material's
              activity and biocompatibility.  


