Title       : CAREER: Investigation of Error Recovery Techniques for Interactive Video
               Transmission over Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1999    
File        : a9875651

Award Number: 9875651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Injong Rhee rhee@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wireless networks provide treacherous environments for digital communication.
              They are bandwidth-limited and error-prone.  Their characteristics are
              unpredictable and time-varying.  Transmitting interactive video over wireless
              mobile networks is even more challenging because of the bandwidth-hungry nature
              of video and the susceptibility of compressed video to data losses.  Frequent
              data losses introduce an error (i.e., distortion) into displayed images which
              propagates to following images. The propagation is due to the
              temporal
dependency of encoded video frames to their previously decoded
              images.  The timing-varying nature of the networks further aggravates the
              problem as network characteristics (e.g., available bandwidth, latency,
and
              loss rates) may undergo rapid and dramatic variations.

In this proposal, the
              project director proposes to study a new class of error recovery techniques
              that focuses on eliminating error propagation.  Prior work has mainly taken an
              approach that prevents display errors from occurring from the first place. 
              This existing approach is not effective for wireless interactive video
              transmission because data losses inevitably occur in wireless communication,
              and repairing them tends to introduce the delays in video playout.  The 
              approach is to isolate errors when they occur by preventing them from
              propagating. The delays in repairing data losses affect only the duration of
              error propagation.  The project  calls the approach,  Recovery from Error
              Spread using Continuous Updates (RESCU).  RESCU does not introduce any delay in
              video playout, and has potential to achieve good error resilience.  A similar
              approach is
adopted in several recovery techniques stipulated in H.263+, an
              International Telecommunication Union (ITU) low-bit rate standard.  However,
              they are limited in that they require feedback channels and
are not suitable
              for multicast.  The proposed techniques, in contrast, have potential to work
              well with or without feedback channels, and to be scalable for multicast. 
              Encouraging preliminary results indicate that such potential is highly
              realizable.

The research plan centers on making RESCU highly adaptive to
              timing-varying environments, and on evaluating its utility for interactive
              video transmission over wireless mobile networks.  Four four major research
              components have been identified which comprehensively cover research issues
              arising from developing highly adaptive robust transmission and coding
              techniques.

* Adaptable video codecs.The first plan is to design adaptable
              coding  schemes incorporating RESCU. The schemes are combined with
              transport-level recovery techniques to produce powerful recovery mechanisms
              which overcome the shortcomings of previous approaches.

* Adaptation. Given
              adaptable RESCU schemes with adjustable coding parameters, the research will 
              tackle the problem of determining the values of these parameters appropriate
              for the maximum robustness under given network conditions.  The approach is to
              apply rigorous Markovian modeling and analysis of the impact of these
              parameters to the final image quality and resource utilization.

*
              Transport-level services.  Adaptable RESCU techniques require several
              transport-level functions: (1) accurate report on the current  traffic
              characteristics; (2) efficient deadline-driven automatic repeat request (ARQ)
              techniques;  and (3) flow and congestion control for robust interactive video
              communication.  Ttechniques will be investigated to support these functions in
              the transport layer.

* Multicast support. Finally, the project will study
              the issues  of robust video multicast including scalability for many receivers,
              receiver-driven control of adaptability, and fairness among heterogeneous
              receivers.

Education plan:
The primary objective in education is to create
              a new generation of computer scientists who can accelerate the deployment of
              video technology into homes and workplaces. To realize the goal, the following
              activities are planned: (1) using videoconferencing as a primary means for
              instruction; (2) participating in multi-university initiative for deploying
              video technology in campus for instructional purpose;
(3) extending
              opportunities for women, under-represented minorities, and undergraduate in
              research; and
(4) developing a series of course dealing with video technology,
              multimedia, computer networking, and
distributed systems.


