Title       : CAREER: Design and Synthesis of Polypeptide Block Copolymers for the
               Construction of Novel, Self-Assembling Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9875776

Award Number: 9875776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent P. Conticello vcontic@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9179,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Dr. Vincent P. Conticello at Emory University is supported
              by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division. The focus of the
              research is the design, biosynthesis and characterization of polypeptide block
              copolymers that are capable of self-assembly into well-defined nanostructures. 
              Initial targets will be based on the structural model of spider dragline silk,
              which is organized into distinct rigid and flexible domains, accounting for its
              unusual combination of high compressive and tensile strength. Specific elements
              of the research will be design and evaluation of spider silk analogs using
              molecular modeling techniques, biosynthesis of candidate proteins using
              recombinant DNA techniques, and characterization of the structure and
              self-assembly of the synthetic block co-polypeptides in both solution and the
              solid state. By using the principles of protein structure and concepts of
              polymer materials science, non-natural protein-based materials will be prepared
              with properties that emulate or exceed natural materials.

The teaching
              component of the CAREER award will parallel the establishment of a new
              Department of Physical, Materials and Computational Science.  Core curricula
              based on interdisciplinary graduate courses in Biotechnology and Chemistry and
              Chemistry of Materials will be developed. Included will be advisor/advisee
              programs for new students, development of a web-based undergraduate inorganic
              chemistry course, and establishment of Freshmen seminars in Materials
              Chemistry.

