Title       : CAREER: Dynamic Programming Approximations for Large-Scale Logistics Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9875400

Award Number: 9875400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anton J. Kleywegt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for research to develop approximation methods
              for the solution of large-scale dynamic and stochastic optimization problems. 
              These types of problems are encountered in many applications, especially when
              decisions have to be made on a regular basis, and the decision maker does not
              know exactly how the future will impact the objective and the evolution of the
              process under consideration.  The specific approach that will be used is the
              development of dynamic programming approximations.  The methods will also be
              used to address a number of important problems encountered in logistics and
              transportation.  The grant also provides funding for the development of
              teaching materials associated with the research.  Simulation driven logistics
              games will be developed that will help to teach the player how to make
              decisions in dynamic and stochastic environments.
     The research will
              contribute to our capability to solve complex dynamic and stochastic
              optimization problems. This will improve the ability of decision makers to make
              good decisions in a dynamically changing environment with uncertainty about
              future outcomes.  Guidelines for the implementation of these methods will
be
              developed to make the technology more accessible to practitioners. Through
              collaboration with the logistics and transportation industries, they will be
              helped to improve some of their operations.  The teaching materials that will
              be developed can be used for graduate and undergraduate education, as well as
              the training of decision makers in industry.


