Title       : CAREER: Towards Database Support for On-Line Time Series Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9875114

Award Number: 9875114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265573             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoyang Wang xywang@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
The research component of this project concerns developing and studying
              database theory and implemen-
tation techniques for supporting on-line
              interactive time series analysis. The target application domains are
those
              involving a large volume of time series that are kept in a database. An on-line
              interactive analysis
system allows users to observe and analyze the time
              series retrieved by one query and then to use the ob-
tained knowledge to form
              the next one. Thus, the system supports an interactive access environment that
              is
especially useful when users only have some ' intuitive idea (which may be
              changing with each time series
analyzed) about what they are looking for. The
              key objective of this project is to provide fast response from
the system,
              which is obviously crucial to the success of this interactive environment. The
              basic strategy of
the proposed work is to provide approximation for time
              series, and to develop indexing and precomputa-
tion techniques. The project
              also contains a prototyping component to build a test bed system. The
              results
from this project will lead to a better understanding of, and a number
              of basic tools for, interactive systems
supporting time series
              analysis.

The education component of this project concentrates on developing
              courses dealing with theories and tools necessary for on-line interactive
              analysis, including those developed in this project. The target students are
              from information technology as well as computational science areas and the
              courses are thus interdisciplinary in nature. Science and engineering nowadays
              rely heavily on the ability to analyze large volumes of data, and the courses
              developed will directly contribute to these fields by exposing the students to
              the methods and techniques for interactive analysis, and helping the students
              to apply these tools to their fields of study. The students will also be
              involved directly in the research component of this project. In addition to the
              courses developed, several Ph.D. dissertations are expected.

