Title       : CAREER: Fast Methods for Particle Dynamics and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a9875899

Award Number: 9875899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234947             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ananth Grama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop innovative techniques and software for
              so-called
"fast methods" for n-body solvers and their applications.  An n-body
              solver
computes the behavior of a set of interacting particles; examples run
              from
the solar system (9 planets interacting through gravity) to computer
              chips
(billions of atoms that attract or repel electrons).  "Fast" methods
              for
these solvers use data structures such as trees to minimize the number
              of
computations.  Typically, the data structure summarizes the interactions
              of
a group of particles, eliminating the need to compute all of the
              pairwise
interactions.  Managing the data structure makes these methods
              difficult to
program, particularly on modern parallel machines.

This
              project addresses algorithmic issues, serial and parallel
              performance,
portability, and I/O requirements for fast methods for particle
              dynamics in
selected applications. Specifically, the project makes
              research
contributions in the following areas:

* Error Control  and
              Boundary Conditions: This project will extend recent
work in variable degree
              multipoles to improve error bounds in non-uniform
particle distributions while
              minimizing the added computation.

* Robust Parallel Algorithms and
              Libraries: This project will build
calibrated portable libraries of fast
              solvers capable of adapting to
dynamic computational platforms like clusters
              of multiprocessors.

* Data Analysis and I/O  Control: This project will
              investigate compression
schemes capable of effectively handling the huge
              amounts of data generated
by particle dynamics simulations.

The education
              plan includes a variety of initiatives at various levels. The
Computer
              Applications in K-12 Education in Science (CAKE) program will
introduce
              pre-college students to the use of high performance computing and
networking,
              using GUIs based on the research libraries as teaching tools.
A series of
              courses, seminars, and workshops on parallel computing and its
applications
              will extend the education to the undergraduate and graduate
levels at Purdue
              University.


