Title       : Career: Global Engineers: An Ethnography of Globalization in the Education,
               Hiring Practices, and Problem-Solving of Engineers in the US, Europe, and Latin
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9875089

Award Number: 9875089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan C. Lucena   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Embry Riddle Aero Univ
	      600 S. Clyde Morris Blvd.
	      Daytona Beach, FL  32114    386/226-6319

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,5913,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will help a young tenure-track faculty in Science and Technology
              Studies (STS) to develop his career in the areas of research, teaching, and
              service.  The research topic is the impact of globalization on the education,
              hiring, practices, and problem-solving of engineers. The main research is a
              four-year ethnography which will include interviewing, participant observation,
              and archival research at a variety of sites in the US, Europe, and Latin
              America where engineers encounter images of globalization in their daily
              experiences. Research sites include aviation and aerospace corporations and
              departments at universities in Brazil, France, Germany, and the US. These
              institutions have agreed to host the investigator.  Informants will include
              engineering students and faculty, and engineers at different levels of
              management and experience, in different design projects, with different
              international experience, and from different gender, race, and ethnic
              backgrounds. Human resource and personnel officers will also be interviewed to
              find out how images of globalization impact the hiring process. An outstanding
              group of social scientists has agreed to provide advice over the course of the
              award.  The project also involves the development of innovative courses and
              course components, and the participation of minority and women engineering
              students as research assistants.  This research will produce a book,
              peer-reviewed articles, curricula on globalization and engineering, and other
              significant activities for industry and higher education. Results can
              contribute significantly to the improvement of engineering education and STS
              scholarship on the subject of globalization in relationship to engineering
              careers. 
