Title       : Career: Computation as a Means of Understanding the Operation of the Devices of
               the Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a9875051

Award Number: 9875051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragica Vasileska vasilesk@imap2.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875051
Vasileska
The demand for speed, performance and cost effectiveness
              continues to push the semiconductor devices towards the limits of
              miniaturization. In these ultra-small devices of the future, random microscopic
              fluctuations in the number and location of the dopant atoms induce
              inhomogeneities in the potential and the field pattern among a large number of
              what should be identical devices, thus causing intrinsic variation in their
              threshold voltage and drain current characteristics. The potential
              fluctuations, which lead to further electron confinement into quantum dots,
              naturally bring one from the problem of ultra-small devices to the problem of
              understanding transport in single and coupled quantum dot structures.  Along
              with these rather exciting technological trends, the difficulties associated
              with the fabrication of the ultra-small devices of the future are putting new
              demands on the area of computational electronics.
	.

On the research side,
              a variety of tools will be developed, including 3D Monte Carlo particle-based
              simulators, 3D Schrodinger-Poisson solvers and a 2D quantum-transport simulator
              based on non-equilibrium.  Green's functions formalism. Links will be
              established with National Laboratories (NASA Ames Research Center) to enable us
              to transfer the developed tools to a multi-processor environment. Through links
              with the Industrial partners (Intel, Motorola), the developed tools will be
              calibrated on their available experimental data.

On the educational side, an
              undergraduate course that will focus on numerical modeling of semiconductor
              devices will be introduced into the curriculum. Revisions will be made on the
              existing graduate level computational electronics class. A unique way of
              including undergraduate students in the research through senior design and
              honors thesis projects will be pursued. An Electrical Engineering Lab will be
              created as part of the general efforts within the ASU's WISE program to
              introduce the engineering discipline to middle school and high school female
              students. To make the existing simulation tools available for ASU's
              experimental groups and even further, a computational hub accessible through
              the Web will be established. For the purpose of increasing ASU's visibility in
              terms of web-based classes and research activities, a common Web site for the
              ASU'S device modeling groups will be developed.
***	 

