Title       : CAREER: Development of Conformational Order in Chiral, Amphiphilic, Dendrimers
               and Application to Enantioselective Catalysis in Aqueous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2001   
File        : a9875458

Award Number: 9875458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan R. Parquette parquett@chemistry.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Parquette plans to study the chemistry of dendrimers and hyperbranched
              polymers with a view toward their use as chiral reagents and phase-transfer
              catalysts.  Chirality will be explored by incorporating an asymmetric core that
              is nonracemic and studying its effects on the conformation of dendridic arms
              that evolve from that core.  Ultimate applications of such structures center on
              the provision of chiral pockets wherein bimolecular reaction rates will be
              increased due to hydrophobic compression.  Phase-transfer catalysis stems from
              the design of dendrimers having hydrophobic cores and hydrophilic surface
              structures, wherein polar reaction product derived from nonpolar reactants will
              be expelled into the reaction medium.  Professor Parquette will also initiate a
              program of cooperative learning groups among undergraduate organic chemistry
              students.  Students' progress will be monitored through the use of log books
              and audits of tests earning "C" or below will be instituted.  Attention will be
              paid to providing research opportunities to undergraduates at this large public
              university.  Additionally, a Chemistry Resource Center will provide a means for
              students to access mentorship and assistance while economizing the time of
              participating faculty.

With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program
              supports the teaching and research program of Dr. Jonathan R. Parquette of Ohio
              State University.  Professor Parquette's research is in the area of dendrimers,
              a specialized polymer molecule that emanates in a spherical manner from a
              central core structure.  The goal is to control the three-dimensional aspect of
              these dendrimers so that they will be able to transmit that three-dimensional
              control through a chemical reaction and into the product structure.  Such
              molecules that can act as catalysts in this manner are especially sought after.
               Professor Parquette is also embarking upon several strategies to decrease the
              effective student-teacher ratio in chemistry classes at Ohio State by
              developing cooperative learning strategies and by starting a Chemistry Resource
              Center to more effectively utilize faculty time.  Web-based dissemination of
              course material will also be employed to more effectively communicate with
              students.





