Title       : Career: Toward a QoS Provision Architecture in Noncooperative Networks: Theory
               and Implementation.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9875789

Award Number: 9875789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kihong Park   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the increased deployment of high-speed local- and wide-area networks
              carrying a multitude of information from email to bulk data to voice and video,
              provisioning adequate quality of service (QoS)  to the diverse application base
              has become an important problem.  Current techniques---some stemming from
              intrinsic limitations---make it difficult to provide differentiated QoS and
              guarantees without resorting to over-provisioning which renders these services
              prohibitive.

Given the expected use of the Internet as an everyday, casual,
              yet evermore indispensable component of economic, educational, entertainment,
              and other societal functions by the population at large, a new architecture is
              needed to transform the homogeneous clump that constitutes today's best-effort
              bandwidth  into stratified services  with graded QoS properties that better
              matches the diverse QoS needs of a compendium of applications, multimedia or
              otherwise.  Crucial to the success of this venture is that neither the user nor
              the network be required to engage in complex computations which would thence
              make the solution outright infeasible or render it equally as expensive as
              over-provisioning.

This proposal describes a QoS provision architecture
              suited for best-effort environments based on ideas from microeconomics and
              noncooperative game theory.  We construct a noncooperative QoS provision model
              where users are assumed to be selfish, and packets are  routed over switches
              where---as a function of their enscribed priority---differentiated service is
              delivered.  Quality of service is an induced phenomenon, achieved as a result
              of interaction between selfish applications mediated by the underlying
              network
substrate.

The present approach differs from previous works in
              three significant ways---one, it is one of the most comprehensive
              noncooperative resource allocation models specifically formulated to model QoS
              provision, two, the approach describes a specific network architecture suited
              to many-switch wide area network environments, and three, it addresses both
              theoretical and practical aspects, with an emphasis on realizability.  Not only
              does the PI study the noncooperative QoS provision modelfrom a
              game-theoretic
perspective showing the existence of a rich structure relating
              Nash equilibria to Pareto and system optima, he also investigate the problem of
              facilitating adequate services when the model is extended to
              incorporate
multi-dimensional QoS vectors with possibly conflicting
              requirements, the effect of system variance on QoS rendered, the adaptive
              relocation of network resources to hot spots using programmable general
              processor sharing switches, and the myriad of distributed control problems
              arising in many-switch systems.

This proposal describes the PI's previous
              research---both single-switch and many-switch---and outlines a program for
              future research that emphasizes an integrated approach to theoretical and
              practical issues with a strong view toward feasible implementations.

The
              dual goal of this proposal is to describe a strategy for developing the
              networking curriculum and education in the Computer Sciences  Department at
              Purdue University.  The main goals are threefold.  First, expand and reorganize
              the existing networking curriculum to impart more  structure, depth, and
              guidance to the student.  This is achieved by enhancing the graduate program
              with two new networking courses, Advanced Topics in Networking (already
              implemented) and Experimental Networks. In the undergraduate curriculum, a new
              networking course was recently introduced by the PI with several more in the
              planning stage.  Second,  enhance the strength of the graduate research program
              by incorporating state-of-the-art networking technology into the curriculum
              (the PI has procured equipment funding for ATM switches which will be
              incorporated into the fall 98 networking curriculum) and devising a new course
              in Experimental Networks
involving active student participation as players in
              network games where noncooperative and cooperative protocols and their
              behavioral consequences are studied.  Finally, with distance learning fast
              becoming a reality spurned by the growth in enabling networking technology and
              continuing education demand, the PI hopes to develop an undergraduate-level
              networking course that can be effectively taught over the Web.  This will be
              facilitated by the PI's graduate networking course being televised in the fall
              1998 semester as part of Purdue's CEE program to off-campus sites who will
              receive live video/audio feed and a voice channel for questioning.


