Title       : CAREER: Nonlinear Dynamics and Control from Microscale to Macroscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9875933

Award Number: 9875933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Mezic mezic@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI's Name, Institution:  Igor Mezic, University of California at Santa Barbara
              Proposal Number: 9875933 Proposal Title: "Nonlinear Dynamics  and Control from
              Microscale to  Macroscale to Classroom" Project Abstract:
We propose to 
              develop mathematical  methods to  study  problems related to engineering of
              devices at the microscale, such as microscale mixers, and dynamics and control
              of macroscale devices such as compression systems.  The new methods that we
              will  develop are built on an interdisciplinary mix of ideas from dynamical
              systems and ergodic theory, control theory and microscale physics.
We will
              study mixing of fluids   in geometries  of the scale of 1 micron.  The work
              proposed here  includes the study of active control of mixing as well as
              treatment of new physical effects such as rarefaction and electric double
              layer, introduced by the small scale of the devices.   We will provide a
              fundamental theory for control of mixing in this context using methods of
              robust control theory and ergodic theory. This study will provide theoretical
              backbone for the rapidly evolving field of control in microfluid systems.
We
              also propose to  study the dynamics and control of macroscopic and microscopic
              compression systems. We have recently developed  a mathematical model for axial
              compression system dynamics by averaging and scaling of the Navier-Stokes
              equations.  A rigorous study of the solutions will be pursued and the relevant
              applied mathematics methods developed.    Possibilities of active control of
              boundary layer instabilities using the so-called microflaps will be studied. 
              Microcompressors for the use in micro jet engines are currently being
              developed. Modelling and control issues in microcompressors will be
              studied.
We will familiarize  students  with the current developments on the
              interface between applied mathematics and  engineering. We propose to teach a
              Nonlinear Phenomena class that uses examples from the research described above
              as the background motivation and problem generator. The students in our
              research group will be exposed to a truly interdisciplinary set of topics from
              dynamical systems, control theory, mathematics, microscale physics and
              engineering.



