Title       : CAREER: Educational Outreach and Remotely Queried, In-Situ Chemical Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9875104

Award Number: 9875104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Grimes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875104
Grimes
The fundamental research and educational objectives of this
              CAREER proposal are concerned with sensing and sensor related
              technologies.

The research component of this CAREER proposal focuses on
              developing two new, different, remote query sensing technologies able to obtain
              chemical concentration information from small, in-situ sensors over a range of
              several meters. During the four-year course of this proposal the PJ seeks to
              extend and develop the different sensing technologies to ultimately provide the
              scientific community with a toolbox of sensor technologies that can be chosen
              as needed for a specific application. Such technology would find great use in
              environmental, manufacturing, and medical monitoring.

Two new remote-query
              chemical sensor technologies will be developed under this CAREER proposal: (1) 
              Magnetoacoustic chemical sensors, where the change in mass of a chemical
              recognition layer results in a change in the resonant acoustic frequency
              emitted by a magnetostrictive thin film exposed to an ac magnetic field, and
              (2) Electromagnetic-based resonant antenna chemical sensors where changes
              either in the dielectric constant or volume of a chemical recognition layer
              result in changes of the resonant electromagnetic frequency of the sensor. By
              monitoring the frequency response of the sensors, rather than the amplitude,
              spurious responses due to sensor alignment within the interrogation field can
              be avoided.

There are several objectives per the educational component of
              this CAREER proposal. The first is development of a new inter-disciplinary
              course at the University of Kentucky (UK), entitled Sensing and Sensor
              Technologies, where students learn about biological and technological based
              sensing means. The class will incorporate a significant laboratory/independent
              research component where students have the opportunity to build their own
              sensors and sensing systems. This class will first be taught Fall Semester 1998
              as an Honors class, open to all University of Kentucky Honors students at all
              levels and of all disciplines. The class will then be transformed to a Senior
              level class, offered through the Electrical Engineering Department, that is
              taught with a multi-disciplinary emphasis, and offered for the first time
              Spring Semester 1999
***

