Title       : CAREER: A Wireless Sensor Instrumentation System for Harsh Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a9875206

Award Number: 9875206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin T. Kornegay kornegay@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875206
Kornegay
Aerospace and defense system applications, both in the
              military and civilian arenas, place heavy demands on the development of sensor
              technology for electronic systems that can survive in harsh environments. These
              demands will be met by wide bandgap materials, but more importantly, how the
              benefits of using these materials can be exploited. This proposal covers an
              effort to develop wireless microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology for
              harsh environment applications (e.g., high temperature, corrosive, erosive,
              etc.). The research plan offers a direct path to the realization of a wireless
              sensor instrumentation system through innovative research in silicon carbide
              (SiC) fabrication, circuit integration, and electronic packaging. The support
              electronics for the wireless sensor will provide signal conversion,
              communication, and self-calibration functions. All fabrication will be done in
              the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility (CNF) and all packaging work, including
              development of high temperature die attach materials, wires and wire bonds,
              will be done in the Cornell Advanced Electronic Packaging Facility.
The
              research plan will be augmented with innovative educational activities that
              integrate research and teaching with practical hands-on experiences. A
              multidisciplinary course titled "Integrated Electronics for Harsh
              Environments," will he developed. The course will teach microelectronic
              integration principles, and apply them to the design and analysis of MEMS for
              harsh environments. It will cover topics in wide bandgap materials, fabrication
              technology, devices, circuits, packaging, system integration, working in teams,
              and the effective use of computational prototyping CAD tools facilitated by the
              World Wide Web. Graduate student advisees will also be introduced to problems
              at government and industrial laboratories that will help them acquire valuable
              hands-on experience as welt as learn about research that is relevant to the
              needs of government and industry.
***

