Title       : CAREER: Fungal Bioreactors for the Treatment of Contaminated Air
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a9875881

Award Number: 9875881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220678             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry A. Kinney kakinney@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The motivation for the proposed research is to improve bioreactor performance by
              developing an innovative bioreactor that uses immobilized fungal species to
              treat volatile organic and nitric oxide (NO) contaminants.  The overall goal is
              to gain insight into the fundamental environmental, biological and mass
              transfer processes that affect bioreactor performance and to use this
              information to improve process design and operation.  Specific research
              objectives include: (1) Assess the capability of immobilized yeast and
              filamentous fungi to degrade volatile organic compounds found in contaminated
              air streams, (2) Determine the mechanism of NO removal in fungal bioreactors,
              (3) Develop a fundamental understanding of how fungal biomass development in
              vapor phase bioreactors affects volatile organic compound degradation and (4)
              Optimize the configuration and operation of a fungal bioreactor to treat air
              contaminated with volatile organic compounds or nitric oxides.  Preliminary
              results obtained by the PI indicate that fungal bioreactors have the potential
              to achieve VOC elimination capacities up to an order of magnitude greater than
              bacterial systems and that they can also efficiently remove nitric oxide
              contaminants.  In addition, fungal bioreactors can tolerate much greater
              extremes in operating conditions and thus provide more stable performance than
              bacterial systems.  One of the key features of the PI's research program is
              that it provides unique opportunities to integrate industry links into the
              classroom.  In this project, the PI will build on this integration in order to
              expose students to real world applications, introduce them to different career
              possibilities and promote interactions between engineering professionals,
              graduate and undergraduate students and faculty.  To this end, two educational
              activities are planned: "project based" instruction and a mentoring program for
              undergraduate women engineers.  Thus, the proposed project will improve the
              educational experience for undergraduate and graduate engineering students,
              will enhance industry-academia interactions and will lead to advancements in
              air pollution control technology.
