Title       : CAREER: Accretion, Asymmetric Galaxies, and Outreach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9875008

Award Number: 9875008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Wilcots ewilcots@astro.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Wilcots   AST 98-75008

Physical asymmetries in disk galaxies are
              normal. Over 50% of "normal" spiral galaxies in the field have asymmetric
              neutral Hydrogen (HI) line profiles and distributions, while optical
              asymmetries are seen in some 40% of spiral galaxies.  The physical processes
              responsible for asymmetries in galaxies are thought to be accretion and
              interaction.  However, direct evidence of accretion is scant and the physical
              effects of interactions on galaxies, particularly weak interactions, have yet
              to be quantified. The research to be carried out is a combination of studies of
              the distribution and kinematics of HI around galaxies in a variety of
              environments and optical wavelength studies of the morphology and star
              formation histories of individual galaxies.  This is being done to measure the
              impact of accretion and interaction on galaxy evolution.

The results from
              this project will be: 1) a measure of the current accretion rate and its
              implications for models of galaxy formation and evolution; 2) an estimate of
              the impact of accretion on the physical properties of galaxies; 3) a
              determination of the role of accretion and interaction in shaping the
              pronounced asymmetries of barred Magellanic spirals; and 4) a description of
              the evolution of the gaseous content of loose groups of galaxies to trace how
              the roles of accretion and interaction change as the environment in which the
              galaxies reside changes.

A detailed and thorough mapping of the HI content
              of galaxies and their environments is at the heart of the project.  The
              analysis of the HI data will yield a measure of the amount of gas around
              individual galaxies that is being, or could be accreted, as well as information
              on the magnitude of any interactions in which the galaxy is participating. The
              response of the galaxy to such external perturbations will be derived from data
              from optical studies of its star formation and morphology using the WIYN
              telescope.

One aspect of the educational component that will be carried out
              concurrently with the research will be the development of a new course.  The
              course will be designed to reach across disciplines and to encourage
              collaborative learning. The goal of the course is to teach the chemical history
              of minerals, beginning with nucleosynthesis, and ending with the incorporation
              of those minerals in the Earth's interior.

The bulk of the educational
              component centers on outreach in three major ways. The first is a continuation
              and expansion of an extremely popular and successful program called "Universe
              in the Park" in which astronomers visit state parks throughout Wisconsin during
              the summer and fall camping seasons. The second outreach component will be to
              use the University's "Space Place" as a science museum and resource center for
              area science teachers. This activity will entail the development of a series of
              interactive exhibits to engage the numerous school groups that visit Space
              Place throughout the year.  Another aspect of this program will be to continue
              and enhance a series of teacher workshops hosted at Space Place.  The third
              component of the outreach program is to develop a long-term relationship
              between the principal investigator and students at area schools, particularly
              those with large populations of minority students, through regular visits to
              science classrooms throughout the academic year.


