Title       : CAREER: Theory and Applications of Optimization Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9875559

Award Number: 9875559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reha H. Tutuncu reha+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research component of this project will address theoretical and practical
              issues in the development and implementation of continuous optimization
              algorithms and their application to problems in mathematical finance and
              chemical process engineering. Algorithm design efforts will focus on
              interior-point methods, including the study of semidefinite
programming,
              complementarity, general nonlinear programming, and robust optimization
              problems. Particular attention will be devoted to the development and analysis
              of potential-reduction methods and  algorithms that reliably detect infeasible
              problems, as well as to the efficient implementation of these methods.
              Implementation efforts will include the continuation of the improvement of
              SDPT3, a research code for semidefinite
programming. Robust optimization
              problems will be studied through saddle-point formulations and polynomial-time
              interior-point algorithms for this class of problems will be developed. 

The
              applications in mathematical finance will focus on the study of pricing of
              financial derivative securities in the presence of transaction costs through
              optimization models, and on the development of methods to find robust and low
              turn-over solutions to portfolio selection problems.  This project will also
              continue the investigator's current collaboration with chemical engineers on
              the study of optimization models and
methods to solve chemical process
              engineering problems. 

The integrated educational activities of this project
              include (1) further development of graduate courses in optimization, portfolio
              theory, and interior-point methods already introduced by the investigator; (2)
              participation in outreach activities through project direction at CMU's Summer
              Undergraduate Institute; (3) facilitation of active involvement of
              
undergraduate students in local industries through the introduction and
              running of a new project course; (4) a long-term plan for the preparation of a
              graduate-level textbook on portfolio optimization.  

The theoretical
              insights gained from this research will lead to
design of more efficient
              optimization algorithms.  The models, methods, and software resulting from this
              project has the potential to produce improved decisions and performance on
              several application areas in science and technology. 


