Title       : CAREER: Robust Control of Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1999     
File        : a9875056

Award Number: 9875056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Paganini paganini@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9875056
Paganini

This project is devoted to research and teaching in
              control of spatially distributed systems, with applications to sensor/actuator
              arrays and to large- scale networks.  The main emphasis will be on global
              stability and performance for designs with low complexity and distributed
              intelligence, and on robustness of performance to modeling error and component
              failure.
New challenges have emerged in the field of control, driven by recent
              technological progress. Dramatic advances in micro electromechanical systems
              (MEMS) enable the fabrication of microsensors, micro actuators, together with
              micro-electronic circuits on the same substrate.  Distributing such units in
              large arrays brings unprecedented possibilities for control at a very fine
              scale, such as "active skin" for aerodynamic drag reduction, or "smart"
              materials for control of structural dynamics; these imply a significant
              departure from the traditional picture of centralized computer control through
              a reduced number of macroscopic variables.
The proposed research is aimed at
              the control-theoretic aspects of this new focus, in particular at methods for
              analysis and design of distributed control configurations from the point of
              view of global objectives.  Among the main issues to address are: (I) the
              computational complexity of analysis and design for these large problems; (ii)
              the need for a localized solution, implemented by a distributed algorithm;
              (iii) the problem of communication within the array (architectures, effect of
              delay, etc.); (iv) the analysis of model uncertainty and robustness in
              distributed systems; (v) the effects of failure of some components of the
              array.  
Recently the PI and collaborators have shown how to break the
              computational complexity of distributed control design under the assumption of
              spatial invariance in the plant, which is characteristic of regular geometry's;
              also, some initial results were obtained on the issue of control localization. 
              These first steps are very encouraging for future research in this wide open
              area.
In addition to fundamental theory, the project will include concrete
              application studies; candidate areas where there is expertise at UCLA include
              the control of fluid flow by distributed boundary actuation (microflaps,
              blowing/suction ....), and aeroelasticity problems such as control of flutter
              by distributed piezoelectric actuation.  An interesting observation from the
              recent fluids literature, is that robustness considerations are relevant to the
              long-standing problem of predicting transition to turbulence.  This provides
              strong motivation for studies in distributed uncertainty modeling and robust
              distributed control for these applications.
A separate focus of this project
              is distributed dynamics of large networks, such as the power grid or wireless
              communication systems.  Connections to the work in distributed control will be
              explored, but these areas will also be pursued in their own right.  In power
              systems in particular, the PI has done recent work showing the limitations of
              current analytical approaches to power system stability, and is involved in a
              research initiative at UCLA on distributed power electronics for the grid.

 
                 The educational objectives of this project are: (i) to train students in
              control and dynamics in engineering systems, with emphasis on the concept of
              robustness as a key to closing the theory-practice gap; (ii) to introduce
              graduate students to research in the exciting area of distributed systems;
              (iii) to establish a curricular environment for interdisciplinary teaching in
              dynamics of large networks, in close connection to the abovementioned research
              in this area.


