Title       : CAREER: Non-equilibrium Dynamics of Thin Fluidized Granular Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a9875529

Award Number: 9875529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Urbach urbach@physics.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Urbach
9875529
This is a Condensed Matter Physics CAREER project. The research
              deals with non-equilibrium dynamics of excited granular media, focusing on a
              monolayer of nearly identical spheres on a flat plate vibrating vertically.
              This simple and easily controllable system exhibits a rich variety of
              cooperative phenomena which will be quantitatively investigated using computer
              imaging techniques. Direct measurements of the statistical distribution and
              correlation functions necessary for the construction of a kinetic theory of the
              non-equilibrium granular fluid will be made. Transport of particles, energy ,
              and momentum in the layer will be studied and compared with the behavior
              predicted from the kinetic theory.  In addition, the novel collective behavior
              of the system will be studied to develop and test theories of `granular
              thermodynamics'. These results will provide a deeper understanding of the
              dynamics of granular media, an essential step towards improved models of a wide
              range of important industrial processes. These conceptually simple but visually
              striking experiments will be used to increase the number and quality of physics
              majors through incorporation into a statistical mechanics course and a
              travelling show to be taken to local high schools in the community.
%%% 
This
              is a Condensed Matter Physics CAREER project. The research deals with the
              behavior of a large number of nearly identical spherical particles on a
              vibrating plate. This simple and easily controllable system exhibits a rich
              variety of surprising phenomena that arise from the energy lost during
              inter-particle collision. The behavior will be quantitatively investigated
              using computer imaging techniques. Theories that relate the statistical
              behavior of individual grains to the average properties of the collection of
              grains will be developed and tested.  These results will provide a deeper
              understanding of the dynamics of granular media, an essential step towards
              improved models of a wide range of important  industrial processes, including
              transport and processing of grains and powders, and gas fluidized beds used in
              petroleum processing. These conceptually simple but visually striking 
              experiments will be used to increase the number and quality of physics majors
              through incorporation into undergraduate courses, and a traveling show to be
              taken to local high schools in the community.

