Title       : CAREER: Taking Advantage of Nonlinearity: New Methods for Nonlinear Feedback
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9875273

Award Number: 9875273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Lin linwei@nonlinear.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
ECS-9875273
Lin


This proposal presents a research and educational
              program in the field of analysis and design of nonlinear control systems.  The
              principle goal of the proposal is to develop new, theoretically sound and
              practically useful feedback design methods and techniques for a large class of
              genuinely nonlinear systems that cannot be adequately dealt with by existing
              theory.  The other important objective to be accomplished is to test and guide
              the theoretical development via applications to challenging benchmark
              engineering problems.  The proposed research plan consists of both theoretical
              development and experimental validation.  It aims at:

	1. developing a
              systematic synthesis procedure, based on either the input-output argument or
              the Lyapunov-like approach, for designing low-gain and low-and-high gain
              controllers that globally asymptotically stabilize a larger class of non-affine
              nonlinear systems than feedforward systems,

	2. developing design techniques
              for the control of non-minimum-phase affine nonlinear systems,

	3.
              developing robust passive systems theory and global inverse L2-gain design
              schemes for uncertain minimumphase nonlinear systems, leading to performance
              robustness against structural-modeling uncertainties or disturbances,
              and

	4. demonstrating the effectiveness and usefulness of the new nonlinear
              control strategies, by solving some long-standing open control
              problems.

This effort will merge nonlinear control theory, computer
              simulation, and physical experiments.  A unique thread in our theoretical
              approach is the systematic use of low-gain design techniques, to take advantage
              of the nonlinear nature of the system in the feedback design, rather than to
              design feedback controls based on linearization of the system (either by first
              approximation or feedback linearization).  The low-gain feedback design method
              has had a significant impact on a few nonlinear control problems, but it has
              not yet been fully exploited for nonlinear control.  The research plan focuses
              on several important issues that are not only interesting in their own right
              but also critical to the advancement and application of nonlinear control
              theory.  Computer simulation and physical experiments involving the
              ball-and-beam, inverted pendulum on a cart, and an industrial-grade pH pilot
              process will be performed in the control engineering laboratories at The Case
              School of Engineering.

The proposed educational plan is an important and
              integral part of this program.  It's main objective is to provide students with
              opportunities to participate in advanced research projects.  Through this
              innovative research program, the students in The Case School of Engineering
              will not only develop analytical and computer skills, and new methods of
              scientific discovery, but also enrich their engineering knowledge and practical
              hands-on experience, hence better preparing them for an engineering career in
              an increasingly global, interdisciplinary, and rapidly changing technical
              climate.  This goal will be achieved by reshaping curriculum, developing new
              laboratory experiments, and advising students.  While both Ph.D. and M.S
              graduate students will be involved directly in this program, the project will
              also benefit undergraduate students through curriculum development and senior
              design projects related to this program.



