Title       : Career: Advanced Numerical Modeling of Bridge Foundation Scour
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9875691

Award Number: 9875691
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fotis Sotiropoulos fsotirop@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
9875691
The proposal for this CAREER award was motivated by the need
              for a comprehensive research strategy to address the problem of bridge pier and
              abutment scour, the leading cause of bridge failures that devastated the
              nation's transportation infrastructure during recent severe floods.  Due to the
              enormous complexity of this problem, for such a strategy to be effective it
              must integrate field and laboratory experiments with three-dimensional
              computational modeling.  It is the objective of this work to develop an
              advanced computational fluid dynamics model by combining the latest
              advancements in numerical and turbulence modeling of complex, three-dimensional
              flows with a novel approach for modeling the sediment transport processes that
              lead to scour.  The numerical methodology will rely on the unsteady,
              three-dimensional Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations closed with
              advanced turbulence models, which resolve the near-wall flow, account for
              turbulence anisotropy, and can simulate bed roughness.  Such level of
              turbulence modeling is essential for reproducing the structure and intensity of
              the foundation-induced, large-scale vortices that drive the scouring process. 
              A coupled Lagrangian/Eulerian approach will be developed for modeling the
              transport of sediment particles and simulating the temporal development of
              scour.  Efficient numerical methods, featuring multigrid acceleration and
              preconditioning strategies, will be used to solve the time-dependent governing
              equations.  Data from existing laboratory experiments will be used to calibrate
              and validate the numerical model.  This research will lead to an advanced
              computational framework that can be used to enhance our understanding of  the
              complex mechanisms that induce scour in the field at a level of detail not
              previously accessible by field and laboratory experiments alone.  The numerical
              model, employed in conjunction with experimental studies, will facilitate the
              evaluation of bridge designs for scour susceptibility and the development of
              scour countermeasures that are based on in-depth understanding of the flow
              physics.  Therefore, this work could potentially have a significant impact on
              the current state-of-the-art, which relies almost exclusively on empirical
              correlations derived from small-scale laboratory measurements.  Furthermore,
              the numerical model will help guide future improved experiments by clarifying
              issues such as the effect of  scaling the results of small-scale experiments to
              full-scale conditions, and the time development of scour toward equilibrium. 
              The educational contributions of this CAREER plan will include, among others,
              the following: i) a new curriculum for Civil and Environmental engineers in the
              area of computational fluid dynamics and hydraulics; ii) projects for directly
              involving undergraduates in research; and iii) a graduate-level textbook on the
              numerical simulation of incompressible turbulent flows.



