Title       : CAREER: Micromachining of Gallium Nitride and Related Materials for Microwave
               and Optoelectronic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9875600

Award Number: 9875600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Fay patrick.j.fay.9@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875600
Fay
An integrated plan for career development based on research on
              micromachining of GaN and related materials (e.g. A1GaN, InGaN, InA1N) is
              proposed. Three micromachined devices for microwave and optoelectronic
              applications that can only be realized using micromachining approaches are
              proposed to demonstrate the technology: an inline transmissive microwave power
              sensor, a piezoelectrically assisted microwave micromechanical switch, and an
              arbitrary curvilin-ear mirror surface for the realization of surface emitting
              blue heterostructure diodes. The re-search work proposed includes development
              of the necessary micromachining fabrication pro-cesses, including the
              development and implementation of a computerized submersible angle-controlled
              stage for generating arbitrarily-shaped etch sidewalls using
              photoelectrochemical wet etching. In addition, a full characterization of the
              etch reaction kinetics will be performed, and a process model developed for
              inclusion into the control software for the angle-controlled stage in order to
              etch curved as well as arbitrarily angled surfaces. The thermal conductivity
              and thermo-electric properties of GaN and A1GaN as a function of A1 mole
              fraction will also be investigated experimentally both in order to optimize the
              material selection for the inline transmissive power sensor, as well as to
              provide additional experimental insight into the electronic band structure of
              this nascent material system. The development and demonstration of a viable
              micromachining technology in this material system will have wide-ranging impact
              on the fields of high-power and high-temperature microwave electronics as well
              as short-wavelength optoelectronics. The inline transmissive power sensor is
              designed to be integrable with high-power GaN-based HEMTs, providing for the
              ability to directly measure amplifier output power over very wide bandwidths
              without the need for large coupling structures. The piezoelectrically-assisted
              micro-wave micromechanical switch is expected to provide the same benefits as
              micro-electro-me-chanical switches in Si and other III-V materials, but with
              the added benefit of lower activation voltage due to the piezoelectric
              properties of GaN and integrability with high-speed, high-power GaN HEMTs.
              Finally, the arbitrary curvilinear mirror surface technology will allow the
              imple-mentation of surface-emitting heterostructure diodes to greatly ease the
              difficulty in packaging these devices for high-density optical storage and
              display applications. In addition to providing a more easily packaged
              surface-emitting structure rather than an edge-emitting diode structure, the
              ability to tailor the curvature of the mirror surface through the use of the
              angle-controlled etching stage also permits the control of the stigmation of
              the far-field intensity pattern of the emitter, eliminating the need for bulky
              and difficult-to-align external optical components to circularize the light
              beam.
The educational programs that are included within the scope of
              activities of this research project include numerous opportunities for
              undergraduate students to participate directly in research activities. These
              opportunities include participation in the development of micromachining
              fabrication processes, device fabrication and verification, and microwave and
              optoelectronic testing of the finished devices. The research results
              originating from this work will also be incorporated into undergraduate course
              work; the Integrated Optoelectronics, Wire-less Communications and Microwave
              Measurements, and Electronic Circuits courses taught by Prof. Fay will all
              benefit directly through inclusion of results from this work. Students will
              also be given the opportunity to be involved in this project through the senior
              design capstone course in the department; the numerous opportunities for
              fabrication process design as well as imple-mentation of the computerized
              angle-controlled etching stage are well-suited for year-long undergraduate
              design projects. An additional program to be supported by this program is the
              expansion of Prof. Fay's Electronics Hobby Evenings program to include more
              students from other departments and colleges across the university as well as
              to include interested high school students and community members.
***
