Title       : CAREER: Control Design of Complex Engineering Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9875244

Award Number: 9875244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geir E. Dullerud dullerud@epic.me.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9875244
Dullerud

Complexity is increasingly a major and central issue in
              the design of high performance engineering systems.  The enormous complexity of
              most systems in engineering is partially due to the long recognized fact that
              even relatively simple physical systems can exhibit very complex and subtle
              behavior, but is more directly attributable to the growth of systems by
              interconnecting many heterogeneous subsystems.  This growing trend, fueled by
              the rapid development of physical components and computing capability, seems to
              be accelerating.  While systems are becoming more and more complex,
              expectations on the level of system performance are increasing.  This poses a
              central design challenge for complex systems engineering as the behavior of
              such systems are inherently uncertain.  In addition to dealing with the more
              complicated and subtle nonlinear behavior of complex dynamical systems, control
              and systems methods for current and future engineering must necessarily contend
              with the issues of incomplete or uncertain models and information.  At the same
              time they must be computationally tractable.

The long term objective of the
              PI's research program is the development of advanced control and dynamical
              analysis methods that are directly applicable to nonlinear complex systems. 
              The research plan of this proposal describes some innovative and substantial
              steps that the PI will take in this direction, together with an integrated
              program for both graduate and undergraduate education.  The major research
              contributions of the proposed program will be in three main areas, The first
              area is construction of analysis and synthesis tools for the control of complex
              nonlinear systems along trajectories, and more general nonlinear control
              approaches.  The second area is the verification of uncertain nonlinear models
              from experimentally obtained data; this is important because exact first
              principles modeling of complex systems is not possible, and so direct
              comparison with data is crucial.  The final area is the investigation of
              specialized control strategies that are required for "systems comprised of
              systems" and can be exploited more generally with the appearance of new
              actuation technology; specifically distributed control methods will be pursued.
               The program proposed here emphasizes new theory and the development of
              analytical methods, however the creation of computational algorithms and the
              completion of general reuseable software are major objectives of the program;
              this will make the ideas and tools of the program immediately available to
              practitioners and industry.  The program will use a combination of nonlinear,
              robust and numerical tools.  Semi-definite programming will form a basis for
              much of the optimization work in the program, and direct contributions to
              domain specific optimization is considered a secondary aim of the program.  To
              complement the proposed program, planned experimental facilities exhibiting
              complex behavior will be used to critically evaluate and partially direct this
              analytical program.

The research program is at the confluence of dynamical
              systems and control theory, control applications, and numerical simulation and
              optimization.  Both graduate and undergraduate education are integrated in the
              research program; students involved with the program will gain considerable
              research experience, making their engineering background broader and their
              research capabilities stronger.  The education plan specifically includes the
              involvement of undergraduates in research through a variety of specially
              selected projects, including optimization tools, web-based education software,
              and experiment construction projects

