Title       : CAREER: Synthesis and Analysis of Mixed-Phase Microporous/Mesoporous Materials
               and Implementation of Distance Learning Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9875768

Award Number: 9875768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Landry cclandry@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,9179,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Christopher C. Landry at the University of Vermont is
              supported by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division. The
              research deals with the synthesis, characterization and catalytic and
              chromatographic behavior of mixed phase microporous/mesoporous silicates and
              aluminosilicates. The mixed phases will be prepared by initial polymerization
              of a silicate source in the presence of an organic micellar template in aqueous
              solution and room temperature to form a weakly-organized mesoporous material.
              This material will be subsequently heated in the presence of a
              structure-directing agent, typically tetrapropyl ammonium cation, to form a
              microporous material.  Incomplete annealing will produce mixed
              mesoporous/microporous composites. Structure, as a function of reaction
              variables will be explored. XRD, NMR, IR, SEM, TEM and porosimetry will be
              employed to characterize the mixed phases. The materials will be evaluated as
              catalysts for olefin isomerization and as chromatographic supports.

The
              CAREER educational plan will focus on the inclusion of Materials Chemistry into
              both graduate and undergraduate curricula. Courses in Materials  Chemistry will
              be developed which will also utilize local faculty and industrial scientists as
              resources.  Classes and special lectures will be electronically disseminated
              through the University's Distance Learning Network, permitting both graduate
              students and industrial scientists at remote locations to earn credit towards
              advanced degrees. The program will include examples from Prof. Landry's
              research and other local industrial projects and is expected to stimulate
              industrial-academic research partnerships.





