Title       : The Study of Orographic Precipitation Systems Using Mobile Doppler Radars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a9875021

Award Number: 9875021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley F. Smull smull@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The need for improvement of quantitative precipitation forecasts, which are
              particularly deficient over regions of complex terrain, has been designated as
              a key research objective by the U.S. Weather Research Program.  This emphasis
              is justified in part by a history of relatively infrequent but cataclysmic
              warm-season orographic flood events that have resulted in an large loss of life
              and property at various locations across the U.S.  Increasingly recognized is
              the potentially disastrous impact of cool-season heavy orographic precipitation
              accompanying landfalling baroclinic cyclones and even some periods of
              relatively steady but moist onshore flow.  These events, whose effects
              sometimes extend far downstream from the mountain slopes upon which the
              heaviest precipitation falls, significantly impact public safety,
              transportation, agriculture, power generation/distribution, and other economic
              concerns in and around major mountain ranges in the western U.S., many of which
              border on rapidly expanding population centers.  As these populations grow
              there is a need to better manage (and hence forecast) water resources
              supporting urban regions and lowland agriculture. 

Current understanding of
              the morphology and underlying dynamics of orographic precipitation systems is
              deficient when compared to analogous phenomena such as mesoscale convective
              systems and banded baroclinic precipitation structures.  Recent advances in
              remote sensing technology provide new tools to attack the problem of heavy
              precipitation events and associated floods in regions of complex terrain.  The
              upcoming field phase of the Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP), to be conducted
              over the Alpine region of central Europe during the late summer/early autumn of
              1999, represents a unique and valuable opportunity to advance understanding in
              this area.  In conjunction with scientific leaders in the European community,
              the MAP U.S. Development Team has defined a sub-program that will take
              advantage of the unique observational infrastructure found in the Alpine region
              to support research directly relevant to improved understanding of processes
              that culminate in heavy orographic precipitation over the U.S. and
              elsewhere.

The research to be conducted under this award centers on the
              collection and analysis of Doppler radar data from mobile platforms (both
              ground-based and airborne) to complement a variety of additional observations
              being collected under the MAP aegis.  Research objectives include: (1) develop
              a conceptual model of the orographic precipitation system stretching from
              coastal areas to the mountain crest; (2) determine the subsynoptic and
              mesoscale kinematics and their impact on orographic precipitation; (3) use the
              above for validation and refinement of mesoscale model simulations of
              orographic events.  This research builds on the Principal Investigator's
              previously published studies of warm-season convective systems and his current
              research focusing on airborne radar observations of cool-season baroclinic
              storm systems in regions of steeply rising coastal terrain.  

Successful
              completion of this research should improve knowledge of orographic
              precipitation systems and potentially improve forecasting 

