Title       : CAREER: Extending Non-Destructive Infrastructure Assessment Techniques to
               Micropile Foundations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a9875066

Award Number: 9875066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Gassman gassman@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9875066
CAREER: Extending Non-Destructive Infrastructure Assessment
              
Techniques to Micropile Foundations

Sarah L. Gassman

ABSTRACT:
This
              CAREER award investigates an integrated approach to research and
education in
              non-destructive evaluation (NDE) of civil infrastructure
systems. Much of the
              civil infrastructure in the United States is
deteriorating due to age,
              inadequate investment in proper maintenance, and
increased system demand.  NDE
              can provide fast and reliable assessment
techniques that are needed to handle
              the large volume of deteriorating civil
systems, particularly bridges, that
              pose serious threats to safety if they
fail.  The focus of this research is to
              develop a NDE technique based on
stress wave principles to efficiently and
              accurately assess the integrity of
micropile foundations that are used to
              support existing foundations of aging
bridges and buildings during
              rehabilitation. This work consists of 1)
laboratory investigations on
              micropile foundations using a combination of
longitudinal and flexural wave
              methods with surface and embedded sensors, 2)
analytical studies related to
              signal processing and numerical simulation,
and 3) field investigations of in
              situ micropiles. Although NDE is well
established and confirmed by extensive
              site experience for drilled shafts
and driven concrete piles, the technique is
              uncertain for slender piles with
high length-to-diameter ratios and piles with
              multiple changes in
cross-sectional dimensions.  Thus, this work will study
              the fundamental
relationship between slender micropile foundations and the
              surrounding soil,
the effect of multiple changes in cross-sectional area on
              wave propagation
and the received signals, and the dispersive effects of the
              concrete used
for micropile construction.  An education plan is integrated
              with the
proposed research to incorporate infrastructure assessment,
              rehabilitation,
and monitoring technologies into the civil engineering
              curriculum at the
University of South Carolina.  Education is critically
              needed in the areas
of infrastructure failure, inspection, and rehabilitation
              to give both
students and the engineering workforce the skills to revitalize
              and preserve
our nation's civil infrastructure. Furthermore, the plan proposes
              to
integrate NDE research methodology into course work, provide
              increased
research opportunities for undergraduates, and increase
              participation of
traditionally under-represented groups

