Title       : (URI) Exploring the Interface of Urban Decision Dynamics and Infrastructure
               Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a9875052

Award Number: 9875052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Allen G. Hunt                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Lomax   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marty D. Matlock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold Vedlitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Courtney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lomax
9875052

Objectives:  The goal of this project is to develop a model of
              sustainable infrastructure that integrates
 ecological, human/political and
              engineering, concerns and to develop a decision support system for
              it.
Examining, a working, system - the City of Houston, Texas - will
              facilitate development of a realistic
model.  City officials will both
              participate in the development and testing of decision support methods,
and
              benefit from the findings.
The project is directed to the following research
              coals: 1) Development of a conceptual model for integrated sustainable
              development in the natural, human, and built domains, 2) A prototype of a
              sustainable decision support system, 3) Identification of key theoretical and
              practical issues involved in integrating the
 Three domains, and 4)
              Development of theory relating decision-making, in the three domains.

              
Methods: For each of the three domains - built, human, and natural - a
              different approach will be used to define criteria for sustainability and the
              data required for modeling, that domain.  These approaches will be integrated
              by modillion- the intersection of the areas in the decision processes sin- a
              modified form of enterprise modillion- commonly used in businesses.  From the
              data, the research team will develop an information-technology -based community
              model that incorporates information from key stakeholders, key  decision
              premises, and key values from each domain.  Three of the five architectures
              needed in the decision support system will be developed in this project: 1)
              enterprise, 2) process, and 3) data architectures.

Potential Impact: The
              model and information support systems that are developed will have impacts in
              three areas.  The clarification of the data necessary to make effective and
              sustainable infrastructure decisions will simplify and improve data collection.
               The information systems that are the result of this research will identify key
              performance metrics and simplify data preparation.  Finally, improvements  the
              metrics and the data will be combined with an organizational analysis to
              generate improved decision-making- tools that can be generalized to other urban
              systems.

