Title       : CAREER: Research and Education in Video Coding and Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9875582

Award Number: 9875582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maja E. Bystrom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to enable low bitrate transmission of highly
              compressed video streams over wireless channels which are subject to fading.
              One of the most important challenges in wireless video transmission is that
              terrestrial wireless channels are typically bandlimited so that significant
              compression is required; however, this compression results in 
low quality
              reconstructed video as well as bitstreams which are extremely sensitive to
              channel errors. Traditionally, in order to protect against channel errors,
              powerful forward error control codes were carefully selected and employed at
              the expense of a portion of the limited bandwidth. This research addresses the
              problem of bandwidth expenditure on channel error 
protection by exploiting
              the redundancy in a source-coded video stream to perform iterative, soft source
              decoding. With these improvements in source decoding less of the overall
              bandwidth must be expended on channel coding. This recovered bandwidth can then
              be devoted to reducing the compression rate, thereby increasing the quality of
              the transmitted video.

The iterative video decoder consists of two stages.
              The first stage is a traditional video decoder with error detection
              capabilities which employs hard channel values, while the second stage is an
              adaptive Viterbi-like source decoder employing soft channel values or
              reliability information from a channel decoder. The project focuses on
              developing efficient and reliable error detection techniques and on determining
              appropriate decision metrics for the Viterbi-like decoder which incorporate the
              soft channel values with knowledge of errors from the error detection process. 
               

The objectives of this project are closely related to the teaching
              objectives.  One primary goal of the teaching plan is to integrate this
              research in wireless communication into undergraduate courses in order to
              encourage interest in research and graduate study.  The second goal is to
              develop a hands-on technology camp for middle-school girls to actively promote
              the 
study of engineering and, in particular, telecommunications. In order to
              demystify the field of engineering, projects will involve illustrating the
              relationship between engineering and everyday life, exposing the students to
              the applicability and prevalence of engineering.


