Title       : CAREER: Available Transfer Capability of Deregulated Power Systems: A Nonlinear
               Predictive Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9875109

Award Number: 9875109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Flueck flueck@ece.iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9875109
Flueck


This CAREER proposal focuses on the integration of
              research and teaching in the undergraduate and graduate programs of the
              Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Illinois Institute of
              Technology.  The Principal Investigator (PI) is collaborating with industry to
              develop a contingency screening tool for voltage collapse that will predict the
              distance to collapse given any generator unit outage, any single branch outage,
              or any multiterminal branch outage.  In addition, the PI is creating new
              undergraduate courses on Industrial Drives and Power Electronics, and new
              graduate courses on Power Transaction Management.  Lastly, the PI is developing
              new relationships with industry to attract students and faculty to the American
              Power Conference, thereby promoting the fascinating field of power
              engineering.

The PI's research agenda for the next four years is centered on
              the research and development of robust and efficient computational tools for
              analyzing nonlinear steady-state behavior of large-scale electric power systems
              in a competitive environment.  The PI's educational agenda is centered on new
              discovery opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in the fields
              of (i) stability and control of large-scale power systems, (ii) industrial
              drives, and (iii) power electronics.  The PI's service agenda is centered on
              the recruitment of talented engineers for the electric power industry.

This
              Career Development Plan will help the power engineering discipline in its time
              of need, which is now!  The electric power industry is facing a tremendous
              challenge brought on by deregulation.  The challenge is obvious: power
              engineering is seen by undergraduates as a slowly dying field that does not
              have any career potential, while at the same time the electric power industry
              is in dire need of attracting new engineers to build, operate, maintain,
              control, and manage the distributed power generating plants, the tightly woven
              web of transmission networks, the vital distribution capallaries, and the
              liberated customer service market.  The goal of this proposal is to integrate
              research and teaching with the direct result that industry will benefit from
              both activities.



