Title       : CAREER: Systems for Linear and Nonlinear Signal Analysis - Design via Groebner
               Bases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9875452

Award Number: 9875452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan W. Selesnick selesi@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9875452
Selesnick
Polytechnic University


The theory of filtering and
              transforms is fundamental for the compression, transmission, and analysis of
              signals from biomedical, geological, or entertainment sources, in audio, image,
              or video format. Because many natural signals are modeled more accurately by
              nonlinear models than by linear models, it is especially important to pursue
              the design, implementation and evaluation of nonlinear transforms. This
              research
advances the state-of-the-art multiresolution analysis tools by
              bringing powerful mathematical tools from algebraic geometry to bear upon the
              design of systems for linear and nonlinear signal analysis. The use of Groebner
              bases fundamentally improves one's ability to construct discrete-time systems,
              even when the corresponding design equations are nonlinear. This research will
              lead to a deeper understanding of how to successfully apply Groebner bases in
              practice, and what their limitations are.

The investigator will also
              organize an Internet website, `A Signal Processing Exercise and Lab Bank',
              devoted to signal processing education. The website will be an evolving
              collection of innovative exercises, projects and demos contributed by educators
              and researchers, that illustrate both basic theory and its application to
              real-world signals, and which can be updated to reflect the progress in signal
              processing techniques. It will facilitate the integration of signal processing
              research and education, and will likewise help in modernizing SP curriculums,
              by giving educators access to a collection of introductory exercises
              illustrating recent and ongoing research topics. By drawing together existing
              resources, and by providing a point for the dissemination of future innovative
              exercises and labs, the website will enhance the NSF's existing investment in
              signal processing education and research.






