Title       : CAREER: Shear Localization in Metallic Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9875115

Award Number: 9875115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd Hufnagel hufnagel@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875115
Hufnagel

There are variety of theories regarding the initiation of
              shear bands.  These models postulate changes in atomic-scale structure
              associated with the initiation of a shear band, so it should be possible to
              verify them by appropriate characterization of the structure.  This project
              involves a series of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and extended energy
              loss fine structure (EXELFS) experiments designed to: (a) identify the
              atomic-scale structural changes associated with shear band formation with the
              goal to elucidate the mechanisms of shear band formation; and (b) characterize
              the interactions of shear bands with second-phase particles, examining the
              effect of particles on both shear band nucleation and motion.  Structural
              observations are correlated with the results of quasi-static mechanical
              testing.  The career development plan integrates these research goals with the
              education of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students as well as
              professional development of local high school science teachers.  This is
              achieved by developing an intensive, informative and entertaining two-week
              summer program for economically and socially at-risk high school students.  The
              summer program focuses on the use of innovative materials in sports equipment,
              and emphasizes extensive student-teacher interaction, interaction with the
              members of the research group, hands-on experience, and teamwork.  By comparing
              the relevant properties of currently-used materials with new materials (bulk
              metallic glasses), the students and teachers will gain an appreciation for the
              materials selection process and see how fundamental scientific advances in
              materials can be converted into practical technology.  It will provide the
              teachers with relevant examples of materials in modern technology, useful ideas
              for demonstrations and experiments, and contacts in the university for further
              professional development.
%%%
The recent development of bulk glass-forming
              alloys has opened up a new range of engineering applications for metallic
              glasses.  Metallic glasses may now be employed in applications where their
              unique mechanical properties are advantageous.  These developments have
              highlighted a need for an improved understanding of the fundamental mechanisms
              of permanent deformation of metallic glasses
***

