Title       : CAREER: Probing and Controlling the Magnetic Properties of Spinel Ferrite
               Nanoparticles through Crystal Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9875892

Award Number: 9875892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhongju John Zhang john.zhang@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,9178,9179,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875892
 Zhang 

This goal of this project is to design and prepare nanol
              articles with specific magnetic properties, and to understand at the atomic
              level the factors determining potentially novel properties of magnetic
              nanoparticles, especially superparamagnetic properties. To achieve this
              understanding, an interdisciplinary approach that combines chemical synthesis,
              high-resolution electron microscopy characterization, neutron diffraction,
              Mossbauer spectroscopy and magnetic measurements will be used to systematically
              elucidate the relationships between magnetic properties, chemical composition
              and structure. Nanoparticles of spinel ferrites will be systematically studied.
              The crystal chemistry, such as the cation distribution and the oxidation states
              nanoparticles of various sizes will be studied, and the relationship to
              magnetic properties, such as the Curie temperature, magnetization hysteresis,
              superparamagnetic relaxation will be systematically investigated. Using
              nanoparticles with well-defined crystal chemistry, relationships between
              particle size and magnetic properties will be unambiguously determined. SQUID
              magnetometry, neutron diffraction, electron energy loss spectroscopy, and
              Mossbauer spectroscopy will be used in these studies of crystal chemistry and
              magnetic properties. We will systematically study the effect of magnetic
              couplings on the superparamagnetic properties of these spinel ferrite
              nanoparticles. Being an excellent teacher is a major part of a successful
              career in academia. This includes vigorously enhancing teaching skills through
              participating in faculty teaching enhancement programs and in activities for
              the innovation of classroom teaching. The proposed research project will be
              well integrated with teaching activities including developing experiments for
              the undergraduate teaching laboratory and broadly training students in
              research.

%%%

These proposed studies will have a significant impact on
              applications of magnetic nano-scale materials such as superparamagnetic
              nanoparticles. Understanding and controlling the superparamagnetic properties
              of nanoparticles is of great interest in information technology as it relates
              to the thermal stability of magnetic data bits for high density information
              storage. It is also crucial in biomedical applications such as contrast agents
              for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic carriers for magnetically
              guided drug delivery.



