Title       : CAREER: Cluster-Assembled Magnetic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1999   
File        : a9875425

Award Number: 9875425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diandra L. Leslie-Pelecky dleslie@unlnotes.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875425
Leslie-Pelecky

The goals of this CAREER proposal are 1) to fabricate
              cluster-assembled magnetic materials using a novel
              evaporation-condensation-compaction deposition technique; 2) to correlate
              magnetic and magnetotransport properties to sample structure to understand the
              role of disorder in magnetism; and 3) to investigate the potential for
              applications ranging from permanent magnets to sensors.  
A gas-entrained
              evaporation-condensation technique is used to form clusters with diameters from
              5 - 50 nm.  The clusters are compacted under high pressure to form a
              nano-grained bulk material.  Extensive structural characterization is
              performed, including x-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, neutron scattering
              and EXAFS.  The resulting nanostructures have two components: crystalline
              grains, and the atoms between the grains, which are collectively called the
              interphase.  The interphase is a large fraction of the sample when the grain
              size is small - up to 50% for 5-nm grains - and can be a significant factor in
              determining overall sample magnetic properties.  
A range of static and
              dynamic magnetic and magnetotransport measurements will determine the intrinsic
              properties of the grains and the interphase, and how the two components
              interact.  Ordering on multiple length scales is investigated using scaling to
              elucidate the similarities and differences between these systems and other
              random magnetic systems such as spin glasses, random anisotropy magnets and
              amorphous ferromagnets.
The two-part education plan addresses some of the
              factors that cause students to choose not to pursue science as a profession. 
              Two one-credit courses will be developed to prepare students for undergraduate
              research and develop the skills necessary to communicate with scientists and
              non-scientists.  The second part of the education project involves the UNL
              Society of Physics Students in outreach to a low-income elementary school in
              Lincoln.  
%%%
This project addresses several fundamental issues in
              cluster-assembled magnetic nanostructures: 1) fabrication of these magnetic
              materials using an evaporation-condensation-compaction technique; 2)
              correlation of their magnetic and magnetotransport properties to sample
              structure to explain the role of disorder in magnetism; and 3) investigation of
              their potential applications ranging from permanent magnets to magnetic
              sensors.  
A novel deposition technique is used to form clusters with
              diameters from 5 - 50 nm.  The clusters are compacted under high pressure to
              form a nano-grained bulk material.  Using clusters as "building blocks" offers
              great versatility in tailoring magnetic nanostructures to have specific
              characteristics.  A unique feature of these materials is that samples with very
              small grains display magnetic properties impossible to achieve with traditional
              bulk materials.  This project will determine the mechanisms responsible for
              these extraordinary properties.
The two-part education plan addresses some of
              the factors that cause students to choose not to pursue science as a
              profession.  Two one-credit courses will be developed to prepare students for
              undergraduate research and develop the skills necessary to communicate with
              scientists and non-scientists.  The second part of the education project
              involves the UNL Society of Physics Students in outreach to a low-income
              elementary school in Lincoln.
***  



