Title       : CAREER: Innovative Technologies for Expedited Site Characterization in the New
               Millennium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a9875037

Award Number: 9875037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pradeep U. Kurup Pradeep_Kurup@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9875037 
Pradeep U. Kurup 
University of Massachusetts, Lowell 

CAREER: 
              Innovative Technologies for Expedited Site Characterization in the New
              Millennium 

ABSTRACT   

This CAREER award supports integrated research
              and education to pioneer novel methodologies for rapid and versatile site
              characterization of the geomedia.  With the great emphasis placed today on
              environmental monitoring, assessment and remediation needs, there has been
              substantial efforts concentrated on advancing a popular in situ methodology,
              the cone penetration test (CPT), for geoenvironmental sensing and assessment. 
              The Principal Investigator will develop an innovative Modular Integrated ConE
              (MICE) penetration test methodology for rapidly sniffing and characterizing
              contaminants in the subsurface, in real-time.  "MICE" will be developed by
              integrating a recently developed "Electronic Nose" technology with the "CPT"
              technology.  The electronic nose technology is based on combining modern
              developments in chemical sensors with artificial neural networks (ANN), for
              automated odor identification.  The various phases involved in the research
              plan include: the development of sensor arrays, ANN models and graphical
              visualization tools, laboratory training and pattern recognition, calibration
              chamber testing, field implementation and in situ testing.  "MICE" is
              envisioned to provide assessment solutions, and expedite characterization of
              the growing number of contaminated sites in the country (and around the world).
               The educational component of this plan is multifold.  Through innovative
              instructional techniques the PI will creatively involve graduate, undergraduate
              and high school students (from typically underrepresented and minority groups)
              in the various phases of the proposed plan.  Undergraduate and graduate
              students will also participate in incorporating research findings into existing
              and new geotechnical/geoenvironmental engineering courses.  The PI will develop
              a new course entitled "Geotechnical and Environmental Site Characterization". 
              This course, directly related to the proposed research, will be offered to
              other campuses via live, two way interactive, audio-video, Distance Learning
              technologies.  The PI will build a dynamic partnership involving
              interdisciplinary research centers, academia, and state agencies to enhance the
              research and educational plans.  The results from this career development plan
              will be broadly disseminated to a broad spectrum of audience, to enhance their
              scientific and technological understanding.  This plan is envisioned to further
              the global frontiers of knowledge and technology in the area of site
              characterization.  The PI will keep pace with future developments in
              cross-disciplinary areas to innovate education and enhance site assessment
              technologies in the 21st century.    

