Title       : CAREER: Revisiting Two Basic Processes in Hydrogeology -- Solute Transport in
               Heterogeneous Formations and Chemical Mixing in Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a9875995

Award Number: 9875995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Harvey charvey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
 9875995
Harvey


The proposed research will reconsider two basic
              processes in hydrogeology:  Solute transport through formations with
              heterogeneous hydraulic conductivity, and chemical mixing and reaction in
              porous media.  The educational initiative will consist of building new
              classroom tools that combine physical models with numerical simulation, and
              developing projects that integrate graduate education with local hydrogeologic
              issues.

When does spatially variable hydraulic conductivty cause dispersion
              and when does it cause nonequilibrium mass transfer?  Hydrogeologists and soil
              scientists have found that spatial heterogeneity in permeability strongly
              influences the transport of solutes in groundwater.  Researchers are divided
              between two principal schools of thought.  The first models the effects of
              heterogeneity as a mass-transfer (or dual-porosity) process, and parameterizes
              the size of immobile zones.  The second models the effects  based on
              heterogeneity on transport as a dispersive, usually Fickian, process and
              relates an effective (or macro) dispersion coefficient to the spatial
              statistics of the permeability field.  We will conduct experimental and
              theoretical research to determine the conditions under which each model is
              appropriate.  In particular, we will investigate the type of spatial structures
              that give rise to diffusive mass transfer.

How do chemicals mix and react to
              porous media?  Developing accurate models of reaction in porous media hinges on
              accounting for the way molecules meet each other before they can react, and
              mechanical dispersion and chemical mixing (or pore-scale mixing) may not be
              synonymous.  For example, mechanical dispersion may result, in part, from
              solute movement through some pores, but not through adjacent
              pores.

Combining physical demonstrations and numerical modeling.  Students
              gain understanding of the connection (and differences) between natural
              processes and mathematical models by using physical models simultaneously with
              numerical models in the classroom.  The combination gives students insight into
              the relation of conceptual/mathematical models and physical reality.  The two
              will be joined by using an LCD projector to display the visual output of a
              numerical transport simulation directly onto a demonstration tank,
              superimposing the simulated and real dye plumes. 

Integrating hydrogeology
              and policy.  Students will be engaged in local hydrologic issues by involvement
              in a nonprofit organization that provides environmental and hydrologic
              expertise for local communities.  

