Title       : CAREER: Nanofabrication of Local Magnetic Sensors for Materials Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9875193

Award Number: 9875193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Moler kmoler@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875193
Moler
This CAREER project will focus on improved measurements of
              magnetic field distributions on small length scales. It will lead to advances
              in superconducting and magnetic materials, which have naturally occurring
              magnetic structure, and in artificially structured mesoscopic materials. The
              major goal of this project is the development of sensors with sufficient
              sensitivity to image mesoscopic electronic phenomena by detecting the magnetic
              fields produced by persistent currents.  Magnetic Force Microscopes (MFMs),
              Hall probes, and Superconducting QUantum Interference Devices (SQUIDs) each
              have particular advantages and disadvantages.    Fabrication, testing, and
              subsequent experimentation with these sensors will provide training for
              graduate and undergraduate students in materials physics and nanofabrication
              techniques.  This award will also partially support the development of a
              microfabrication-based research experience course, which will provide
              undergraduates with a solid grounding in the scientific principles and practice
              of microfabrication, and with the opportunity to conceive, design, fabricate,
              and characterize their own microfabricated device.  This course will be offered
              as part of a new applied physics minor, intended for undergraduate engineering
              and science majors, which is being offered by the historically graduate
              Stanford Applied Physics Department.
%%%
This project focuses on research in
              the area of nanofabricated magnetic sensors related to the study of electronic
              structure on small length scales.  In addition, the project will partially
              support the development of a new microfabrication-based research course to
              provide undergraduates with a solid grounding in the scientific principles and
              practice of microfabrication, and with the opportunity to conceive, design,
              fabricate, and characterize their own microfabricated device.  This course will
              be part of a new undergraduate minor in applied physics being introduced by the
              Stanford Applied Physics Department which has historically been solely a
              graduate department. The work supported under this proposal will provide
              training for both graduate and undergraduate students in materials research and
              nanofabrication techniques at the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility and at the
              newly constructed Laboratory for Advanced Materials.
***



