Title       : CAREER: An Efficient 3D Representation for Modeling Microstructure of Trabecular
               Bone and Development of An Integrated Program in Computational Biomechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9875633

Award Number: 9875633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: X. Edward Guo exg1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875633
Guo
The goal is to develop an integrated education program in
              computational biomechanics in conjunction with research in trabecular bone
              mechanics in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Columbia University. 
              The research component of the project aims to develop a novel imaging analysis
              and modeling technique for trabecular bone mechanics.  Trabecular bone, a
              spongy, porous type of bone tissue made of tiny rods and plates, is mostly
              affected by many bone diseases such as osteoporosis, which costs billions of
              dollars in health care in the United States alone.  The complex
              three-dimensional microstructure of trabecular bone can be captured in great
              details by high resolution imaging techniques.  Mechanical models based on
              these high-resolution images of trabecular bone are very useful in determining
              mechanical properties of normal and diseased trabecular bone.  One technical
              challenge in modeling is to overcome the enormously large size of the models. 
              In this project, a distinctly new approach will be developed to handle
              microstructural modeling of trabecular bone.  We will develop imaging analysis
              procedures on high-resolution images of trabecular bone to create
              microstructural models with significantly reduced size (200-100 fold) such that
              even a whole bone can be analyzed!  In parallel with this research activity, a
              new course in computational biomechanics for senior undergraduate and first
              year graduate students will be introduced.  In this new course, we will use a
              multimedia teaching facility equipped with numerous computer workstations and
              video-audio aids to teach students the fundamentals in biology, computational
              techniques as well as basic principles of mechanics.  In addition, using the
              Internet as a fast channel for information dissemination, all teaching
              materials will be written in a highly graphical and multimedia format and
              placed on the World-Wide-Web for student's easy access.  Furthermore,
              programming modules of basic computational techniques will be written in a new
              Java language, which allow a computer-platform-independent Internet access by
              students.  New research advances in the research component will be introduced
              and implemented in the course.  In summary, this project will develop an
              innovative modeling technique for trabecular bone, integrate new research
              advances in undergraduate/graduate education, and provide an interactive (fun)
              teaching forum for enhancing education in science, mathematics, engineering and
              technology. 


