Title       : CAREER: Development and Applications of Solid-State NMR Methods for the
               Structure Determination of Membrane - Associated Peptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9875756

Award Number: 9875756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ayyalusamy Ramamoorthy ramamoor@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ramamoorthy
9875756

Technical:
The main objective of this proposal is to
              develop solid-state NMR techniques that are capable of describing the
              structures and dynamics of immobile and non-crystalline supramolecular
              assemblies of membrane proteins that have been largely inaccessible to the
              traditional experimental methods of structural biology, x-ray crystallography
              and solution NMR spectroscopy. The key problem hampering widespread use of
              solid-state NMR spectroscopy for structure determination of membrane-bound
              peptides and proteins is the lack of a comprehensive resonance assignment
              protocol. To overcome this problem, multinuclear, multidimensional methods are
              proposed. Several biologically active membrane-bound polypeptides will be used
              in the development of methods proposed in this application. Since spin
              interaction tensors are important in the conformation and dynamics studies of
              uniaxially oriented membrane-associated polypeptides, simple methods are
              proposed to study chemical shift anisotropy and dipolar coupling tensors
              associated with nuclei (~sN and 13C) on the backbone of the peptide of interest
              rather than using the data from a model peptide in order to probe the global as
              well as local dynamics of the peptide incorporated in lipid bilayers. Two
              educational initiatives are proposed to develop Biophysics and Chemical Biology
              courses that reflect the expansion of this science into the interface between
              Biology and Physics.

General Significance:
More than half of all proteins
              are strongly associated with cell membranes. Membrane-associated proteins are
              responsible for many of the properties and functions of biological systems. In
              order to obtain a detailed understanding of how membrane proteins carry out
              their functions and how these functions can be altered for biological or
              biotechnological purposes, it is necessary to determine their three-dimensional
              structures. Determining the structures of membrane proteins is one of the most
              important challenges in science at the present time. In this research project,
              new solid-state NMR techniques will be developed and applied to study several
              biologically active membrane-bound peptides. The methods and goals of this
              research will demonstrate the power of solid-state NMR methods applied to
              systems of fundamental interest, and will also provide a mad map for other
              investigations of complex membrane proteins using solid-state NMR. Two
              educational initiatives are proposed to develop Biophysics and Chemical Biology
              courses that reflect the expansion of this science into the interface between
              Biology and Physics.

