Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Digital Signal Processing Framework for Optimized Wireless
               Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9875805

Award Number: 9875805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akbar M. Sayeed akbar@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for CCR-9875805

Wireless communication systems, particularly
              code-division
multiple access (CDMA) systems, are vital building blocks of the
              rapidly
evolving global information infrastructure. Digital signal processing
              (DSP)
is playing a central role in wireless communications due to the
              increasingly
sophisticated processing required in the physical network layer. 
              The major
DSP challenges in CDMA system design stem from three key factors
              that
dominate the processing in the physical layer: (1) channel
              propagation
dynamics; (2) multiaccess interference; and, (3) the inherent
              complexity of
the DSP algorithms. The proposed research has two primary goals
              for meeting
the physical layer CDMA challenges:

*       Development of DSP
              tools and theory to launch an integrated attack
on time-varying multipath
              dispersion, time-varying multipath fading, and
multiaccess interference.
*   
                 Development of design strategies for practical high-performance
systems
              that optimize the complexity versus performance tradeoffs inherent
in the DSP
              techniques.

A new unified framework based on DSP in canonical
              multipath-Doppler
coordinates will be developed to meet these goals. The
              canonical coordinates
are defined by a fixed basis that is derived from a
              fundamental
characterization of channel propagation dynamics in terms of
              certain discrete
multipath delays and Doppler shifts of the signaling
              waveform. The canonical
coordinates naturally connect the key physical layer
              facets and thus
facilitate a unified DSP development. First, all processing
              relating to
propagation effects can be directly performed in the coordinates.
              Second,
the same coordinates provide a canonical subspace-based
              representation
of the desired signal and multiaccess interference. Finally,
              the simple 
computation and subspace structure of the coordinates affords a
              direct handle 
on complexity. At the heart of the research is a particularly
              promising
innovation: whereas existing interference suppression techniques
              treat
propagation effects as a nuisance, canonical coordinates exploit the
              subspace
structure induced by channel effects for enhanced interference
              suppression.

The educational objectives of the program include integrated
              curriculum
development in DSP and communications, a thematic approach to
              teaching to
facilitate conceptual thinking, and leveraging of technology to
              extend the
boundaries of traditional instruction and learning.
   

