Title       : Development of Asymmetric Cyano Group - Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9875735

Award Number: 9875735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott G. Nelson sgnelson+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9178,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Nelson's research explores catalytic, asymmetric cyano group transfer
              reactions.  The paradigm within which this is being developed is that of the
              Meerwein-Pondorf-Veerly hydride transfer reaction, where acetone cyanohydrin
              serves in place of the secondary alcohol component.  Further development of the
              cyano variant of this reaction will result from elaboration of the cyano group.
               In this way, an asymmetric Strecker process is possible.  Other possible
              targets include complex polyol fragments of such molecules as the antioncogenic
              agent pancristatin.  Development of effective catalysts for the reaction is a
              corollary goal, and will be pursued using combinatory screening methods and the
              development of a ligand library.  Professor Nelson's educational activities are
              targeted at the development of science instructors among the chemistry student
              cohort.  Students will design and implement lesson plans and laboratory
              exercises, to provide a mechanism for creating or perpetuating an interest
              among science majors in exploring a career in science education.

With this
              CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program supports the teaching and research
              of Dr. Scott G. Nelson of the University of Pittsburgh.  Professor Nelson will
              employ the cyano group in its relatively safe acetone cyanohydrin form to carry
              out a variety of metal-catalyzed reactions that will result in such useful
              substances as amino acid analogues.  More complex targets are also being
              targeted, such as the anticancer compound pancristatin.  Professor Nelson's
              educational goals center on inspiring undergraduate science majors to opt for
              careers as science teachers.  Specifically, Dr. Nelson will give these students
              the opportunity to be involved in the design of new laboratory experiments. 
              This is intended as a teaching alternative for the traditional undergraduate
              laboratory research opportunity.

