Title       : CAREER: Life Science in the Atomic Age: The Radioactive Revolution of Biomedical
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9875012

Award Number: 9875012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela N. Creager creager@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Career Development Project integrates research and teaching around the
              theme of materials in biological experimentation. The five-year research
              project addresses the role of radioisotopes in postwar biomedicine, a subject
              that has been virtually untouched by historians of science. This study will
              help resolve central issues about the reconfiguration of biology after World
              War II, including the changing relationship between physical scientists and
              biologists, the degree to which postwar biomedical research corresponded to
              "big science," and the relationship of practices in laboratory research to
              those of field science.

In conjunction with this research project, the PI
              will develop two new courses to teach Princeton students about developments in
              postwar biology by involving them in historical research. An undergraduate
              seminar, "Biology in the Atomic Age," will focus on the intertwined scientific
              and political developments in the aftermath of Hiroshima, with attention to
              biophysics, radiation research (including that on human subjects), and
              scientific assessments of environmental health and safety. Students in a
              graduate seminar entitled "Postwar Biomedicine: Big Science?" will investigate
              the major trends in life science after World War II, in terms of disciplines,
              institutions, patronage, and research practices. To complement the seminar
              discussions, the PI will draw a group of outstanding scholars to Princeton for
              a three-day workshop on postwar biomedical science. Finally, the Pis yearly
              lecture course on the history of biology since the Enlightenment will be
              redesigned around the changing materials and practices of life scientists,
              incorporating various instruments, organisms, and contemporary biological kits
              into classroom teaching.

This project will also include a second and more
              limited research project examining the contributions of crystallographer
              Rosalind Franklin to knowledge of the three-dimensional architecture of tobacco
              mosaic virus. In addition to enriching our understanding of molecular biology
              in the 1950s, this historical reassessment will provide a timely and important
              contribution to scholarship on women in science. The study has more immediate
              benefits as well:  by extending the PI's scholarship to include work on gender
              and science (an area in which she teaches a yearly seminar) the project will
              more fully integrate her teaching and research activities. This historical
              study grows out of her first book project, which shows how tobacco mosaic virus
              became an important material for biological experimentation and served as a
              model for biomedical and agricultural research on other viruses.

