Title       : CAREER: Investigation of Novel Structures and Associated Interfaces for Wide
               Bandgap Semiconductor Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a9875186

Award Number: 9875186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Porter lporter@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9875186
Porter

This proposal describes research on novel structures and
              metallizations for wide bandgap semiconductor devices, the development of
              integrated laboratory-classroom modules associated with semiconductors and thin
              film science, and the extension of coordinated advising and outreach
              activities.

Due to its large bandgap (3.4 eV), high thermal conductivity,
              and high saturation drift velocity, gallium nitride is being intensively
              pursued for a variety of optoelectronic and high temperature, high frequency,
              and high power electronic devices.  Recent advances in the quality of GaN
              epitaxial films have prompted efforts to develop structures which can be used
              in making efficient devices.  In this project novel structures comprising
              conducting layers and semiconducting GaN films will be investigated.  This work
              will employ the selective growth of GaN and its subsequent overgrowth to
              produce embedded conducting layers (ECL) within the GaN epitaxial films.  These
              structures will have potential applications in devices such as ultra-violet
              photodetectors and permeable base transistors.

A closely related challenge
              for the development of both GaN and SiC devices involves the fabrication of
              p-type ohmic contacts with low specific contact resistivities (SCRs).  Because
              of the large bandgaps and large workfunctions of these semiconductors, metal
              contacts on p-type material yield large Schottky barrier heights, or energy
              barriers for electron transport across the metal-semiconductor interface. 
              These large barrier heights increase SCRs even on relatively highly doped
              material.  To reduce the Schottky barrier heights InxGa1-xN will be
              investigated in the form of thin (~50-100 A) interlayers between selected metal
              contacts and the p-type GaN or SiC semiconductor substrates.  Indium nitride
              and gallium nitride are completely soluble in one another, such that the
              composition of InxGa1-xN may be varied over the range from pure GaN to pure
              InN.  By varying the composition, and thus the bandgap, of the lnxGal-XN
              interlayer, it is believed that the barrier heights can be significantly
              reduced.

The long-term outlook for the advancement of wide bandgap
              semiconductor technology will depend on the availability of suitably educated
              graduates.  Recent research indicates that students learn best when laboratory
              courses are integrated with classroom experiences.  For this reason the
              Materials Science & Engineering Department at CMU plans to implement a new
              undergraduate curriculum with extensive integration of laboratory and classroom
              courses.  The development of instructive experiments will be critically
              important to the successful implementation of this program.  This proposal
              discusses plans for developing selected laboratory modules and expanding
              student advising and outreach programs.
***



