Title       : CAREER: Effects of Microstructural Randomness in Composite Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9875067

Award Number: 9875067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah C. Baxter baxter@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9875067
Baxter
A CAREER award supports research and education in mathematical
              modeling of materials processing and properties.  The research work will
              examine the influence of random microstructure on the development of
              thermo-mechanical stresses and stress concentrations in metal matrix composites
              during cooling after consolidation processing.   In order to investigate the
              effect of randomness in microstructure on the development of stresses during
              processing this work will employ the Moving Window-GMC technique.  It uses the
              micromechanics model, known as the generalized method of cells (GMC), in a
              moving window procedure to generate material property fields for a given
              material microstructure. Statistical methods are then used to develop
              probability density, auto- and cross correlation functions associated with the
              fields. These functions will be used with Monte Carlo techniques to generate
              additional material property fields with the same statistics as the original.
              Standard finite element methods, used to model consolidation cool down, will
              use the original and simulated properties as input. The analysis of the output
              from these models, e.g. residual stress states, will be used to improve
              predictions of the effective pre-use properties of the composite
              material.

The educational plan associated with this project has several
              focus areas. The development of two new courses is planned.  The first is an
              advanced undergraduate class in Numerical Methods. The emphasis of this class
              would be on problem solving techniques; problem definition through
              identification with classic engineering problems, choice of solution technique
              and implementation of the method via appropriate technological platforms. The
              second class is an undergraduate class in mathematical modeling. It will
              improve the ability of undergraduate engineers to set up and define problems. 
              Also planned are  short courses for undergraduates on special topics, in the
              format of seminars or interdisciplinary classes, as well as development of
              competitive undergraduate research projects integrated with the research work
              under this award.
***



