Title       : CAREER: Analysis of RET Co-Receptor Function in a Teaching Laboratory Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9875793

Award Number: 9875793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Quinn C. Vega vegaq@mail.montclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montclair State University
	      Valley Road & Normal Avenue
	      Montclair, NJ  07043    201/893-4000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to incorporate the critical aspects of basic
              scientific research while training the students in the fundamentals of
              molecular biology.  Although students must learn the required techniques of
              molecular biology in order to be successful in professional school or in the
              work force, too often these techniques are learned in isolated experiments
              where the connections between the experiments are unclear.  Such experiments
              also tend to focus on a particular technique without considering the experiment
              in the larger context of scientific inquiry.  Integrating the learning of
              laboratory techniques, experimental design and experimental analysis is
              critical for the training of future researchers that can adapt to the necessary
              changes that occur in molecular biology.
This project will teach students
              molecular biology techniques in the framework of a research project.  The
              students will be presented with a scientific problem and they will attempt to
              solve the problem.  Specifically, the students will be introduced to the RET
              receptor, a newly characterized signaling molecule and a protein involved in
              the early stages of kidney development.  They will be told about the ligand for
              this receptor and the three co-receptors that may be involved in the receptors
              activation.  Finally, the students will learn that the three co-receptors have
              similar amino acid sequences but vary in their ability to activate the receptor
              in the presence of the ligand.  The students will then proceed to spend the
              rest of the semester devising experiments to determine the important regions of
              the co-receptor for RET activation.  Although a seemingly daunting task for
              untrained molecular biologists, the students will learn how to approach this
              question in a step-by-step fashion.  The students will first learn how to align
              protein sequences and compare similarities between the co-receptors.  The
              aligned co-receptors will then be analyzed to allow construction of receptor
              hybrids using standard cloning and amplification techniques.  Finally, with the
              help of a technician, the students will study the expression of their designed
              protein looking at both the levels of expression and the ability of their
              co-receptor to activate the RET receptor in the presence of the appropriate
              ligand.  In the process of performing these experiments, the students will
              learn how to analyze data in preparation for later experiments, understand the
              connections between experiments and gain insight into the methods of
              experimental design by studying a timely research problem.  Finally, the data
              obtained in these experiments will help answer the question of co-receptor
              function as well as provide reagents and hypotheses to be studied by future
              student laboratories.


