Title       : CAREER: The Logic of Grouping and Perceptual Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a9875175

Award Number: 9875175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Feldman jacob@ruccs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate one of the most basic aspects of human
perceptual
              intelligence, the ability to organize the visual world.
Perceptual
              organization---the process whereby individual bits of the
visual image are
              aggregated into coherent, meaningful wholes---is a
fundamental process that is
              known to influence many other aspects of
visual processing. Yet no
              mathematically well-defined theory of it
exists. The key stumbling block is
              the pervasive but slippery notion
known as ``goodness of form,'' which has
              resisted attempts to define
it rigorously.  The approach taken in this
              proposal is a modern,
mathematically-motivated version of the idea that for
              any visual
image, human observers see the simplest interpretation possible.
              In
most previous renditions of this idea, the term ``simplest'' is only
very
              vaguely or subjectively defined. The lack of concrete definitions
or
              algorithms in turn makes it impossible to determine empirically
whether the
              interpretation that human subjects see is, in fact, the
simplest.  Minimal
              Model (MM) theory builds on ideas from modern
computational logic, with which
              which the term ``interpretation'' and
``simple'' can be given extremely
              precise definitions. Under these
definitions, it turns out that human
              judgments---for example, the way
line drawings are grouped and
              organized---correspond closely to the
formally minimal interpretation in a
              well-defined logical language.
This minimal interpretation is in a sense the
              least ``coincidental''
interpretation possible of a given scene; that is, the
              one that
explains the image best.  An efficient algorithm exists for
              rapidly
computing the minimal interpretation.  Moreover predictions
              derived
from this theory have already been used to answer some
              long-standing
empirical questions about human perceptual grouping. The
              experiments
to be conducted in this project investigate many of the most
              difficult
and important problems in perceptual organization: the perception
              of
occluded figures, the detection of figures amid complex and
              cluttered
scenes, the interpretation of three-dimensional structure, and
              the
representation and categorization of shape. For each of these
              visual
tasks, MM theory makes definite and concrete predictions what
              people
will see under various conditions, and about the limits of the
              visual
system's ability to recover the true structure of the visual
              world.
Educational activities in connection with this project include
              the
creation of new courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
              The
proposed undergraduate course (Topics in Cognitive Research) and
graduate
              course (Mathematical Methods in Cognitive Science) emphasize
an
              interdisciplinary approach to research in which both behavioral
              and
computational studies are emphasized.


