Title       : CAREER: Micro-Scale Based Reliability Analysis of Mechanical and Flow-Related
               Behavior of Heterogeneous Materials for Macro-Scale Infrastructure and
               Geotechnical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9875516

Award Number: 9875516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Graham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9875516 
Lori L. Graham 
University of Virginia 

CAREER:  Micro-Scale Based
              Reliability Analysis of Mechanical and Flow-Related Behavior of Heterogeneous
              Materials for Macro-Scale Infrastructure and Geotechnical Applications
              

Abstract 

With the aging of our nation's infrastructure comes safety
              concerns about existing systems based on geomaterials such as soil and
              concrete.  The full development of proper reliability analyses of such systems
              will contribute to a rationally prescribed balance of safety and cost in
              engineering design and maintenance activities.  An important part of this
              reliability analysis is to assess the effects of the randomness that is
              inherent in soil and concrete.  This career development plan describes
              integrated research and educational activities aimed at improving the
              behavioral descriptions for these materials, thereby promoting
              reliability-based design and analysis for civil engineering applications.
              

The research plan consists of five phases that provide a logical and
              efficient progression from experimentally obtained microstructures to
              reliability analysis of such critical responses as local stresses in concrete
              and soils and local groundwater velocity in soils.  Use of "moving-window GMC"
              and stochastic field theory establishes a much-needed link between micro-scale
              and macro-scale research on these materials.  This research has potential to be
              extended within the fields of geotechnical and concrete engineering, as well as
              to be applied in other engineering fields (e.g., microelectronics, materials
              process modeling). 

The advantages provided by probabilistic analysis and
              reliability-based design will be further promoted through an education plan to
              improve the incorporation of probability and statistics into the engineering
              curriculum, based on the development of probability modules to be applied to a
              range of civil engineering courses.  Further, incorporation into educational
              activities of the visualization techniques developed in research will enhance
              presentation of complex course materials.  In general, the education plan
              addresses the development of students (both full-time and in continuing
              education) who are confident in their abilities to solve complex problems by
              placing an emphasis on cross-disciplinary preparation. 



