Title       : CAREER: Feedback Based Robust On-Line Traffic Control for Intelligent
               Transportation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a9875296

Award Number: 9875296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kaan M. Ozbay kaan@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
Although the investment and the interest in Intelligent
              Transportation Systems
(ITS) is growing exponentially, robust real-time
              on-line traffic control
strategies that can effectively use this ITS
              infrastructure do not exist yet.
Recent advances in the area of mathematical
              control theory coupled with the
availability of real-time traffic data present
              major opportunities for the
development and implementation of robust traffic
              responsive real-time feedback
control models and strategies.  This integrated
              research and education project
has the following objectives:
1. Development
              of feedback based on-line traffic control strategies that can be
used for
              real-time traffic management during recurrent and
              non-recurrent
congestion.
Previous research in the area of traffic control
              mostly focused on the use of
simulation / optimization based approaches. 
              However, these traditional models
are not generally applicable to real-time
              systems due to their very high
computational costs and robustness requirements
              of real-time traffic control
systems.  The use of the feedback control design
              methodologies that can make use
of real-time data collected by traffic
              sensors, constitutes an exact match with
the requirements of ITS, due to the
              capability of feedback models to respond in
real-time to the deviations of the
              system from its desired behavior.
2. Development of Virtual Interactive
              Traffic Simulation control on the Internet
(VITSI) toolbox and use of
              real-time traffic data for laboratory testing and
validation.
VITSI toolbox
              will be developed using several programming languages including
C/C++ and JAVA
              depending upon the computational requirements of the modules to
be developed. 
              The goal for developing VITSI is to provide researchers and
students with a
              flexible and specialized traffic simulation and control design
tool set they
              can use for the development, testing and validation of different
real-time
              traffic control strategies.  On-line traffic data acquired by
              Rutgers
Intelligent Transportation (RITS) laboratory coupled with VITSI
              toolbox will
also be used to test and validate developed models.  This
              real-time traffic data
will be mainly obtained from ITS facilities in New
              Jersey.
3. Introduction of the results of the proposed research activities
              into the
undergraduate and graduate level traffic control courses through the
              use of the
proposed VITSI toolbox and traffic data acquisition and processing
              capabilities
at the recently established Rutgers Intelligent Transportation
              Systems (RITS)
laboratory.
With the advent of ITS, on-line traffic control
              design, testing, and
implementation has become one of the fast growing areas
              of traffic engineering.
However, feedback control techniques have not yet been
              effectively introduced
into the traffic engineering education programs.  This
              research project will
design an integrated interdisciplinary
              research-education program that will
incorporate feedback control techniques
              into both graduate and undergraduate
traffic engineering classes.  At the
              heart of the education efforts, there will
be the use of VITSI toolbox concept
              coupled with the on-line traffic data
acquisition and processing capabilities
              of the RITS laboratory.  VITSI toolbox
will be specifically designed to
              encourage the use of Internet based hands-on
tools for effective teaching,
              learning, and research activities, and will
complement RITS as a new research
              and education tool that does not currently
exist.

