Title       : CAREER: MultiAgent Systems to Support Mobile Information Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9875433

Award Number: 9875433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anupam Joshi joshi@cs.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to provide seamless access to the networked
              computational and information resources from mobile, wirelessly connected
              systems. Such systems will be an integral component of the National Information
              Infrastructure (NII). Some of the current obstacles in building such a
              ubiquitous access system on mobile platforms include their limited compute
              power, disks, battery life etc., as well as the limited and variable bandwidth
              of the wireless networks. Moreover, the next generation of radio communication
              hardware will engender ad-hoc networks which current proxy based mobile access
              models cannot handle. The approach in this research is to create agent oriented
              middleware which overcomes the limitations of the mobile hosts as well as
              wireless networks, and helps integrate them into the high performance computer
              and communication systems that form the backbone of the NII. The middleware
              transcodes (multimedia) data streams to enable weakly connected access, and
              integrates software component based systems to provide computational power to
              mobile hosts. This allows the systems to create information from available data
              to respond to queries, which is useful when the queries are in non-trivial
              domains (e.g. scientific information, electronic commerce). Moreover, the
              system provides disconnection management, and integrates techniques for
              cooperative information filtering. The system supports both proxy based and
              end-end data management approaches and their relative efficacy is compared. It
              is expected that this work will lead to the development of software systems
              needed to support mobile information access in complex, real world
              applications, and allow the NII to handle the diversity of scale presented by
              mobile clients connected over low bandwidth wireless (ad-hoc) networks to the
              high bandwidth network backbone and powerful servers. The educational component
              of this proposal has two aspects. One focuses on creating courses in the area
              of the proposed research work and training undergraduate and graduate students.
              The other leverages the proposed research to create adaptive electronic
              notebooks for science and engineering education which use (existing)
              courseware, digital libraries and other data repositories. It is expected that
              the electronic notebook software will be used by non-traditional students in
              continuing education programs who use low bandwidth dial-in or wireless
              connections. http://www.cs.umbc.edu/~ajoshi/career/ 
