Title       : CAREER: High Performance Packet Switches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1999 
File        : a9875637

Award Number: 9875637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nick McKeown nickm@ee.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Internet is facing two problems simultaneously: there is a need for faster
              switching/routing
capacity to carry the continued growth of user data, and
              there is a need to introduce guaranteed
qualities of service (QoS) for
              real-time traffic.  Each problem can be solved independently - the fastest
              single-stage switches and routers can be made using input-queued crossbar
              switches, instead of shared memory systems limited by memory bandwidth.  And
              QoS can be provided using numerous well-known techniques, such as weighted fair
              queueing (WFQ).  However, until now, these two solutions have been mutually
              exclusive; all of the work on algorithms that provide QoS has required that
              switches and routers use shared memory or output queueing.
The Next Generation
              Internet (NGI) will require hugely increased capacity, and distinguished and
              guaranteed qualities of service.  Building on previous research on high
              performance switches and routers, the proposed work will follow three avenues
              in an attempt to solve the problem of simultaneously increasing network
              capacity and providing QoS:
1. Switch Speedup.  Using a new technique called
              "precise emulation via speedup", cross-bar switches can be built that precisely
              emulate output queued and centralized shared memory switches, yet use memories
              that run at only twice the speed of the external line.  This promising
              technique enables switches and routers to provide guaranteed QoS at speeds much
              higher than before.  In this work, new practical algorithms will be developed,
              studied and prototyped with the goal of making this technique available to the
              industry at large,
2. The Fork-Join Router.  This is a new highly parallel
              architecture for single-stage IP routers with aggregate capacities in excess of
              1Tb/s.  Using multiple forms of parallelism simultaneously, different parts of
              the system may operate at different speeds, allowing a particular
              implementation to make best use of the available switching, and forwarding
              technology.  The router is highly fault-tolerant, degrading gracefully when
              sub-systems fail.  Perhaps most importantly, the fork-join router can use the
              "speedup" technique for Terabit routers that provide precise QoS
              guarantees.
3. The Streaming Processor.  Network switches and routers require
              fast processing elements that process data as it "streams through."  Streaming
              data is not processed well by traditional heavily-pipelined load-store RISC
              CPUs.  There is a need for a processor architecture optimized for streaming
              data, in which the CPU is part of a larger system pipeline, and in which data
              with spatial, but not temporal, locality can be processed at very high speed. 
              Such a device would enable faster forwarding decisions in routers,
              perform
faster scheduling algorithms to provide QoS, and perform fast
              transcoding of net-work data.
An important goal is to see the research used by
              industry and in the NGI.  Therefore, a goal of
the proposed research is to
              transfer the technology to the builders of "carrier-class" switching and
              routing equipment, and to encourage rapid adoption.
