Title       : CAREER: Dynamics, Domain Conformity, and Anisotropy in the Theory and
               Implementation of Unstructured Mesh Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9875170

Award Number: 9875170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan R. Shewchuk jrs@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Solutions to complex scientific simulations based on partial differential
              equations use discrete meshes to represent the physical (continuous) domain.
              Similarly, computer rendering of complex scenes uses these meshes for radiosity
              calculations. Existing heuristic-based methods do not produce meshes that
              dependable for 3-dimensional real-world problems that include moving or complex
              surfaces, or that exhibit anisotropic (direction-dependent) behavior. This
              project will design, analyze, and implement mesh generation algorithms for
              these domains that are practical and, where possible, provably good. The
              technical approach to this task is to use optimization-based smoothing and
              topological transformations. For anisotropic problems, the project will also
              develop a firm theoretical basis footing for extending Delaunay triangulations
              to the anisotropic case. Finally, in three dimensions the project will pursue a
              firm understanding of constrained Delaunay tetrahedralizations and algorithms
              for their construction.

This project will also be active in integrating
              research with education. It will contribute to curriculum development and
              course design in support of a new Computational Engineering Science program
              being initiated within the College of Engineering at UC Berkeley. This effort
              will include courses and texts in mesh generation and conjugate gradient-like
              solvers.

