Title       : CAREER: Structure-Property Relationships of Nanocrystalline Oxide Films for Gas
               Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9875405

Award Number: 9875405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoqing Pan panx@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9875405
Pan

The research and development of reliable chemical sensors
              parallels the demand for a high degree of control over air pollution and fuel
              combustion efficiency for a variety of combustion processes, and increasing
              concern over safety in homes and in industrial activities involving flammable
              and poisonous gases.  One of the main obstacles in the development of
              sensitive, selective and durable gas sensors has been the lack of adequate
              understanding of the fundamental processes involved in the operation of these
              devices and the relationships between these processes and the microstructure
              and composition of the sensing materials.  This Faculty Early CAREER
              Development project will focus on nanocrystalline tin oxide materials, a model
              system for use as chemical sensors, to obtain fundamental understanding of the 
              structure-property relationships.  Systematic experiments are planned to
              investigate: (1) microstructural instabilities and crystal defect (e.g.,
              crystallographic shear planes, grain boundaries, and dopants) evolution during
              the reaction process in the gaseous environment at elevated temperatures; (2)
              the atomic structure and electronic characteristics of individual defects
              (crystallographic shear planes, twin boundaries, and special grain boundaries)
              and interfaces; (3) correlation of microstructure, morphology, and chemical
              composition information with electrical measurements in different gaseous
              atmospheres at elevated temperatures.  The studies on nanocrystalline tin oxide
              films will be conducted by spatially resolved microscopy and spectroscopy
              techniques in combination with impedance measurements within various simulated
              gaseous environments.  Specifically, such advanced microscopy techniques will
              be combined with the thermal and chemical pre-treatment of specimens using a
              specially designed apparatus which simulates the environment the gas sensors
              encounter in use.   Through the course of the research project the PI plans to
              explore the commercial software simulation programs for use in students
              education and training in crystal physics.  In addition, a virtual microscopy
              database will be established, accessible via the Web, for images, renderings of
              crystal structures, and video clips/segments demonstrating the in-situ electron
              microscope observations. 


One of the main obstacles in the development of
              sensitive, selective and durable gas sensors has been the lack of adequate
              understanding of the fundamental processes involved in the operation of these
              devices and the relationships between these processes and the microstructure
              and composition of the sensing materials.  The results from this Faculty Early
              CAREER Development project about the structure and chemistry of tin oxide, a
              model gas sensing material, will be used to interpret the electrical properties
              and sensing performance of that material and will provide guidance on how to
              tailor solid state chemical sensors, which have optimized microstructure and
              desirable sensing properties.  The proposed research involves the utilization
              and development of a number of advanced tools, such as image simulations,
              structural modeling, and electron microscopy.  The long-term goal of the
              educational plan is to develop non-traditional and innovative pedagogical
              techniques that will provide graduates with the intellectual, creative, and
              scientific understanding needed to prosper in the modern scientific and
              engineering fields. These approaches are aimed to ensure that the students are
              adequately prepared for the scientific and industrial environment of the
              future.


