Title       : CAREER: Robust On-Line Location and Routing for Urban Service Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a9875305

Award Number: 9875305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elise D. Miller-Hooks edm3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

CAREER: Robust On-Line Location and Routing for Urban Service
              Systems
Elise Miller-Hooks
Proposal No. 9875305

This research focuses on
              the development of the conceptual framework and
algorithmic steps for
              real-time location and routing decisions in dynamically
changing environments
              for urban service operations, including emergency
response services, vehicles
              carrying hazardous materials, and response teams to
incidents involving
              hazardous materials.  Response time and the associated
level of service of
              many of these urban service operations, such as ambulance,
police, fire and
              emergency repair, depend on travel times experienced on the
roadways and the
              relative location of the call for service to that of the
response vehicle. 
              Thus, optimal location and routing decisions are vital to
the performance of
              many emergency service operations.  Real-time information
can be used to make
              improved tactical and operational location and routing
decisions for emergency
              services and other urban operations, including the
transport of hazardous
              materials.  However, it is critical that procedures that
dynamically respond
              to current conditions on the state of the network consider
the time-varying
              and uncertain nature of future travel conditions in order to
generate robust
              solutions; i.e. solutions that will remain optimal, or nearly
optimal, despite
              variations in travel conditions and that can be applied to a
variety of
              situations.  The inherent stochastic and dynamic characteristics of
future
              travel conditions, including the probability of arc or node failures, as
well
              as the spatial and temporal correlation in travel conditions and
              the
possibility of multiple conflicting objectives, are considered in this
              work. 
Accompanying this research effort is an integrated educational
              initiative to
provide students with fundamental knowledge and skills drawn
              from multiple
disciplines to allow them to solve a broad range of difficult
              problems, to
integrate research and teaching through inclusion of real-world
              problems in
coursework, to impart an interest in transportation graduate
              studies and
promote retention of women and underrepresented minorities in
              engineering, and
to develop skills in using non-lecture based pedagogical
              techniques for
improved comprehension of fundamental engineering concepts.

