Title       : Mathematical Models in Cognitive Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9009001

Award Number: 9009001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160289             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Estes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purposes of the models to be studied are to explain cognitive              
              phenomena and to contribute to efforts in artificial intelligence              
              to build machines that learn.  The research will compare                       
              computational models developed in the classical information-                   
              processing framework with adaptive network models.  Three kinds                
              of phenomena will be of special interest.                                      
                                                                                             
              (1)  Classification and category learning:  An example is                      
              learning to classify parts of speech, an essential component of                
              the ability to parse sentences during language processing.  The                
              learner must cope with fuzzy sets, that is, sets defined only in               
              terms of combinations of properties that are probabilistically                 
              related to categories.  A central question is why this kind of                 
              learning is particularly difficult.  In the models to be tested,               
              the answer appears to lie in limitations on people's capacity for              
              selective attention to the most relevant of a large number of                  
              properties and in the hazards of partial success, that is, the                 
              tendency to accept a partial solution to a classification problem              
              when better ones are available.                                                
                                                                                             
              (2) Recognition:  The frequency of false recognitions is a major               
              problem in many domains: In the health area, false diagnoses of                
              diseases are apparently unavoidable; in navigation, actually new               
              locations or scenes are falsely recognized as having been                      
              previously encountered; eyewitnesses to crimes claim to recognize              
              actually innocent suspects. Research in this project will                      
              evaluate the hypothesis that the explanation of false                          
              recognitions has the same locus as that of difficulty of                       
              classification.                                                                
                                                                                             
              (3) Decision:  When selecting among alternatives, as in                        
              investment, vocational choice, or games of strategy, people often              
              suffer the consequences of choosing an alternative with a high                 
              short-term payoff when others would yield much larger long-term                
              payoffs.  In the theoretical analysis, decision making of this                 
              kind will be interpreted as a combination of processes of                      
              recognition and classification.
