Title       : Monitoring Land-Use Change in Tropical Rainforests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9009137

Award Number: 9009137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63147              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer M. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   One of the most active areas of human-environmental interaction in        
              recent years has been the rainforests of the Amazon Basin.  Rapid              
              deforestation and expansion of agricultural and other human activities         
              has dramatically altered large tracts of land.  The resultant change in        
              plant cover has profound implications for flows of carbon between              
              terrestrial and atmospheric systems, not only in Amazonia, but across          
              the globe.  Recent models of climatic change have considered                   
              deforestation an irreversible process, but analysis of satellite               
              imagery over the last 15 years indicates that processes are much more          
              complex.  This project will develop and test analytic procedures to            
              analyze changing patterns of land use, land cover, and related                 
              variables in a part of Zona Bragantina, the first part of Amazonia to          
              be extensively settled.  Data from the LANDSAT Thematic Mapper will be         
              used to identify land-use and land-cover patterns; these data will be          
              entered into a geographic information system (GIS) with data on                
              political boundaries and jurisdictions, river and road networks, and           
              major geologic and soil features.  The GIS will then be used to analyze        
              the dynamics of deforestation and subsequent human settlement, the             
              degree to which pastures and fields are abandoned, and the rates of            
              natural revegetation.  These analyses may well show that large tracts          
              of cleared forest land return to a densely vegetated state at much             
              faster rates than previously understood.  The research will be                 
              conducted collaboratively with scientists from the Brazilian                   
              Organization for Ranching and Agriculture (EMBRAPA).  NSF support has          
              been complemented by funds from the U.S. Agency for International              
              Development, which will be used to purchase computer equipment and             
              supplies for use by EMBRAPA in this project.                                   
                   This research project will provide a highly instructive                   
              examination of procedures that can be used to evaluate relationships           
              between infrastructure and economic development and land-use changes in        
              a heavily forested part of the Amazon basin.  By relating human                
              activities to natural processes in this region, the investigator should        
              establish a framework for more extensive examination of human-                 
              environmental interactions.  Among the interactions that can be more           
              effectively examined are processes by which human-induced land use             
              affects the diversity of biological species.  This line of research            
              should also help establish a firmer basis for evaluating the nature and        
              magnitude of various policies that have been proposed for reducing             
              natural environmental stress while encouraging economic development.           
              The results of this project will be highly generalizable in other              
              nations.
