Title       : Engineering Research Grant: X-ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9009284

Award Number: 9009284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kristen M. Biggar, N-BioS               
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kei M. Lau lau@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal G. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We are requesting funding for the purchase of                                  
              an X-ray diffractometer for our compound                                       
              semiconductor materials and devices research.                                  
              We chose a compact bench top model which is                                    
              specifically designed for the characterization                                 
              of compound semiconductors.  This                                              
              diffractometer will allow us to make precise                                   
              measurements of the lattice constants of grown                                 
              epitaxial layers on binary alloy substrates                                    
              and assess the quality of the epi-layers. Many                                 
              of the on-going research programs will benefit                                 
              from the acquisition of the X-ray                                              
              diffractometer.  Our experimental studies on                                   
              strained-layers and hetero-epitaxy have mainly                                 
              relied on optical and electrical                                               
              characterization techniques.  In order to                                      
              pursue a thorough investigation more attention                                 
              must be paid to the structural properties of                                   
              the materials.  For a number of the device                                     
              research programs, it is necessary to grow                                     
              perfectly lattice-matched hetero-junctions for                                 
              some specific applications.  The X-ray                                         
              diffractometer will provide us with                                            
              information on the exact amount of mismatch so                                 
              that very fine adjustments can be made in the                                  
              growth parameters to obtain lattice matching.                                  
              Accurate measure of the mismatch is also                                       
              required for the study of different strain                                     
              effects in various III-V material systems.                                     
              Furthermore, knowledge of the alloy                                            
              compositions in the heterostructures is                                        
              important in optimization of the devices and                                   
              correlation of the device performance to the                                   
              structural parameters.  X-ray diffraction                                      
              measurement is the most direct means of                                        
              determining the alloy compositions in layered                                  
              structures. We have developed organometallic                                   
              chemical vapor deposition techniques to grown                                  
              high quality III-V structures for our material                                 
              and device research programs.  Addition                                        
              of a double-crystal X-ray diffractometer will                                  
              undoubtedly enhance these programs and provide                                 
              crucial steps for further advancement.
