Title       : A Study of Contracts and Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9009509

Award Number: 9009509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Asher Wolinsky a-wolinsky@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project consists of three independent parts.  The first                   
              investigates in detail a different approach to the analysis of                 
              renegotiation of contracts.  The emphasis of this approach is on               
              taking explicit account of the role of the time dimension in the               
              implementation and the renegotiation of contracts.  The notion of              
              renegotiation proofness employed here recognizes the fact that                 
              renegotiation of contracts normally involves some costs.  The                  
              results so far indicate that this approach yields significantly                
              different predictions than has been common in the related                      
              literature.  The second part investigates the effect of small                  
              deviations from perfect maximizing behavior on the functioning of              
              dynamic and decentralized markets.  The basic intuition is that                
              such models may capture explicitly the idea that the maximizing                
              agents devote special efforts to gain at the expense of the nearly             
              rational ones and in the proces disrupt significantly the operation            
              of such markets.  The third part is concerned with an industrial               
              organization problem.  The purpose is to investigate the nature of             
              inventory accumulation resulting from strategic considerations                 
              faced by a durable goods monopoly.                                             
                                                                                             
              This research is significant because it enriches and changes                   
              important lines of research.  For example, this project develops               
              renegotiation-proofness criteria which take explicit account of the            
              time cost of renegotiating contracts.  There is a large, growing               
              literature on the conditions that must hold for contracts to be                
              renegotiation proof.  This literature is important because the                 
              possibility of contract renegotiation can lead to inefficient                  
              market outcomes.  Preliminary work by the investigator demonstrates            
              that introducing time into contract renegotiation theory                       
              dramatically changes the results and suggests many promising new               
              directions of research.
