Title       : Unemployment and Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1991      
File        : a9009051

Award Number: 9009051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139012             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Akerlof akerlof@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Yellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to develop and to test empirically              
              a model of "wait unemployment" which is designed to explain both               
              the incidence of cyclical unemployment across skill groups and also            
              the extent of cyclical variation in job quality for workers of                 
              given skill.  The theoretical model provides a microeconomic                   
              foundation for the phenomenon of upward and downward mobility of               
              workers over the business cycle first observed by Arthur Okun.  The            
              treatment of unemployment in the model closely parallels the                   
              treatment of unextracted exhaustible resources in Hotelling's model            
              of natural resource extraction.  The model will be tested with                 
              panel data from the National Longitudinal Survey.  The project will            
              provide new estimates of the extent of cyclical variability in                 
              wages and "job quality" for workers either leaving unemployment or             
              else entering the labor force.  The theory predicts that it is                 
              these new job seekers, rather than the entire workforce, which will            
              experience significant cyclical variation in job opportunities.                
                                                                                             
              This project addresses an important critique that has been levelled            
              against models assuming involuntary unemployment.  Even in the                 
              deepest recessions, substantial numbers of new jobs are constantly             
              being created and filled.  Assuming that employers prefer to fill              
              new jobs with the highest quality workers available, highly skilled            
              individuals can easily bump less skilled workers for the job                   
              openings which appear in recessions.  Simple models with                       
              involuntary unemployment imply incorrectly that the incidence of               
              cyclical unemployment will fall entirely on the least skilled                  
              members of the labor force.  The key insight pursued in this line              
              of research is that a high quality worker who takes a "poor                    
              quality" (low paying) job, perhaps in a recession, will suffer long            
              term consequences from this decision.  Preliminary work by the                 
              investigators under their previous NSF grant demonstrates that this            
              assumption is realistic and the theory yields many testable                    
              predictions regarding the behavior of the labor market.  This                  
              project extends the theory and tests it empirically.
