Title       : SGER: Isolation and Characterization of Rapidly-Evolving Human Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9009500

Award Number: 9009500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryellen Ruvolo ruvolo@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   A surprising fact that has emerged in recent years is the                 
              great degree of genetic similarity between humans and                          
              chimpanzees.  Ninety-eight percent of human single-copy DNA  (the              
              inherited genetic material) is so similar to chimpanzee DNA that               
              it forms hybrid human-chimpanzee DNA molecules when mixed                      
              together under appropriate conditions in a test tube.  Dr. Ruvolo              
              will study the 2% of human DNA which does not form hybrid                      
              molecules with chimpanzee DNA.  Because only a fraction of all                 
              DNA consists of genes (protein-coding units), the first question               
              to answer is whether there are any genes in this 2% "human-                    
              specific" DNA fraction.  If there are, they will be characterized              
              by DNA sequencing.  If not, then the genes most different between              
              humans and chimpanzees can still be isolated from the other 98%                
              of human DNA and similarly characterized by DNA sequencing.  In                
              either case, Dr. Ruvolo will isolate those genes maximally                     
              different between humans and chimpanzees.  These DNA sequences                 
              will be compared with all known DNA sequences by computer search               
              techniques to test whether, and in what way, they resemble any                 
              known genes.                                                                   
                   This research is important because it develops a general                  
              method for identifying genes maximally different between closely-              
              related species.  Such genes are useful in population biology and              
              in systematics for determining how groups and species are related              
              to one another.  Extension of this method may allow isolation of               
              genes common to groups of organisms, such as "primate-specific"                
              or "mammal-specific" genes.  Isolation of the most rapidly-                    
              evolving genes in humans can help partition the human genome into              
              ancient and modern segments.
