Title       : Incremental Case-Based Learning Through Introspective Reasoning About Knowledge
               Goals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9009710

Award Number: 9009710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67033              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashwin Ram   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate how a reasoner can improve its                  
              understanding of an incompletely understood domain through the                 
              application of what it already knows to novel problms in that                  
              domain.  Recent work in AI has dealt with the issue of using past              
              experience stored in the reasoner's memory to understand novel                 
              situations, plan for novel goals, or solve novel problems.                     
              However, this process assumes that past experiences are well                   
              understood and provide good "lessons" to be used for future                    
              situations.  This assumption is usually false when one is                      
              learning about a novel domain, since situations encountered                    
              previously in this domain might not have been understood                       
              completely.  The research will develop techniques by which a                   
              reasoner can (a) use domain knowledge that may not be completely               
              understood to solve novel problems, (b) maintain an explicit                   
              model of the "gaps" in its knowledge base, (c) learn by filling                
              in these gaps when the information it needs become available, and              
              hence (d) gradually evolve a better understanding of the domain.               
              This research is important for several reasons.  On the                        
              theoretical side, it will contribute to our understanding of                   
              learning, explanation, and experience-based reasoning.  On the                 
              practical side, it will provide the foundations for technology                 
              that will allow us to design practical resoning systems that can               
              learn and improve their own performance through experience.
