Title       : Individual Participation in Collective Political Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1990      
File        : a9009845

Award Number: 9009845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70553              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward N. Muller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry A. Dietz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerrold Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Finkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this project a model of instrumental and normative incentives for           
              participation in collective political action will be evaluated in              
              dynamic and comparative perspective and tested against alternative             
              explanations.  The data are from national samples and protest-prone            
              community sub-samples in three countries, Peru, Israel, and West               
              Germany, that differ substantially in regard to macro economic, social,        
              and political conditions, as well as in regard to aggregate levels of          
              legal and illegal collective action.  Two-wave panel surveys are used          
              to determine the structure of causality between attitudes and                  
              behaviors.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The researcher's approach to the explanation of collective political           
              action, defined broadly to encompass both legal and illegal behaviors          
              by which groups may exert influence on public policy, is innovative            
              theoretically and methodologically.  The model that is being developed         
              comprises two general motivations for participation in collective              
              political action:  outcome-oriented rational choice and adherence to           
              norms of appropriate behavior; and it distinguishes further between two        
              sources of rational motivation, private outcome incentives and                 
              collective outcome incentives, and between two sources of normative            
              motivation, personal moral norms and social norms.  This `rationality-         
              norms' model is an alternative to grievance and relative deprivation           
              explanations, and it subsumes other more ad hoc social-psychological           
              approaches.  The innovative methodological features of the approach            
              are, first, a `maximum difference' data collection design that affords         
              powerful tests of the cross-national generalizability of results across        
              countries differing substantially in economic, social, and political           
              characteristics and enables the investigators to bridge the micro and          
              macro levels of analysis; second, a multi-sample design within                 
              countries that permits a determination of the extent to which                  
              relationships between attitudes and behaviors are conditioned by               
              facilitative social environments; and, third, a longitudinal data              
              analysis design that takes into account possibilities of reciprocal            
              causation and allows for the estimation of both lagged and simultaneous        
              effects between variables.
