Title       : Script Abstraction and Episodic Memory Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9009694

Award Number: 9009694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Farrar farrar@webb.psych.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will investigate children's memory for their                      
              everyday experiences, such as going to school.  Two types of                   
              memory will be investigated: (1) script memory and (2) episodic                
              memory.  Script memory refers to an abstract general memory for                
              the typical activities that occur during routine events (e.g.,                 
              eating at a restaurant).  Episodic memory refers to memory for a               
              specific event episode.  The research will address three specific              
              interrelated questions.  The first is the role of script memory                
              in facilitating episodic memory.  Of interest are the conditions               
              under which children remember specific episodes of a repeated                  
              event.  For example, it has been argued that episodic memories                 
              are established only when a particular experience deviates                     
              substantially from the typical scripted event.  Whether an                     
              episode is perceived as different depends on several factors,                  
              such as event complexity, similarity to other event experiences,               
              and the frequency of experiences.  To determine how these                      
              conditions function, the research will use novel, artificial                   
              events created for children to experience.  This will provide                  
              systematic control of these factors.   Second, the research will               
              use the same sorts of events to examine how these same elements                
              contribute to script memory development.  Of interest is whether               
              differences in event experience will produce different levels of               
              script abstraction.  Second, the studies will examine whether                  
              there are developmental differences between younger and older                  
              children on how much they depend on scripts to form an episodic                
              memory.  That is, are younger children more likely than older                  
              children to falsely report typical script activities when                      
              recalling an episodic event. even when that activity did not                   
              occur during that particular episode?  These studies will                      
              investigate the conditions (i.e., the complexity, frequency and                
              similarity of events) in which script dependency occurs.  Of                   
              interest is whether the degree of script dependency can be                     
              altered in both older and younger children under these different               
              event conditions.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Results of this research will have implications both for                       
              education and for the judicial system.  First, by examining the                
              conditions under which children form different types of memories,              
              it will be possible to create learning experiences to facilitate               
              the acquisition of different educational concepts that are more                
              appropriate for either script or episodic memory.  Second, this                
              research will provide much needed information on the accuracy of               
              children's memory.  This information is important for questions                
              regarding children's eyewitness testimony in cases of physical                 
              and sexual abuse.  In many of these cases, children are often                  
              called to testify about repeated events that took place over an                
              extended period of time.
