Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Qualitatively Riemannian Foliations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1990 
File        : a9009447

Award Number: 9009447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 30,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore M. Kellum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1265,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Qualitatively Riemannian                          
              Foliations.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or                            
              complimentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions                
              in foreign countries.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This award will support an 18-month visit by Dr. Mark Kellum                   
              to work with Professor Etienne Ghys of L'cole Normale                         
              Suprieure de Lyon in Lyon, France, on "Qualitatively                          
              Riemannian Foliations."  The proposal concerns ongoing                         
              research into the structure of qualitatively Riemannian                        
              foliations on compact manifolds, a continuation of research                    
              the principal investigator began with his thesis, where he                     
              showed that the Molino theory on leaf closures in Riemannian                   
              foliations generalizes to the qualitatively Riemannian                         
              situation.  In his thesis, he employed the theory of locally                   
              compact transformation groups.  This theory, together with                     
              results due to Sacksteder, Furstenberg and Ellis in measure-                   
              theoretic and topological dynamics, suggests studying the                      
              closure of the holonomy pesudogroup, when it consists of                       
              equicontinuous or distal local homeomorphisms.  These                          
              theories also suggest a relaxation of our original                             
              differentiability assumptions on the holonomy pseudogroup of                   
              local metric isometries.  Ghys also points to many of the                      
              same results in his treatment of qualitatively Riemannian                      
              foliations.
