Title       : Ethnicity and Enterprise: Self-Employment Among Hispanic and Asian Immigrants in
               Chicago
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1995 
File        : a9009669

Award Number: 9009669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90771              (Estimated)
Investigator: Silvia Pedraza-Bailey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Waldinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
                   The increased salience of immigrant business has attracted a              
              growing body of research, but two major questions, which this                  
              proposal addresses, remain:  What is distinctively ethnic about                
              the immigrant firm?  Do these distinctive ethnic characteristics               
              contribute to the firm's survival, profitability, and growth?                  
                   This research is a longitudinal comparative study of self-                
              employed persons in retail and service businesses in Chicago.                  
              The researchers will conduct 850 interviews with new small-                    
              business owners in the following groups:  Cubans, Mexicans,                    
              Puerto Ricans, Koreans, Chinese, Philipinos, Blacks and Whites,                
              reinterviewing them two years later.  They are testing a model of              
              ethnic immigrant incorporation into the labor  market.  The                    
              methods include event history analysis over time to analyze                    
              survival or mortality of the businesses over time.                             
                   The study is novel in several ways.  First, the data is                   
              unique, consisting of the comprehensive list of applicants for a               
              General Business License in the city of Chicago.  Second, the                  
              theoretical model of ethnic entrepreneurial development is novel               
              in arguing that the interaction between ethnic group                           
              characteristics and the opportunity structure produces two                     
              distinct patterns of entrepreneurial development that are                      
              associated with the two modes of labor market incorporation of                 
              immigrant groups:  replacement labor and replacement                           
              entrepreneurs.  The two patterns of immigrant incorporation and                
              business development are associated with the type of migration,                
              social background, and organizing capacity of the group,                       
              differences that will affect business survival, profitability,                 
              and success.
