Title       : Research Initiation: Investigation of the Thermomechanical Behavior of
               Compression Molded Fiber Reinforced Composite Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1992     
File        : a9009158

Award Number: 9009158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim A. Osswald tim@neptune.me.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                   The thermomechanical behavior of fiber reinforced composite               
              parts will be investigated.  The objective of the study is to                  
              conduct research in modeling, analysis and process simulation of               
              the thermomechanical behavior of compression molded fiber                      
              reinforced polymer parts.  Such a study will increase our                      
              understanding of the phenomena and the physics behind shrinkage,               
              warpage and surface waviness of reinforced plastic parts.  The                 
              project can be divided into two portions:  an experimental and a               
              computer modeling potion,.  The experimental aspect of the research            
              deals with thermomechanical material properties qualification and              
              characterization.  Here, the effect that different types of                    
              matrices and fillers have on part's properties will be studied.                
              During these studies different degrees of fiber orientation will               
              be considered.  In the second portion of the project a finite                  
              element computer simulation of the thermomechanical processes that             
              take place during molding will be developed.  The simulation will              
              be compared to parts of complex geometry molded under realistic                
              industrial processing conditions.  Understanding the                           
              thermomechanical behavior of plastics and being able to predict                
              filling patterns, fiber orientation, shrinkage, warpage and surface            
              waviness before a part is actually molded leads to higher part                 
              quality and eliminates some of the expensive and time consuming                
              tasks done in the early stages of part and mold design.
