Title       : RIA: Control of Multi-Media Traffic in High Speed Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1990    
File        : a9009926

Award Number: 9009926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69105              (Estimated)
Investigator: San-Qi Li sanqi@globe.ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The research is developing system theories for control of                 
              multi-media traffic in high speed networks.  As compared to                    
              today's networks, a high speed network will be operated in a much              
              more heterogeneous environment.  Many assumptions and constraints              
              used by network system analysts have also changed, largely by                  
              recent rapid advances in lightwave and photonic technologies.                  
              The control of multi-media traffic in high speed networks has                  
              therefore become a most challenging task in the telecommunication              
              network field.                                                                 
                   This research is being conducted at three different levels:               
              ATM link, switching node and network.  The performance                         
              measurement, as well as the control objectives, at each level are              
              substantially different.  The emphasis at the ATM link level is                
              placed on developing effective analytic tools for study of                     
              service scheduling, congestion control and buffer management of                
              multi-media traffic.  The research at the switching node level is              
              focussed on performance analysis and congestion control design of              
              multi-media traffic within a space-division fast packet switching              
              node.  The initial effort at the network level is to develop                   
              simple heuristic routing algorithms appropriate for multi-media                
              traffic, with emphasis on real time and high speed services.                   
              This project is being carried out on the basis of new analytical               
              methods and system concepts the principal investigator has                     
              developed, and is establishing guiding principles for control of               
              multi-media traffic in high speed networks.
