Title       : Cryopreservation of Drosophila melanogaster embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1990     
File        : a9009425

Award Number: 9009425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26841              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Steponkus   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald E. Pitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The ultimate goal of this project is to develop a protocol for the             
              cryopreservation of Drosophila melanogaster embryos.  In our                   
              studies to date, we have taken a mechanistic approach in                       
              investigating three strategies of cryopreservation; supercooling,              
              conventional cryopreservation, and vitrification.  Of the three,               
              only vitrification is appropriate because it allows for ultra-rapid            
              cooling rates to minimize injury associated with the extreme                   
              subzero chilling sensitivity of the embryos.  With this approach,              
              we have attained 20.0  10.3% hatching of eggs following recovery              
              from liquid nitrogen.  More important, in recent studies 3% of the             
              surviving larvae developed into fertile adults.  For this proposal,            
              studies will first focus on modifications of the culture conditions            
              to increase the number of larvae that develop into adults by                   
              minimizing larval desiccation, adding ecdysteroids that control                
              sclerotization and pupariation, varying temperature, and modifying             
              the culture medium.  A systematic analysis will then be conducted              
              on the effects of each step of the vitrification procedure on                  
              larval development, pupariation, and adult eclosion, including                 
              cryoprotectants used for loading, loading time, dehydration time,              
              different vitrification solutions, and cryogenic treatment.  The               
              results of this analysis will be used to optimize the vitrification            
              procedure with respect to larval development, pupariation, and                 
              adult eclosion following recovery from liquid nitrogen.  For this              
              work, a multidisciplinary team of cryobiologists, a biophysicist,              
              an engineer, and a Drosophila geneticist has been assembled.                   
                                                                                             
              A successful increase in the number of fertile adults produced by              
              this cryopreservation technique will significantly reduce the costs            
              of maintaining Drosophila stocks.  Drosophila now have to be                   
              maintained as living cultures in order to keep the myriads of                  
              genetic types available.
