Title       : CEP-An Environment for Conditional Equational Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9009755

Award Number: 9009755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51288              (Estimated)
Investigator: G Sivakumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 2875      SYSTEM SOFTWARE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to build CEP, an environment for              
              Conditional Equational Programming.  This will include a practical,            
              efficient interpreter for the equational language, facilities for              
              proving program correctness, and for doing program transformation and          
              synthesis.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                Equational Programming is gaining wide popularity as the cleanest            
              way to provide in a simple, well-understood, and uniform framework the         
              features of both Lisp-like functional programming and Prolog-like              
              logic programming.  A program is a set of (conditional) equations for          
              example {0 + x = x, s(x) + y = s(x+y)} and a computation consists of           
              solving an equation, for example x + y = s(s(0)) (finding                      
              substitutions that make two terms equal in the theory).                        
                                                                                             
              A new procedure, formulated as a set of inference rules has been               
              developed for equation solving.  This formulation not only improves            
              current methods, but also permits easy incorporation of techniques,            
              that are being developed, for detecting equations that are                     
              unsatisfiable, thus pruning the search space even further. Also,               
              building on previous results in the theory of conditional rewriting,           
              methods will be investigated for proving the correctness of a given            
              equational program.                                                            
                                                                                             
                Building CEP and distributing it to other researchers will have a            
              significant impact in the fields of logic and functional programming.          
              It will spur a lot more development and the use of this paradigm as            
              the cleanest way to combine logic and functional programming.
