Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Kinetics of Diamond Film Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1990       
File        : a9009576

Award Number: 9009576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Taborek ptaborek@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Flame growth of diamond films is controlled by nucleation on                   
              the substrate, and diffusion of the growth species through the                 
              boundary layer formed by the jet of hot gas.  It is proposed                   
              to monitor these effects by in situ long focal distance                        
              microscopy using a Questar microscope.  Edge-on observation of                 
              the impinging gas jet with this microscope, which provides 2                   
              micron resolution at 15 cm, will allow us to map out the                       
              variation in the boundary layer thickness across the                           
              deposition area.  This information will be used to study the                   
              effects of gas flow on the heat and mass transfer to the                       
              growing film.  Direct high resolution observation of the                       
              substrate will allow one to make a real-time video of the                      
              growing film, and will help clarify the steps in the                           
              nucleation process.  Work on electrochemical deposition will                   
              be more qualitative and exploratory, since no electrochemical                  
              diamond deposition process has yet been demonstrated.  The                     
              search for a useful process will attempt to exploit analogies                  
              with electrodeposition of silicon, germanium and other                         
              refractory semiconductors.                                                     
                                                                                             
              There has recently been an intense international research                      
              effort in the field of low pressure, low temperature diamond                   
              film growth.  Because of the superlative properties of                         
              diamond, including hardness, thermal conductivity and chemical                 
              inertness, the potential impact of low cost diamond in many                    
              areas of technology would be very great.  The goal of this                     
              research project is to investigate experimentally the kinetics                 
              of several promising diamond film growth techniques, including                 
              chemical combustion flame growth, plasma flame growth, and                     
              electrochemical deposition.
