Title       : Non-Market Institutions and the Growth of Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9009598

Award Number: 9009598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93554              (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Greif avner@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to analyze the emergence,                      
              operation, and evolution of non-market institutions which arose                
              in Genoa and England during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.              
              Two types of transactions central to trade and trade efficiency                
              will be analyzed.  The first transaction to be examined is the                 
              provision of the services required in handling goods abroad,                   
              while the second transaction is the organization of the                        
              provisions governing exchange of goods abroad (e.g., credit                    
              arrangements).  Neither transaction could be organized through                 
              the anonymous market nor supervised by the legal system in these               
              two historical episodes.  An extensive documentary search will be              
              conducted in order to identify the nature of the institutions                  
              that governed these transactions.  To facilitate the empirical                 
              research, asymmetric information models of the organizational                  
              problems associated with these transactions will be constructed.               
              This research is important because the study departs from a long               
              tradition in economic history that emphasized the contribution of              
              the market mechanism to European growth.  Thus, this research may              
              shed important new light on the European development process                   
              which will enhance our understanding of the transition from less               
              developed to more developed economies in general.
