Title       : Research Initiation Award: Nonlinear Optical Materials Via Sol-Gel Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9009481

Award Number: 9009481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 2,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel L. Plawsky plawsky@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The discovery of optical second harmonic generation in                         
              crystals in 1961 spurred rapid progress in the field of                        
              nonlinear optics.  Nonlinear optical materials are materials                   
              whose optical properties depend upon the intensity of light                    
              incident upon them.  The nonlinearity could be in the form of                  
              an intensity dependent refractive index or a saturable                         
              absorption.  These materials have practical applications in                    
              telecommunications, digital computers, and laser fusion.  They                 
              have the potential to become future optical semiconductors                     
              which can operate at frequencies two to three orders of                        
              magnitude higher than current semiconductor technology.  The                   
              PI plans to explore formation of commercially viable nonlinear                 
              optical materials using the sol-gel technique.  The sol-gel                    
              process is a means for producing inorganic films and                           
              monolithic structures from organo-metallic monomeric                           
              compounds.  The process is analogous to step reaction                          
              polymerizations in organic systems where the monomer is                        
              usually a metal alkoxide such as tetramethoxysilane.  These                    
              reactions are run at room temperature, in a common solvent for                 
              alkoxide and water, and using either an acid or base catalyst.                 
                                                                                             
              The sol-gel process will be used to produce new nonlinear                      
              optical materials by polymerizing modified alkoxide monomers                   
              of the form RSi(OR')3 where R represents an organic                            
              functionality demonstrated to have a high nonlinear                            
              susceptibility.  Work will focus on R-groups which are                         
              primarily substituted benzenes, pyridines and azo dyes.                        
              Commercially available alkoxides and custom alkoxides                          
              synthesized as part of this research will be investigated.                     
              Thin film and monolithic materials will be made.  To                           
              facilitate the observation of second-order nonlinear effects,                  
              the dipoles of the organic functionality will be aligned using                 
              corona poling.  The second-order and third-order                               
              susceptibilities of the starting materials as well as the                      
              polymerized materials will be assessed using second harmonic                   
              generation and four-wave mixing respectively.  The strength,                   
              chemical and environmental resistances, and thermal stability                  
              of the film and bulk materials will also be determined.
