Title       : Biological Controls on Nitrate Retention in Northeastern Forest Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9009190

Award Number: 9009190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Knute J. Nadelhoffer knute@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent reports of large nitrate exports from forests to                   
              surface waters raise concern that losses of nitrate, together                  
              with associated acidity and cations, may result in gradual                     
              decrease in forest soil fertility and impoverishment of aquatic                
              ecosystems downstream of forested catchments through                           
              eutrophication and acidification.  Field experiments will be                   
              conducted to: 1) quantify and compare nitrate retention                        
              capacities of several different forest ecosystems in the                       
              Northeast; 2) compare the importances of nitrate uptake by                     
              growing vegetation vs. nitrate immobilization in decomposing                   
              organic matter as sinks for excess nitrate; and 3) relate tree                 
              species growth rates and N use efficiencies to both nitrate and                
              ammonium availabilities.                                                       
                   The work will take advantage of two on-going research                     
              projects.  One is the EPA's Watershed Manipulation Project (WMP),              
              a large multiple-investigator study of the effects of nitric and               
              sulfuric acid deposition on soil biogeochemical processes and                  
              soil solution chemistry at both plot and catchment levels in a                 
              mixed-species forest in Maine.  The other is a plot-level N                    
              enrichment experiment conducted at the Harvard Forest NSF-LTER                 
              site in Massachusetts where investigators are now studying the                 
              effects of chronic N additions on N cycling rates, primary                     
              productivity, and canopy chemistry.  The in-place, EPA project                 
              provides a unique opportunity to trace the paths and to identify               
              the fate of nitrate additions to forest ecosystems.  This project              
              will support N isotope studies that will allow for this.                       
              Preliminary 15N analysis of soils and tissues from the WMP plots               
              show that the high sensitivity of techniques proposed here will                
              allow for quantifying nitrate retention in important ecosystem                 
              components.                                                                    
                   This research will improve our basic understanding of                     
              forest ecosystem processes that are important in controlling                   
              exports of nitrate and acidity to stream, lake, and estuarine                  
              ecosystems.  It will also improve our ability to predict changes               
              in forest productivity as patterns and rates of N cycling change               
              due to both natural processes and human caused N deposition.
