Title       : Modeling Strategy Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9009320

Award Number: 9009320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Goldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This career advancement award will permit Dr. Susan Goldman to                 
              acquire new methodological skills relevant to understanding how                
              people learn from written material.  In previous work, Goldman                 
              provided evidence that readers exhibit a great deal of                         
              flexibility in the strategies they use to learn from text.                     
              Goldman will study how readers select various strategies by (1)                
              having readers describe and explain their reading behavior, and                
              (2) creating computer models of the reader that vary the                       
              knowledge available to the "reader."  To do the computer modeling              
              work, Goldman will acquire the necessary skills by studying at                 
              two research laboratories where scientists are engaged in this                 
              type of work.  She will pursue skills in two approaches to                     
              modeling, one relying on the assumption that readers have many                 
              rules that govern their behavior and a second that makes the                   
              assumption that readers operate with very few of these rules.                  
              Goldman will spend approximately two months at each research                   
              laboratory, devoting the remainder of her time to implementing                 
              the project at her home institution.  The activities in which                  
              Goldman is engaged will enhance understanding of the knowledge                 
              requirements of different types of reading material, of the types              
              of strategic knowledge for reading that lead to efficient                      
              learning from text, and of how texts can be written to facilitate              
              understanding and learning.  Ultimately, the information and the               
              techniques Goldman is developing can be used to assist in the                  
              diagnosis and remediation of developmental and adult reading                   
              difficulties.   Thus, this career advancement award will                       
              contribute toward improving independent learning skills and                    
              levels of literacy in our society.
