Title       : RIA: High-Breakdown Point Estimation in Electric Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1990       
File        : a9009099

Award Number: 9009099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Vittal                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lamine Mili lmili@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The security and the economic operation of an electric power system            
              can benefit greatly from robust estimation theory.  Its major concern          
              is the design of estimators which are robust against departures from           
              the assumptions, due to bad measurements for instance.  The first              
              objective of the proposed research is to extend this theory to                 
              electric power systems, which are represented by models involving              
              sparse matrices.  In particular, the important concept of breakdown            
              point, which is defined as the maximum fraction of contamination that          
              an estimator can handle, has to be generalized in order to account for         
              the local properties which characterize sparse regression models.              
              Based on this concept, algorithms which apply high-breakdown point             
              estimators to power systems will be developed.  Here, the resampling           
              technique and the simulated annealing method will be considered, the           
              objective being the development of algorithms which can be implemented         
              in a real-time environment of a control center.  The third objective           
              of the proposed research is the investigation of meter placement               
              methodologies which are optimal for bad data identification.  This is          
              indeed an important issue since in power systems the redundancy in the         
              measurements is very low.  Preliminary results showed that a poor              
              measurement configuration for bad data analysis can be dramatically            
              improved through appropriate measurement re-allocation.
