Title       : Shape Recognition and Figure-Ground Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9009100

Award Number: 9009100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Peterson mapeters@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Theoretical attempts to understand visual perception often                     
              partition perceptual processes into those processes that can be                
              performed simultaneously and those that must be performed                      
              successively.  Most theorists have assumed that figure-ground                  
              organization and shape recognition are performed successively.                 
              Figure-ground organization is the determination of which regions               
              in the visual field represent figures and which constitute the                 
              backgrounds against which the figures are viewed.  Figure and                  
              ground regions are separated by a contour; the region to which                 
              the contour is assigned appears to be the recognizable figure,                 
              whereas the other region appears to be an undifferentiated ground              
              which simply appears to continue behind the figure.                            
                                                                                             
              Despite the linkage between shape recognition and figure-ground                
              organization, these theorists have argued that figure-ground                   
              organization must precede shape recognition, appealing either                  
              explicitly or implicitly to the argument that one cannot                       
              recognize a figure until there is a figure to be recognized.                   
              Consequently, figure-ground relationships are generally conceived              
              to be determined by stimulus variables only (i.e., variables such              
              as the relative areas, symmetries, convexities, and enclosure of               
              the two regions on either side of a contour).  Contrary to this                
              argument, however, previous studies in Peterson's laboratory have              
              shown that certain shape recognition analyses are conducted prior              
              to the determination of figure and ground.  These experiments can              
              be readily integrated into current theoretical approaches to                   
              shape recognition, thereby rendering this argument obsolete.                   
                                                                                             
              The planned experiments will examine the conditions under which                
              shape recognition processes can contribute to figure-ground                    
              computations.  One series of experiments will identify which                   
              specific types of contours (e.g., luminance contours, binocular                
              disparity contours, and/or color contours) permit shape                        
              recognition computations to be performed simultaneously with the               
              analysis of the stimulus variables relevant to figure-ground                   
              organization.  Another series of experiments will test whether                 
              the shape representations corresponding to both interpretations                
              of a reversible figure-ground stimulus are activated                           
              simultaneously prior to the assignment of the figure-ground                    
              contour.  A third series of experiments will attempt to explicate              
              the rules governing the interactions between shape recognition                 
              variables and stimulus variables in figure-ground computations.                
                                                                                             
              These experiments will provide information about fundamental                   
              aspects of visual processing, including the manner in which                    
              analyses of physical variables interact with cognitive variables               
              in perceptual organization.  These experiments are certain to be               
              relevant to the design of surrogates for physical scenes.
