Title       : Research Initiation Award: Reaction, Transport, and Geometry in Electrochemical
               Micromachining: A Moving- Boundary Analysis Via the Finite Element Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1990       
File        : a9009924

Award Number: 9009924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Derby derby@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Electrochemical micromachining (EMM) is becoming increasingly                  
                                                                                             
              important in the processing of high-precision metallic parts                   
              and in device fabrication in the microelectronics industry.                    
              However, the complicated interactions of transport phenomena,                  
                                                                                             
              electric current distribution, and tool and work piece                         
              geometry have made engineering advances difficult.  Usually,                   
              the choice of operating parameters is made empirically, based                  
                                                                                             
              primarily on trial and error experimental approaches.                          
                                                                                             
              A fundamental theoretical study of the electrochemical                         
              micomatchining process is proposed.  The analysis will employ                  
                                                                                             
              the finite element method to simultaneously calculate mass                     
              transport, fluid flow, potential, and geometrical changes as a                 
                                                                                             
              self-consistent, mathematical moving boundary problem.  Past                   
              modeling approaches of similar electrochemical systems have                    
              generally considered only those cases where fluid flow is                      
              unimportant or have ignored the interaction of changing                        
              geometry on mass transport in the system.                                      
                                                                                             
              The potential impact of this work is great.  A prior                           
              calculations can be used as a cost-effective test bed to asses                 
                                                                                             
              process changes and to determine optimal process parameters,                   
              such as current density, electrolyte flow rate, and tool                       
              shape.  This work will advance the fundamental understanding                   
              of EMM and will enable rapid advances of micromachining                        
              techniques for many applications.
