Title       : Research Initiation: Adaptive Compensation of In-Process Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1991     
File        : a9009908

Award Number: 9009908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kevin I. Sewell                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Slawomir A. Spiewak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research issue addressed in this research initiation proposal              
              is to develop a design methodology of corrective filters which                 
              would recognize and compensate the impact of the working                       
              environment on the dynamic characteristics of sensors.  Significant            
              improvements in the accuracy and reliability of measurements may               
              be possible with these self-tuning sensors to improve the                      
              performance of existing production systems.  This approach may be              
              able to improve the feasibility of implementing high performance               
              control, monitoring and diagnosis of manufacturing systems needed              
              for the factories of the future.                                               
                                                                                             
              The systematic approach to the design of self-tuning sensors for               
              manufacturing systems will attempt to advance in-process metrology             
              by integrating two important elements of modern engineering.  These            
              elements are:  (1)  The modeling of sensors installed on particular            
              machine tools as components of multi-degree-of-freedom systems.                
              The derived models, based on first principles, will encapsulate the            
              a priori knowledge about the sensors, machines tools and relevant              
              manufacturing processes; and (2)  the time series based, on-line               
              identification of real-time parameters of these models in the                  
              presence of stochastic disturbances.                                           
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to implement a prototype corrective               
              filter capable of tracking and compensating the impact of the                  
              environment on the dynamic performance of typical force and torque             
              sensors.  This filter will be built as a high speed,                           
              multi-processor system.
