Title       : SGER: Monitoring Political Change in the Soviet Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9009698

Award Number: 9009698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1990     
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Miller arthur-miller@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is supported through the Small Grants for Exploratory               
              Research mechanism.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The Soviet Union is experiencing unprecedented political reform.               
              These reforms are producing corresponding changes in the relations             
              between political institutions and the public.  Because the                    
              individual citizen is playing an expanded civic role, survey                   
              research is essential for understanding the new politics emerging in           
              the Soviet Union.  This project entails research on political                  
              attitudes and political participation among the citizens in three              
              Soviet republics:  the Russian Federation, Estonia and the Ukraine.            
              The study involves interviews with 1600 Soviet citizens and is                 
              conducted in cooperation with scholars from the Center for Political           
              and International Studies in Moscow.                                           
                                                                                             
              It is critical that this research be done as soon as possible.                 
              Scholars have never before had an opportunity to study the                     
              democratization of a communist political system.  Researchers must             
              act quickly to establish a baseline measure of public opinion before           
              too much change occurs.  Moreover, if this project is delayed, future          
              events, such as political turmoil, might make it impossible to                 
              conduct systematic rigorous surveys.  All materials will be                    
              catalogued and archived for use by other social scientists interested          
              in studying political change in the Soviet Union.                              
                                                                                             
              The project should add considerably to our understanding of the                
              democratization process in a communist political system.
