Title       : Gender Politics in Social and Legal Constructions of Self- Defense: ROW Planning
               Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9009204

Award Number: 9009204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Dixon dixon@mail.soc.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              During the past two decades, the prevalence of violence against                
              women has been extensively studied.  Citizens generally support                
              the right of individuals to defend themselves against violence,                
              but this support appears to break down for some women victims such             
              as battered women who turn on their batterers.  The majority of the            
              research about rape and battering has not dealt with the issue of              
              female victims fighting back, especially fighting that results in              
              homicide.  Recently, some explorations have been made on the                   
              historical and legal reasons affecting the perception of women                 
              acting in self-defense following physical and/or sexual abuse.                 
              However, the issues are complex and in need of further exploration.            
                                                                                             
              This Research Opportunities for Women Planning Grant will allow                
              this young investigator to undertake preliminary research prior to             
              developing a full scale project on gender politics in self-defense.            
              The project will be the first to examine systematically the social             
              constructions of self-defense in situations where women are                    
              physically and sexually abused.  The pilot project will include                
              open-ended interviews that ask victims, judges, prosecutors, and               
              defense lawyers about their perceptions of self-defense in various             
              situations.  The results of the interviews will be used to                     
              construct a set of vignettes that will be used in a full-scale                 
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research will add valuable insight to our understanding of                
              whether belief in rights to self-defense varies by social                      
              categories.  Questions relating to whether the right to self-                  
              defense is granted differently to men and women and to black and               
              white women have great theoretical significance.  Also, such                   
              research will be of practical significance to those interested in              
              legal reforms related to the self-defense of women against                     
              violence.
