Title       : Chemistry of Life Processes-Coupled Networks: Chemical and Neural
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9009251

Award Number: 9009251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Comer                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve E. Marder  (DATA NOT AVAILABLE current)
              Irving R. Epstein epstein@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9236,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  By studying some relatively complex chemical reactions and a              
              relatively simple neural network, the principal investigators                  
              hope to derive new insights into how the different parts of a                  
              network interact to produce rhythmic behavior.  Ultimately, the                
              principal investigators seek to explain how groups of neurons                  
              work together to generate and modulate simple rhythmic behaviors               
              such as walking, chewing or breathing.                                         
                                                                                             
                   The principal investigators propose to construct and study                
              the properties of networks of coupled components, each of which                
              is independently capable of oscillatory, bistable or other                     
              complex dynamical behavior.  Two classes of systems will be                    
              investigated:  a) inorganic chemical reactions in continuous flow              
              reactors coupled through mass transfer or through computer-                    
              controlled concentration-dependent modulation of input flows; and              
              b) neurons of the crustacean stomatogastric ganglion grown in                  
              tissue culture and coupled through electronically-controlled                   
              artificial synapses and electronic connections.                                
                                                                                             
                   By employing a variety of different components and varying                
              the nature of the connections between them, the principal                      
              investigators shall be able to explore questions that have not                 
              bee answered by studies of neural networks consisting of large                 
              numbers of simple, identical units.  Such issues include a) the                
              relationship between emergent network properties, which depend                 
              primarily on the coupling between units, and network properties                
              that result from the properties of individual units; b) the range              
              of behavior modes that can be displayed by coupled oscillator                  
              networks; c) how the details of the coupling influence the                     
              behavior of the network; and d) the role of delayed coupling in                
              oscillator networks.                                                           
                                                                                             
                   The proposed experimental studies will be supplemented by                 
              ongoing theoretical work on both the chemical and neural systems.              
              While the chemical systems are better understood mechanistically,              
              dynamic similarities already apparent between the two classes of               
              systems should make for a fruitful interplay between the two sets              
              of experiments and ultimately lead to a clearer picture of the                 
              operation of real neural networks such as those found in rhythmic              
              motor systems in general, or the stomatogastric nervous system in              
              particular.
