Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Convection in Mushy Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1990        
File        : a9009177

Award Number: 9009177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M G. Worster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The aim of the proposed research is to understand the nature                   
              of gravitationally-driven convection within mushy regions                      
              during the solidification of binary melts.  Better                             
              understanding of the interactions between convection and                       
              solidification will allow improvements to be made in the                       
              manufacture of many materials.                                                 
              Mushy zones are regions of mixed phase, comprising a rigid                     
              matrix of dendritic crystals with fluid filling the                            
              interstices, that form during the casting of alloys.                           
              Buoyancy-driven convection of the interstitial fluid can occur                 
              due to compositional variations that arise when one component                  
              of the alloy is preferentially incorporated within the solid.                  
              The convection can cause "chimneys" to form in the mushy                       
              region that interrupt the uniformity of the microstructure and                 
              create local regions of high impurity ("freckles").  By                        
              transporting solute, the convection also causes                                
              macrosegregation of the casting; an initially homogeneous melt                 
              can solidify to form an ingot with large-scale variations of                   
              bulk composition.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This project is a combined theoretical and experimental                        
              investigation of the onset of such convection and the                          
              structure of the fully-developed, convective state.  The                       
              convective exchange of solute between a mushy layer and the                    
              liquid melt will be determined, so that calculations of                        
              macrosegregation can be made.  Additionally, the means by                      
              which the number density of chimneys is determined internally                  
              by the system will be studied; this should suggest a means by                  
              which freckle-free ingots can be cast.
