Title       : Deep Arrays for Earthquake Response, San Francisco Bay Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9016470

Award Number: 9016470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255235             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro A. De Alba padealba@hypatia.unh.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Benoit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T.Leslie Youd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1496,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This action is to support the installation, in collaboration                   
              with the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) - and possible                          
              collaboration with the California Division of Mines and                        
              Geology (CDMG) - of two deep arrays in the San Francisco                       
              Bay area, with the objective of measuring ground motions                       
              and the elevation of ground water pressure during the large                    
              earthquake that is expected to occur in the San Francisco                      
              Bay area.  These recordings will provide valuable data for                     
              seismological, earthquake engineering and earthquake hazard                    
              mitigation studies: these data do not exist at present.                        
                                                                                             
              Surface measurements from the October 17, 1989 Loma                            
              Prieta, California earthquake showed that the apparent                         
              amplification of the peak horizontal ground acceleration at                    
              deep clay sites was higher by 100% or more than would                          
              have been anticipated; yet no measurements in the soil                         
              profile showing how amplification progressed between                           
              bedrock and the ground surface are available.  Nor are data                    
              of this type available at other locations for strong-motion                    
              earthquakes.  There is a significant probability (67% in 30                    
              years) that an earthquake producing greater intensity of                       
              motion than the Loma Prieta event will occur in the San                        
              Francisco Bay area; it is thus an excellent location to                        
              establish a deep accelerometer array to improve prediction                     
              capabilities.  Sites are being surveyed in the area, and                       
              several promising locations have been identified.  An                          
              advisory panel consisting of eminent researchers and                           
              administrators in earthquake hazard mitigation, from major                     
              universities in the United States and Canada, and from the                     
              USGS and CDMG, will provide advice on the general                              
              requirements for the sites and their instrumentation, as well                  
              as on the location of instruments to maximize the usefulness                   
              of the data recovered.  The panel members have expertise                       
              in earth science, geotechnical engineering, and field data                     
              measurements.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The damage caused by the Loma Prieta earthquake, as well                       
              as previous major earthquakes worldwide, point to the need                     
              to measure two different types of data so as to improve                        
              earthquake hazard mitigation methods:  The measurement                         
              during strong earthquake-induced ground shaking of the                         
              amplification of ground motions in deep clay deposits; and                     
              the ground motions and the increase in ground water                            
              pressure in saturated sands during strong earthquakes. These                   
              measurements could be obtained through two separate field                      
              arrays, or a combined array at a site which has the                            
              appropriate combination of saturated sands and deep clay                       
              deposits.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The establishment of these arrays follows the                                  
              recommendations of the September 1988 workshop on                              
              "Designated Sites for Geotechnical Experimentation in the                      
              United States", and the November 1990 workshop on                              
              "Dynamic Soil Properties and Site Characterization".  These                    
              sites will become designated geotechnical test sites, open to                  
              all interested researchers.  The sites will be available for                   
              research into geotechnical phenomena not associated with                       
              earthquakes, but it is expected that the sites chosen will, in                 
              general, be more suitable for investigation of the                             
              earthquake-induced phenomena discussed.
