Title       : "U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Structural Change and Vibrational Dynamics
               Studied by Ultrafast Spectroscopies"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1993     
File        : a9016841

Award Number: 9016841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17290              (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham R. Fleming   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Cina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1960,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a two-year cooperative research                        
              project in chemical dynamics between two groups at the                         
              University of Chicago and two groups at the Institute for                      
              Molecular Science, Okazaki.  Professors Graham R. Fleming and                  
              Jeffrey A. Cina will work with Professors Keitaro Yoshihara                    
              and Iwao Ohmine and their associates on studies of chemical                    
              dynamics in solution.  The studies combine ultrafast                           
              spectroscopy with theory and simulation and are aimed at                       
              building up a detailed understanding of how solvents influence                 
              the rate and outcome of chemical reactions.  Such reactions                    
              are often modeled as occuring on simple one- dimensional                       
              potential surfaces.  The other degrees of freedom - in-                        
              tramolecular vibrations are either modeled statistically or                    
              simply ignored.  The roles of the solvent in modifying the                     
              potential surface and in influencing motion along it are                       
              generally regarded as distinct ("static" and "dynamic").  The                  
              development of a more realistic description of simple                          
              chemical processes such as photochemical isomerization is                      
              hampered by ignorance of vibrational dynamics, of the true                     
              potential surface, and of the various time scales of the                       
              solvent response.  The goal of this collaborative project is                   
              to combine the experimental and theoretical strengths of the                   
              groups at the U.S. and Japanese institutions to specifically                   
              address these questions.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The experimental programs at both Chicago and Okazaki represent                
              the state of the art.  They are complementary in several                       
              ways.  The groups at Chicago have developed fluorescence                       
              spectroscopy further than the Okazaki groups, while the                        
              Okazaki groups have developed unique femtosecond studies of                    
              clusters.  The FSCAR and Raman spectroscopies require                          
              different set-ups and will give complementary information.                     
              The use of very large scale computing to combine electronic                    
              structure and dynamical modeling is well developed at Okazaki                  
              and the enormous computing power available there will allow                    
              calculations that could not be contemplated in the United                      
              States.  It will be of great value to see how such calculations                
              influence the thinking of experimentalists.  Both the U.S.                     
              and the Japanese groups possess great strength in analytical                   
              studies of condensed phase dynamics and again, the exposure                    
              to the large computer calculations in Japan will be most                       
              valuable to the American groups.  Finally, as an important part                
              of the project, two U.S. graduate students will participate in                 
              the study, spending time each year in the Japanese laborator-                  
              ies.
