Title       : U.S.-Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Asian Corporatism in Comparative
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1994    
File        : a9016432

Award Number: 9016432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57065              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. McNamara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1331,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will facilitate cooperation between Professor                       
              Dennis L. McNamara in the Sociology Department at Georgetown                   
              University in Washington, D.C., and Professor Keiko Imai in                    
              the Sociology Department at Sophia University, Tokyo.  The                     
              research project will focus on comparative historical methods                  
              of the relationship between governments and the business                       
              class in Japan during the postwar years.  This project is an                   
              effort to specify differences in comparatist styles of ties                    
              between State and Capital in Japan and South Korea (with                       
              other funding), and their effect on business class formation.                  
              Societal corporatism in Japanese cotton manufacture will be                    
              examined.  The Research will include focus on the anti-                        
              recession contacts among the Japan (cotton) Spinners                           
              Association (1965-67 and 1977-78) and the development of                       
              trade controls against cheaper imported textiles in the early                  
              1980's.  This research may lead to a better understanding of                   
              the institutional relationships that promote the competitive                   
              advantage of business in the Pacific Rim countries.                            
                                                                                             
              The project represents an excellent collaboration between the                  
              Japanese and U.S. scientists.  Professor McNamara has had                      
              considerable relevant field experience that has resulted in a                  
              number of publications.  He has a strong foundation in Korean                  
              language and area studies and will be studying intensive                       
              Japanese during his visit.  Professor Imai was previously                      
              with the Institute of Developing Economies in Japan.  She                      
              focuses most of her studies on Latin American development but                  
              also has strong comparative interests and familiarity with                     
              both Japan and South Korea.  Professor Imai and the Institute                  
              of International Relations in Tokyo will participate in                        
              providing the necessary contacts among leaders in academic                     
              business and government in both Tokyo and Osaka.  Professor                    
              McNamara will publish, disseminate and discuss his findings                    
              among scholars in the Economy and Society Research Committee                   
              of the International Sociological Association.  Furthermore,                   
              the study should provide historians, social scientists, and                    
              policy analysts an excellent forum for discussing models of                    
              business/state relations.
