Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Electric Currents in Complex Active Regions
               and Their Relation to Solar Flares and Prominences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9016779

Award Number: 9016779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13250              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Gordon Emslie emslie@ssl.msfc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1523,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Marcos Machado, University of Alabama in Huntsville, and Dr.                   
              Brigitte Schmeider, Observatory of Meudon, Paris, France.                      
              The objective of the project is to investigate electric                        
              currents in complex active regions and their relation to solar                 
              flare and prominences.                                                         
                                                                                             
              It is widely accepted that solar flares are due to the                         
              release of energy stored in stressed, current carrying                         
              magnetic fields.  Over the past few years, it has also become                  
              clear that complex field configuration, indicating the                         
              possible interaction between impacted magnetic bipoles, are                    
              important to the trigger of flares, as well as the formation                   
              of prominences and their eruption.  Field complexity and                       
              particularly energy storage are not yet completely understood                  
              within the context of flare production, but are thought to be                  
              linked to converging and shearing motions observed at                          
              photospheric levels and above.  This project will focus on                     
              the detection of current buildup, using data from the                          
              Marshall Space Flight Center and Meudon Observatory, as well                   
              as proxy indicators of field line connection in the chromo-                    
              sphere and coronal levels.  The investigators will emphasize                   
              the link between current buildup and the velocity field,                       
              exploiting the combined capabilities of US and French                          
              instruments.  In order to obtain this goal, the observational                  
              studies will be linked with theoretical field calculations                     
              under various field conditions to infer the topology of the                    
              coronal field and its response to the current buildup.
