Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Field Tests of Interspecific Competition in
               Stream Salmonid Guilds in Japanand the U.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1993      
File        : a9016512

Award Number: 9016512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35620              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt D. Fausch kurtf@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,5921,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a two year cooperative                         
              research project between Professor Kurt Fausch, Department of                  
              Fishery and Wildlife Biology, Colorado State University, and                   
              Dr Hiroya Kawanabe, Department of Zoology, Kyoto University,                   
              Japan.  This project is aimed at increasing our understanding                  
              of the roles of biotic interactions and environmental                          
              factors in shaping longitudinal distributions of salmonid                      
              guilds in mountain streams.  Ecologists have long sought to                    
              understand the relative roles of biotic and abiotic factors                    
              in shaping animal communities by investigating distributions                   
              of species along altitudinal gradients where environmental                     
              features and species composition change over short distances.                  
              A frequent finding is that congeneric species, which are                       
              assumed to compete strongly, occupy different positions along                  
              the gradient and overlap little.  Furthermore , the distribu-                  
              tion of one or both species is usually expanded in locations                   
              where its congener is absent versus those where it is                          
              present.  The objective of this research is to experimentally                  
              test whether interspecific interference competition is an                      
              important mechanism in determining the relative success of                     
              two congeners, the Japanese charr and the Dolly Varden charr,                  
              in the altitudinal zone where they are sympatric, in the                       
              Hidaka Mountains of Hokkaido, Japan.                                           
                                                                                             
              Both Professor Fausch and Dr Kawanabe are leading experts in                   
              their fields and their strengths are complementary.  The                       
              project will give Professor Fausch the opportunity to                          
              undertake research in a relatively undisturbed community, and                  
              the Japanese methods of 3-dimensional mapping of positions                     
              should yield a more precise examination of interactions and                    
              displacements than generally encountered.  The results of                      
              this research should provide a better understanding of the                     
              ecology of stream salmonids and animal communities in                          
              general.  Stream salmonids are an economically important                       
              species and any increase in knowledge of their ecology should                  
              permit better management of streams that support them.
