Title       : Physical Forcing of Spatially Distributed, Meroplanktonic Populations/GLOBEC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1992   
File        : a9016721

Award Number: 9016721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis W. Botsford lwbotsford@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Hastings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Botsford and collaborators will model and analyze the                 
              dynamic effects of spatially and temporally varying physical                   
              oceanographic conditions on spatially distributed, meroplanktonic              
              marine populations with age or size structure and density-                     
              dependent recruitment.  They will examine the effects of both:                 
              (1) large scale physical forcing on transport and survival                     
              between sub-populations during the planktonic larval stage, and                
              (2) small scale physical forcing on life history rates in local                
              sub-populations.  Population behavior will be characterized in                 
              terms of persistence, stability, sensitivity to environmental                  
              variability, and spatial synchrony.  These investigators will use              
              their models and the results of their analyses to project changes              
              in these populations due to projected changes in global climate.               
              As specific examples for which to make these projections, they                 
              will focus on the Dungeness crab (Cancer magister) and the                     
              feeding interaction between sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp.)              
              and macroalgae (Nereocystis leutkeana, Macrocystis pyrifera) in                
              the California Current System.  For these systems they will model              
              larval transport based on idealized flows and small scale benthic              
              flows computed from wave energy.  Potential future changes in the              
              physical environment will include changes in the level of                      
              upwelling and the frequency and magnitude of ENSO events.
