Title       : Collection Support for Invertebrate Paleontology at the Academy of Natural
               Sciences of Philadelphia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1995     
File        : a9016724

Award Number: 9016724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Rosenberg rosenberg@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1129      LONG-TERM PROJCTS IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The collection of invertebrate fossils in the Academy of                  
              Natural Sciences, Philadelphia includes 4,000 type specimens and               
              one million specimens in 104,000 lots, half of which are                       
              currently cataloged.  The collection is composed predominantly of              
              Tertiary molluscs from eastern North America, and includes                     
              historically important collections.  Prior NSF support has                     
              initiated the process of rearranging the collection from                       
              stratigraphic to systematic order, sequestration of types, and                 
              computerization of all lots.  Dr. Gary Rosenberg, Curator of the               
              collection, is now embarking on the first phase of a ten-year                  
              plan to computerize the type specimens as well as the systematic               
              collections.  Type specimens will be photographed and analyzed                 
              from a conservation perspective and remedial actions taken to                  
              halt deterioration.  A type catalog will be published in the                   
              Academy's malacological journal Tyronia.                                       
                   The proposed curatorial improvements will benefit a wide                  
              audience of paleontologists, malacologists, ecologists, and                    
              biogeographers.  The proposed improvements will reverse the                    
              effects of prior neglect, and will make this valuable research                 
              resource easily accessible to investigators.  Systematic                       
              collections of fossils may prove to be the most valuable tool for              
              gauging the rate of extinction and environmental change on Earth,              
              and the proper care of these collections is critical to future                 
              generations of researchers.
