Title       : Dynamics of Plasma-Dust Interactions in the F-Corona and Interplanetary Shock
               Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9016439

Award Number: 9016439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nebil Y. Misconi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    305/768-8000

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study will attempt to determine the essential                        
              properties of the coronal force field and its interaction with                 
              circumsolar dust, including ion drag and Coulomb drag from the                 
              solar wind plasma, sudden orbital changes during coronal mass                  
              ejections, interaction of the local magnetic field with the                    
              electric charge on the dust particles, and orbital changes due to              
              evaporation and sputtering.  These studies will attempt to                     
              determine whether these orbital changes give rise to the observed              
              dust "rings" around the sun, and how the distribution of dust                  
              relates to solar activity.  These relationships will allow                     
              observations of F-coronal dust, such as those to be carried                    
              aboard the Solar Heliospheric Observatory spacecraft, to be used               
              as an indicator of the coronal plasma environment.  Numerical                  
              simulations of the dynamical evolution of dust particles released              
              from comets and asteroids will be carried out.  These                          
              computations will form the basis for identifying the source                    
              distribution of coronal dust.  Calculations of the force field in              
              the F-corona, and the numerical techniques and analytical                      
              solutions developed and refined here, will provide powerful tools              
              in a wide range of non-Keplerian dynamical problems, such as                   
              cometary dynamics and disintegration, planetary accretion,                     
              stability of asteroidal satellite  orbits, and interrelations                  
              between the distribution of dust and solar activity.  This work                
              also relates to studies outside the solar system, including stars              
              with dust envelopes, plasma-dust interactions in flare stars, and              
              dust escaping stellar systems into the interstellar medium.
