Title       : Performance Evaluation of Fast Packet Switches Supporting Integrated Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9016032

Award Number: 9016032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fouad A. Tobagi tobagi@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
                   Two objectives characterize the design of new                             
              telecommunications networks.  One is to support high bandwidth                 
              applications (such as digitized video and image communication) made            
              possible by the high capacity of fiber optics transmission systems;            
              the second is to provide a single communications system which                  
              supports all services in an integrated and unified fashion.  In                
              response to these objectives, packet switching is emerging as the              
              appropriate switching technique.                                               
                   Several proposed architectural designs for fast packet                    
              switches have emerged in recent years.  There is a need to evaluate            
              and compare these proposals under various traffic scenarios with               
              respect to the performance of the switch as seen by network users.             
              The performance measures, which are typically expressed in terms of            
              packet loss and packet delay, must be tailored to be consistent                
              with the specific requirement of the applications supported.  This             
              research will create a unified framework consisting of a precise               
              definition of the performance measures of interest and a                       
              characterization of the basic traffic patterns corresponding to the            
              various applications and their mixes to be supported by a fast                 
              packet switch.  Using this framework the research will examine the             
              performance of switches in two steps by 1) focusing on single                  
              module switches of the above mentioned types and 2) addressing the             
              case of large switches composed of several switching modules                   
              organized in multistage configurations.  Both mathematical analysis            
              and computer simulation will be used in this study.
