Title       : Acquisition of a Freeze Fracture Instrument and a High Pressure Freezer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1991   
File        : a9016892

Award Number: 9016892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Candace H. Haigler candace.haigler@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal for funds to purchase a freeze fracture                     
              instrument and a high pressure freezer.  The freeze fracture                   
              machine is required for determination of: (1) typed and                        
              distribution of proteins in membranes; (2) patterns of vesicle                 
              fusion; (3) relationships between extracellular matrix                         
              components; and (4) the role of non-bilayer lipids in membrane                 
              function.  The research proposed includes analysis of natural and              
              artificial membranes, comparison of control and experimental                   
              samples, and investigation of plants and protists.  (Minor users               
              will also examine fungi, animals, and DNA molecules.)  Freeze                  
              fracture, which involves cleaving and replicating cells and                    
              membranes, is the only technique that allows structural                        
              observation of intramembrane proteins and lipid phases.                        
              Therefore, it is absolutely required for this research.                        
                                                                                             
              If freeze fracture micrographs are to be meaningfully                          
              interpreted, it is best for the sample to be uncryoprotected, but              
              frozen so fast that vitrification occurs before the formation of               
              large ice crystals that destroy ultrastructure.  The high                      
              pressure freezer, which briefly applies pressure and cryogen                   
              together to lower the rate of freezing required to avoid ice                   
              crystal formation, is the only instrument that will allow good                 
              freezing to occur below the surface layer of an uncryoprotected                
              sample.  Therefore, it greatly reduces artifacts, enhances                     
              meaningful interpretation of replicas, and increases the                       
              efficiency of freeze fracture experimentation.
