Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Light Reflection from a Chiral Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1991     
File        : a9016008

Award Number: 9016008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Silverman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    203/527-3151

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1462,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Mark Silverman, Department of Physics, Trinity College, and                    
              Dr. Jacques Badoz, Optics Laboratory, Ecole Superieure de                      
              Physique et Chimie, Paris, France.  The objective of the                       
              project is to investigate the interaction of light with                        
              chiral media.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Molecules and molecular arrangements characterized by a left-                  
              or-right-handedness (chirality) interact with polarized light                  
              to produce diverse phenomena collectively referred to as                       
              optical activity. In this project, experiments to measure the                  
              difference in specular reflection of right and left circularly                 
              polarized light from selected optically active fluids and                      
              crystals will be undertaken for the purpose of 1) resolving a                  
              fundamental controversial issue in the electrodynamics of                      
              chiral media, and 2) determining the feasibility of a new                      
              approach to the spectroscopy of chiral materials.  The                         
              experimental method will employ photoelastic modulation of                     
              the polarization of the reflecting probe beam and subsequent                   
              phase-sensitive detection.  From the resulting signal, the                     
              generalized Fresnal coefficients for an isotrophic naturally                   
              chiral medium will be measured for the first time as a                         
              function of angle of incidence and wavelength, and compared                    
              with recent theoretical predictions.  The interaction of                       
              light with chiral media is of major interest in physics,                       
              chemistry, engineering and the biosciences for both conceptual                 
              and practical reasons.  The scientific and educational                         
              significance of the proposed project is that it provides a                     
              stringent test of inequivalent electrodynamic descriptions of                  
              chiral media. The project will benefit from the complementary                  
              expertise and previous successful joint work of the two                        
              investigators, as well as from the availability of special                     
              instrumentation in the French laboratory.
