Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Chemical Reactions of Microclusters in Gas
               Phase and Interaction with Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9016913

Award Number: 9016913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20506              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Johnson mark.johnson@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1962,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a two-year cooperative research                        
              project in physical chemistry between Professor Mark A.                        
              Johnson of Yale University and Professor Tamotsu Kondow of                     
              the University of Tokyo.  They will collaborate on research                    
              into "Chemical Reactions of Microclusters in Gas Phase and                     
              Interaction with Surfaces."  Over the past five years,                         
              physical chemists have become increasingly interested in                       
              molecular clusters as a tool to learn about the molecular                      
              aspects of condensed phase behavior.  Professor Johnson's                      
              group at Yale has developed methods based on mass spectrometry                 
              to isolate a specific number of solvent molecules around a                     
              solute molecule or reaction complex in order to study the                      
              size dependence of bimolecular and photo-initiated chemical                    
              processes.  A particularly interesting solute "anion" is the                   
              free electron itself, which has been studied through the                       
              accommodation of an excess charge by a collection of closed                    
              shell species.  The behavior of excess charges in polar media                  
              is of primary interest in radiation chemistry and is presently                 
              a focal point for experimental tests of current theories.                      
                                                                                             
              In previous work, the Yale group has discovered that several                   
              homogeneous systems possess strong absorptions near the                        
              binding energy of the excess electron, and that the excitation                 
              of these absorptions leads to fragmentation of the cluster                     
              rather than ejection of the electron.  Excitation near the                     
              binding energy means that the ejected electron would have                      
              very low kinetic energy and apparently cannot escape.  In                      
              Japan, meanwhile, Professor Kondow has been looking at the                     
              microscopic reverse process, the propensity of slow electrons                  
              to stick onto closed shell neutral clusters.  He has found                     
              that the slow electrons are efficiently attached to create a                   
              negatively charged clusterion.  It is likely that the two                      
              groups are carrying out complementary probes of the same                       
              essential physics and the goal of the cooperative project is                   
              to bring their efforts together to find a unified description                  
              of these phenomena.
