Title       : Optical Emissions from Photoexcitation of Atmospheric Radicals and Molecules in
               the Gas Phase and on Aerosol Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9016731

Award Number: 9016731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Long C. Lee llee@mail.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Masako Suto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project is devoted primarily to atmospheric aerosols.                 
              Laboratory experiments will probe the conditions under which                   
              aerosols of ammonium sulfate and ammonium bisulfate can be formed              
              in the gas phase from ammonia, sulfur trioxide and water vapor.                
              The aerosols will be produced by mixing the reacting gases in a                
              flow tube.  Particle-size distributions of the resulting aerosols              
              will be deduced from measurements of ultraviolet light                         
              scattering.                                                                    
                   Experiments will assess the possibility of chemically                     
              identifying such aerosols by observing light emitted by them when              
              they are exposed to laser beams of variable wavelength and                     
              intensity.  Variations of these experiments will test                          
              possibilities of separately detecting chemical species adhering                
              to the surfaces of the aerosol particles.                                      
                   Similar experiments will be conducted on the formation of                 
              ammonium nitrate aerosols from ammonia, water vapor, nitric acid               
              and/or nitrogen dioxide.                                                       
                   The experiments will be useful for better understanding of                
              conditions under which these aerosols are formed in both the                   
              natural and the perturbed atmosphere.  The feasibility of                      
              measuring the aerosols under field conditions will be explored.                
              Experiments aimed at detecting chemical species adhering to the                
              aerosol surfaces are designed to reveal any unsuspected surface-               
              chemical properties of the aerosols, by virtue of which they                   
              might influence the chemistry of the gas phase.
