Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Toward a Microscopic Description of Friction
               in Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9016353

Award Number: 9016353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Kivelson kivelson@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1913,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in physical                     
              chemistry between Dr. Daniel Kivelson, University of California                
              at Los Angeles and Dr. Gilles Tarjus, University of Pierre                     
              and Marie Curie, Paris, France.  The objective of the project                  
              is to develop a microscopic description of friction in                         
              liquids.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The investigators are studying the motions of molecules in                     
              liquids, with particular emphasis on the motion of a reacting                  
              group traversing an activation barrier during a chemical                       
              reaction.  In liquids the surrounding fluid plays an important                 
              role, not only in altering the activation energy, but also as                  
              a source of friction in determining all molecular motions.                     
              The project will focus on this frictional effect.  Since                       
              friction is a macroscopic concept, they will seek to understand                
              under what conditions it can validly and usefully be applied                   
              in describing dynamics at the molecular level.  They will                      
              also explore how the frictional concept, extended if needed,                   
              to give a better microscopic description, can yield insights                   
              into chemical kinetics in liquid solution.  Their approach                     
              will be both theoretical and computational.  The results of                    
              this research should contribute to the understanding of                        
              frictional effects in liquids, particularly those connected                    
              with chemical reactions.  Understanding chemical kinetics on                   
              a molecular level is one of the most fundamental problems in                   
              chemistry.  Dr. Kivelson has been a leader in the area of                      
              studying molecular motions in liquids, particularly rotational                 
              motions, for many years, and he will benefit from the                          
              complementary expertise of Dr. Tarjus in the proposed research.
