Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Variational Data Assimi- lation Using Optimal
               Control Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9016234

Award Number: 9016234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: IONEL M. Navon NAVON@csit.FSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0318000   Weather Modifications                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1527,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Drs.                    
              I.M. Navon and James O'Brien, Florida State University, and                    
              two French researchers: Professor F.X. LeDimet, Department of                  
              Mathematics, Blaise-Pascal University, Clermont-Ferrand, and                   
              Professor Olivier Talagrand, Laboratory for Dynamic Meteoro-                   
              logy, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris.  The objective of the                   
              project is to investigate optimal control variational methods                  
              for data assimilation in meteorology and oceanography with                     
              the aim of improving accuracy and predictability of atmospheric                
              and oceanic models.                                                            
                                                                                             
              In global forecasting models, errors arise in the numerical                    
              forecast mainly due to errors in the initial conditions and                    
              deficiencies in the dynamics and physics of the models.                        
              Potential improvements in numerical weather prediction (NWP)                   
              in the near future are expected to occur as a result of                        
              either better physical parameterizations or from data                          
              improvement in the accuracy of global observing systems. The                   
              use of adjoint models as an application of the theory of                       
              optimal control for data assimilation has seen a vigorous                      
              development in the last few years.  The US and French                          
              investigators in past collaboration have developed the                         
              adjoint of the NMC spectral model. In this project, they will                  
              focus on related theoretical questions in the area of                          
              optimization of algorithms, efficiency and scaling of complex                  
              problems. In addition, they will study the inclusion in the                    
              adjoint NWP of variational data assimilation of physical                       
              atmospheric processors, such as radiation and moisture ther-                   
              modynamics. This project will benefit from the complementary                   
              expertise of the investigators in optimal control theory and                   
              meteorology.  The results of this research will be important                   
              for enhancing the medium-range numerical weather forecasting                   
              model's predictability and for taking advantage of various                     
              satellite data which will shortly become available.
