Title       : Development of Quantitative, Hydrodynamic and Biological Models of Settlement of
               Planktonic Larvae of Benthic Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1992  
File        : a9016825

Award Number: 9016825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324993             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Eckman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francisco E. Werner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Dr Eckman and collaborators will develop some general,                    
              quantitative models designed to assess the relative roles of                   
              transport, turbulent mixing and shear, larval development and                  
              larval behavior in producing spatial and temporal variability in               
              rates of settlement of planktonic larvae of benthic                            
              invertebrates.  The focus will be largely, but not exclusively,                
              on unique problems faced by planktonic larvae of benthic                       
              existence.  These investigators will begin by creating simple,                 
              steady, 1-dimensional models that should enable us to evaluate                 
              selected larval flux conditions at the boundary, and to assess                 
              the relative influence of many important scaling variables on                  
              settlement rate.  Variables studied in 1-D models will include                 
              the scale and density of bottom roughness features, boundary                   
              shear velocity (including lift and drag forces exerted on                      
              larvae), turbulent mixing, larval swimming, substrate                          
              selectivity by larvae, and the degree of larval competence to                  
              settle.  The development and evaluation of these models will                   
              include laboratory studies of larval behavior and settlement to                
              ensure accuracy.  The models will indicate which scaling                       
              variables must be incorporated, and which can reasonably be                    
              deleted, from more complex models that more closely mimic field                
              situations.  Dr. Eckman et al. will build and evaluate a series                
              of more complex, ideal models, which have broader ecological                   
              relevance.  These models will include time-dependent flows that                
              account for wind-wave or tidal forcing, and 2-dimensional, steady              
              flows that incorporate horizontal gradients in bottom roughness                
              or depth.  Thus, the research will incorporate physical dynamics,              
              biological development and behavior into quantitative formulae.                
              This work will generate predictions of variability in rates of                 
              larval settlement in space and time for several ecologically                   
              relevant situations.  For each case, the models will indicate the              
              relative sensitivity of larval settlement rates to a suite of                  
              potentially important hydrodynamic and biological process.  The                
              research proposed includes conceptual studies of simplification                
              and predictability, and prototype investigations of biological                 
              processes in idealized flow fields - two categories of research                
              targeted for support under GLOBEC's modelling program.
