Title       : Acquisition of a Photomicroscope & Image Analysis System for Plant Biology
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1991   
File        : a9016138

Award Number: 9016138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard D. Grimes grimes@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for the purchase of a photomicroscope equipped             
              with a video camera capable of detecting low light emissions, an               
              image processing and analysis system (for enhancement of image                 
              quality, quantification of data, and 3-dimensional reconstruction              
              of plant tissues), and a video recorder.  One of the primary uses              
              of this instrumentation will be in the analysis of gene expression             
              and protein localization during plant development.  In particular,             
              we will pursue investigations into the regulation of cell surface              
              proteins during embryogenesis (Dr. Grimes), the cellular basis of              
              calcium oxalate deposition in plants (Dr. Franceschi), and the                 
              temporal and spatial distribution of key enzymes involved in the               
              evolution of the C4 photosysthesis mechanism (Dr. Ku).  In these               
              studies, we will need to analyze low-level cell immunofluorescence             
              data, quantitate gene expression in specific cell and tissue types,            
              and perform image analysis and 3-dimensional reconstruction in                 
              order to develop a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms               
              involved in these processes.  This instrument will also be used to             
              probe the mechanisms of phloem unloading by in vivo monitoring of              
              fluorescent dye movement in sink tissues.  (Dr. Fisher).  To fully             
              understand phloem function, it is necessary to evaluate the data               
              in a structural context.  The use of 3-dimensional reconstruction              
              from sections of the tissues involved will be of central importance            
              for progress in this area.  The mechanism of malic acid                        
              accumulation into the vacuole of CAM plants is also being explored             
              (Dr. Uribe).  The use of fluorescent probes to monitor the                     
              energetics of the the vacuolar membrane in vivo will allow events              
              inside of a living plant cell to be visualized, as opposed to                  
              studies on isolated membrane fractions.  The requested                         
              instrumentation is critical to many aspects of the proposed                    
              research and will greatly enhance our capabilities for research in             
              plant cell biology.
