Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Dynamics of Highly Excited Molecular
               Electronic States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1991     
File        : a9016221

Award Number: 9016221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 1,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4241               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Stephens   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent McKoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1241,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Drs.                    
              Jeffrey Stephens and Vincent McCoy, California Institute of                    
              Technology and Dr. Christian Jungen, Laboratoire de Photophy-                  
              sique Moleculaire, University of Paris, Orsay, France. The                     
              objective of the research is to study the dynamics of highly                   
              excited molecular electronic states.                                           
                                                                                             
              The investigators propose to develop methods of electronic                     
              structure calculation, which are particularly appropriate for                  
              the study of dynamics of highly excited bound states molecules,                
              including their photoelectron spectroscopy.  The proposed                      
              research is relevant to recently developed and future                          
              experimental techniques, which probe highly excited molecular                  
              states via selective laser excitation.  The physical basis of                  
              the method singles out the description of short-range                          
              particle (nuclei and electrons) correlations, which are                        
              ultimately responsible for the evolution and decay of a                        
              highly excited molecular complex.  The proposed research                       
              connects in a unified manner with multichannel quantum defect                  
              theory (MQDT), which has been largely developed over a period                  
              of years for the purpose of describing and predicting the                      
              evolution and decay of highly excited molecular complexes.                     
              The suggested approach provides for initial development of the                 
              technique and ab initio calculation of fundamental interaction                 
              parameters needed to exploit the power of MQDT.  The results                   
              of this project will be of fundamental interest and direct                     
              relevance to researchers currently developing modern                           
              experimental spectroscopies in the US and Europe. The                          
              project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the                   
              two research groups. The French collaborator Dr. Jungen is an                  
              internationally recognized expert in the area of MQDT and                      
              molecular structure theory.  The US research team has a                        
              strong background in the area of ab initio computation of                      
              molecular Rydberg and continuum states.
