Title       : Astrometric and Radiometric Studies of the Galactic Radio Source Sco X-1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1991     
File        : a9016671

Award Number: 9016671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard J. Geldzahler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Geldzahler at Applied Research Corporation and his collaborator            
              Dr. Fomalont at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory will carry            
              out a concentrated study of the enigmatic galactic source Sco X-1.             
              They will use radio telescopes in the U.S. and Europe to address               
              questions of the relative motions of components of the source, the             
              distance of the source, the implications for a dual-beam model of              
              energy transport, flux density variations of the extended                      
              components, the emission mechanism of the source, and confinement              
              of the lobes.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The X-ray binary star system Sco X-1 is the only known Galactic                
              object to exhibit a radio morphology similar to the classical                  
              extragalactic double radio sources.  It is also the only known                 
              double-lobed radio source with a neutron star as its energy source.            
              It has been suggested that the process of forming the lobes in Sco             
              X-1 is similar to that in the luminous extragalactic objects.                  
              Investigation of Sco X-1 can impact a number of fields of                      
              astrophysics and plasma physics.  Understanding dual-beam                      
              extragalactic sources is important to cosmology, to active galactic            
              nuclei, and to jets.  Space and laboratory plasma physicists are               
              interested in the mechanics of jet acceleration, stability of the              
              beams during energy and momentum transport, and the interaction of             
              the beams with targets.  Dr. Geldzahler and his collaborators have             
              designed observations to more clearly reveal the character of Sco              
              X-1 and thus better understand the linkage between this source and             
              extragalactic core-jet-lobe sources and to better understand the               
              plasma physics of this phenomenon.
