Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Construction of Large- Scale Lexical and
               Textual Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1991  
File        : a9016554

Award Number: 9016554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11845              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Ide ide@cs.vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6855,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Nancy Ide, Vassar College, and Dr. Jean Veronis, Groupe                        
              Representation et Traitement des Connaissances, French                         
              National Center for Scientific Research, Marseille, France.                    
              The objective of the project is the construction of a large-                   
              scale lexical and textual database from machine-readable                       
              materials in French and English, with the goal of extracting                   
              information that can be used for automatic language processing                 
              tasks.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              A number of machine-readable materials in French and English,                  
              including dictionaries in typesetter's format, but also                        
              corpora and other linguistic data, have been acquired by the                   
              project and installed at each site. Software tools have been                   
              developed to structure, access and analyze these data,                         
              utilizing compatible hardware and software systems in order to                 
              enable their use in both locations.  The project involves                      
              three avenues of research:  1) the structuring of machine                      
              readable dictionaries and other linguistics data into a                        
              consistent lexical database, 2) the extraction of machine-                     
              usable knowledge from dictionary definition texts for use in                   
              natural language understanding and generation and 3) the                       
              construction of large neural networks from dictionary texts                    
              and experimentation with these networks for language analytic                  
              tasks, such as word sense disambiguation.  The project will                    
              benefit from the complementary expertise of the two investi-                   
              gators in lexical database and the results of this research                    
              may make a significant contribution to the fields of                           
              lexicography and machine translation.
