Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Multinational EconometricPolicy Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9016998

Award Number: 9016998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Engle rengle@ucfd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clive W. Granger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Halbert L. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0510202   International Economic Modeling         
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1320,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support joint research between US and                          
              French researchers on the topic of multinational econometric                   
              policy analysis.  The US investigators are:  Dr. Robert F.                     
              Engle, Dr. Clive W. Granger, and Dr. Halbert L. White,                         
              University of California at San Diego. The collaborators                       
              in France are:  Dr. Michel Lubrano, Dr. Luc Bauwens and Dr.                    
              Russell Davidson, University of Aix-Marseille II and III.                      
              The objective of the project is to develop and apply                           
              statistical techniques to evaluate policy models.                              
                                                                                             
              Potentially one of the most important activities by                            
              econometricians and applied economists is the production of                    
              models to be used by policy makers to help them determine                      
              an appropriate policy.  However, these models have to pass                     
              not only standard specification tests and evaluation                           
              procedures, but they also have to show that they are                           
              relevant for policy purposes.  Testing procedures for these                    
              models are very preliminary and are in need of both further                    
              theoretical and empirical development.  In this project,                       
              the investigators will examine and apply econometric                           
              methods to study existing models.  Theoretical developments                    
              will be coupled with empirical studies, which examine the                      
              co-movements of output and asset prices across countries.                      
              Both the US and French groups have extensive experience in                     
              both the theory and practice of econometrics, as well as in                    
              the development and application of tests and testing                           
              procedures.  In particular, the French investigators bring                     
              to the project experience of testing procedures based on                       
              methods associated with the use of artificial regressions,                     
              as well as Bayesian specification testing.
