Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Biophysical Chemistry of Retinal Proteins/January
               1992/Honolulu HI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1991  
File        : a9016622

Award Number: 9016622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15568              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Mathies rich@zinc.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1952,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for the participation of eight US                  
              scientists in a joint US-Japan seminar on "the Biophysical                     
              Chemistry of Retinal Proteins".  The chemistry of retinal                      
              proteins is a rapidly emerging area of biophysics.  Retinal-                   
              containing pigments are a class of intrinsic membrane                          
              proteins the mediate energy and information transduction.                      
              Much research in this area concentrates upon the molecular                     
              mechanisms of the transduction processes and recent progress                   
              on site-specific mutagenesis, sequence and structure                           
              determination and spectroscopic studies of intermediate                        
              structure and dynamics now present the real possibility of                     
              determining the molecular mechanism of these processes.  Most                  
              of the main contributions to this area have been made by                       
              American and Japanese scientists, many of whom it is intended                  
              should participate in this seminar.  For this reason the                       
              seminar should provide an excellent forum for formulating a                    
              more complete picture or retinal transduction.                                 
                                                                                             
              The seminar is to be held on January 12-18, 1992 at the                        
              University of Hawaii, Honolulu.  The co-organizers are                         
              Professor Richard Mathies, Department of Chemistry, University                 
              of California, Berkeley and Associate Professor Toshiaki                       
              Kakitani, Department of Physics, Nagoya University, Japan.                     
              Specific topics to be discussed at the seminar include (1)                     
              retinal protein structure and genetics; (2) chromophore                        
              structure and the environment; (3) photoactivation of                          
              retinal-proteins; (4) analysis of structure and transduction                   
              mechanisms; and (5) pigment regeneration and signal transduc-                  
              tion.  These topics represent the right combination of                         
              biochemistry, spectrochemistry and genetic engineering to                      
              make a real contribution to this subject area.  The seminar                    
              will permit representatives from several research groups in                    
              the two countries to meet and exchange information which                       
              could lead to more extensive research collaboration.
