Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Diving and Foraging Pattern of Northern
               Elephant Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9016374

Award Number: 9016374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Burney J. Le Boeuf leboeuf@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a cooperative research project in                      
              biology between Professor Burney J. Le Boeuf, University of                    
              California at Santa Cruz, and Professor Yasuhiko Naito,                        
              National Institute of Polar Research, Tokyo, and colleagues                    
              from their respective institutions.  The scientists will                       
              study diving behavior and foraging ecology of northern                         
              elephant seals, Mirounga angustirostris.  Specifically they                    
              will study:  1) the development of diving in pups and                          
              juveniles, 2) measurement of swim velocity rates and feeding                   
              rates during diving, 3) location of foraging and routes taken                  
              at sea, 4) foraging energetics, and 5) the effect of weather                   
              variables on the free-ranging dive pattern.  Diving performance                
              will be studied by attaching diving instruments (time-depth                    
              recorders, swim velocity meters, radio transmitters) to seals                  
              at Ano Nuevo, California, before they go to sea.  The U.S.                     
              and Japanese researchers bring complementary strengths to                      
              this project and Professor Naito's specifically-designed                       
              instruments will be critical to its success.                                   
                                                                                             
              The diving pattern of northern elephant seals--characterized                   
              by prolonged, continuous, and deep diving--is distinctive                      
              even among diving mammals.  Recent findings are challenging                    
              long held interpretations of diving performance.  These seals                  
              dive deeper than other marine mammals (maximum depth of 1250                   
              m), spend brief periods on the surface between dives (less                     
              than 3 minutes), and dive continuously for 3-8 months at sea.                  
              This collaborative study will clarify diving adaptations in                    
              pelagic seals.  The findings will have important implications                  
              for how seals partition oxygen stores during foraging, manage                  
              anaerobic metabolites, and cope with compression effects.                      
              The results of the study will have practical applications to                   
              fisheries biology and marine mammal management, and will have                  
              broad implications for foraging ecology, understanding the                     
              diving adaptations of aquatic vertebrates, and studying                        
              diving behavior and physiology.
