Title       : Dissertation Research: Separating the Effect of History and Ecology on the
               Bigeography of Day-geckos (Phelsuma): Evidence from mtDNA Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1991   
File        : a9016403

Award Number: 9016403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Bull bull@bull.zo.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray R. Radtkey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The relative effects of history, dispersal and ecology on the                  
              community structure of island systems of arboreal day geckos in                
              the genus Phelsuma will be investigated.  Restriction enzyme                   
              analysis of mtDNA will be used to distinguish between these                    
              effects.  First, phylogeny of the genus will be compared with                  
              biogeography and physical history.  Second, maternal inheritance               
              patterns of mtDNA will be used to identify genotypes on recently               
              emerged islands and determine whether these genotypes evolved in               
              situ or represent dispersal events.  This will provide a lower                 
              estimate of colonization rate.  Third, maternal inheritance                    
              patterns of mtDNA will again be exploited to reconstruct the                   
              colonization history of the granitic Seychelles by P. sundbergi                
              and P. astriata.  This information will be used to determine the               
              influences founder effects and ecological interactions have had                
              in producing observed body size patterns.  Preliminary results                 
              indicate that the Seychelles were originally "colonized" by two                
              distantly related ancestors. The colonist leading to P. astriata               
              was a close relative to P. lineata; the colonist leading to P.                 
              sundbergi was close relative to P. madagascariensis and P.                     
              abbotti.  Further work will include basic ecological studies,                  
              ecological comparisons with Anolis radiation, and phylogenetic                 
              comparisons with other taxa.
