Title       : Resonance Raman Studies of Electron-nuclear Coupling, Time Resolved Dynamics and
               Magnetic Perturbations of Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9016860

Award Number: 9016860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Champion champ@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                The proposed research utilizes resonance Raman and Rayleigh                 
              scattering to probe the electronic and nuclear                                 
              structure/function relationships of biological molecules such                  
              as the heme proteins (myoglobin, hemoglobin and cytochrome c).                 
              Related techniques, such as electronic absorption and far                      
              infrared spectroscopy, are also utilized and theoretical                       
              relationship that link a variety of experimental measurements                  
              are developed.  Further experimental and theoretical studies                   
              involving the spectroscopic and kinetic effects of protein                     
              conformational distributions are also proposed.  Dynamic                       
              studies will include the measurement and analysis of ligand                    
              binding to heme proteins under a wide variety of sample                        
              conditions as well as pump/probe experiments designed to                       
              monitor protein folding and conformational relaxation.  Laser                  
              mediated thermal perturbations will be followed using                          
              Stokes/anti-Stokes Raman scattering.  Studies of photon induced                
              electron transport kinetics as well as resonance Raman                         
              saturation studies are also proposed.  Resonance Raman and                     
              kinetic studies of biological Single crystals will also be                     
              extended.                                                                      
                 Overall the objectives are to achieve a better understanding                
              of the resonant light scattering properties of biological                      
              molecules and to apply this knowledge to the elucidation of                    
              their mechanism of action.  These studies are significant not                  
              only in their relationship to the biological sciences, but also                
              in their connection to the understanding of basic light-matter                 
              interactions.
