Title       : Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9016370

Award Number: 9016370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norimitsu Watabe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Electron Microscopy Center of The University of South                      
              Carolina has supported ultrastructural research activities of                  
              over 900 faculty members and students during the past 19 years.                
              The users are from almost every science department, institution,               
              and college including the Department of Biological Sciences,                   
              Chemistry, and Physics, and the College of Engineering.  The                   
              Center has assisted faculty members to obtain research grants by               
              providing them with ultrastructural research facilities for                    
              projects involving electron microscopy.  Federal grants thus                   
              obtained during the past three years alone amounted to over three              
              million dollars.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The Center's only high resolution transmission electron                        
              microscope was acquired 17 years ago.  Because of heavy usage and              
              old age, the microscope in recent years has been out of order                  
                                                                                             
              frequently for extended periods of time.  Thus, the research                   
              activities of many investigators have been seriously jeopardized.              
                                                                                             
              Also, the microscope in now obsolete.  It does not have                        
              resolution and analytical capability comparable to modern models.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              The proposal is a request for funding of the acquisition of a                  
              high resolution, high performance, 200 KV analytical transmission              
              electron microscope with various components offered to us by                   
              Hitachi, Ltd., Japan, with the understanding that the University               
              will match approximately half the cost and South Carolina sales                
              tax.  Primary users are from the Department of Biological                      
              Sciences and Chemistry.  The majority of those research projects               
              are funded by the National Science Foundation.  Seven major and                
              four minor projects are outlined in the proposal.
