Title       : Recruitment Dynamic in Event Driven Bank Circulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1991  
File        : a9016893

Award Number: 9016893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cabell S. Davis cdavis@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Franks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glen G. Gawarkiewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Davis and collaborators will develop a series of models               
              of increasing complexity to examine the effects of storms and                  
              oceanic eddies on advective loss rates of plankton and fish                    
              larvae from an idealized offshore bank.  Their working hypothesis              
              is that such "wash-out" events cause major reduction in                        
              recruitment in characteristic zooplankton (Calanus,                            
              Pseudocalanus, Centropages, Paracalanus) and fish (cod, haddock,               
              herring) populations.  Although, for simplicity, they focus on                 
              bank circulation, the work will provide insights into basic                    
              interactions between physical forcing, food web dynamics, and                  
              recruitment which can be applied to other regions of the ocean.                
              The researchers will start with a simple 2-D kinematic model of                
              idealized flow around a bank (Georges Bank parameter values will               
              be used) and will then incorporate simple models of food chain                 
              and zooplankton population dynamics.  Eulerian models containing               
              simple biology will be compared with Lagrangian ones (using flow               
              trajectories specified from the Eulerian), containing more                     
              complete biology.  We will develop simplification techniques to                
              reduce biological complexity to a minimal acceptable level given               
              dominant scales of physical and biological forcing. Models of                  
              intermediate complexity such as contour dynamics analyses will be              
              developed to assess impact of rings on bank circulation.                       
              Finally, they will use a primitive equation (PE) circulation                   
              model containing simplified biology and compare the results with               
              the other models.  The primitive equation model will be used to                
              obtain realistic dynamical flows given strong topography and                   
              stratification, so that temporal-spatial correspondence between                
              physical losses and biological distributions can be determined.
