Title       : Astromomical Research with the Owens Valley Millimeter Interferometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1993     
File        : a9016404

Award Number: 9016404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000100            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Z. Scoville nzs@deimos.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Padin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Duane O. Muhleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey A. Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shrinivas R. Kulkarni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award is for continuing support of research at the millimeter             
              wave interferometer, operated by the California Institute of                   
              Technology in Owens Valley, California.  The Principle                         
              Investigator, one of the world leaders in millimeter wave astronomy            
              and radio interferometry, directs one of the most creative and                 
              productive groups of astronomers in the world.  These workers have             
              not only pioneered in the application of millimeter wave technology            
              to important astronomical problems, but have also been instrumental            
              in developing the technology itself.                                           
                                                                                             
              Objects to be investigated under this award range from our own                 
              solar system to the most distant galaxies.  The first global                   
              measurement of Martian winds is expected, using absorption features            
              of carbon monoxide.  The high resolution of the three element array            
              (soon to be expanded to six elements or more) will permit detailed             
              mapping of circumstellar structure associated with young stellar               
              objects - possibly planetary systems in the making.  The great                 
              sensitivity of this instrument will allow the extension of                     
              cosmological studies of the Hubble expansion, now frequently                   
              conducted with the 21 cm radiation of neutral hydrogen, to the use             
              of the millimeter wavelength lines of carbon monoxide.  This will              
              broaden the base of galaxies for which high accuracy red-shifts may            
              be obtained.
