Title       : Dissertation Research: Biosystematics and Evolution of the Genus Brachylaena R.
               Brown (Comlpositae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  1991    
File        : a9016349

Award Number: 9016349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Crawford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Brachylaena (Compositae) is a woody, dioecious genus of thirteen               
              species; it is distinct from other members of the Compositae and               
              is considered to represent a monophyletic assemblage.  Five of                 
              the species of Brachylaena are endemic to Madagascar and the                   
              Mascarene Islands while eight species are confined to the                      
              continent of Africa.  The PIs propose to test some of the                      
              proposed origins and affinities of the Madagascar Flora using                  
              Brachylaena as an exemplar.  The genus is distributed between the              
              two regions and it is widespread on the Island of Madagascar,                  
              suggesting an ancient affinity.  Several taxonomic problems such               
              as intergrading morphological forms have been recognized in the                
              genus therefore, it is proposed that an initial phenetic analysis              
              be carried out to establish the limits of the groups.  The groups              
              obtained from this analysis will then be compared                              
              electrophoretically to determine the genetic variation within and              
              among populations of individual species and to estimate the                    
              genetic divergence among species of the genus.  Only two                       
              chromosome counts have been made for the genus but it appears                  
              from these that at least one of the species is tetraploid.  In                 
              addition to phenetics and electrophoresis, an analysis of                      
              restriction site data from chloroplast DNA will be undertaken in               
              order to produce a phylogenetic hypothesis for the genus.  This                
              will be compared to a cladogram generated from morphology.  The                
              distribution of Brachylaena, with certain species restricted to                
              the continent of Africa and others endemic to Madagascar, will                 
              make it possible to discuss the evolution of this group in the                 
              context of the two regions and to relate this to known geological              
              events.  Furthermore, aspects of the biology and distribution of               
              this genus (i.e., woody, dioecious and tropical) make it an                    
              interesting and important group in which to study genetic                      
              variation within and among populations.
