Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: "Role of Molten Globule State in the Structure
               and Function of Proteins"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1993       
File        : a9016819

Award Number: 9016819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7380               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony L. Fink enzyme@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will facilitate continued collaboration between                     
              Professor Anthony L Fink, University of California, Santa                      
              Cruz, and Associate Professor Yugi Goto, Department of                         
              Biology, Osaka University, Japan.  The scientists will                         
              investigate the protein conformational state known as the                      
              molten globule and its role in protein folding reactions.                      
              The goal of the research is to increase our understanding of                   
              the molecular details and physical properties of molten                        
              globules and to determine whether they may be important in                     
              certain physiological processes such as membrane transloc-                     
              ation.  Research has indicated that molten globule-like                        
              states are of critical importance in protein folding, protein                  
              denaturation and probably in vivo protein function. In order                   
              to establish generalities, a variety of biophysical techniques                 
              will be used to structurally characterize the molten globule                   
              state from several different proteins.  In addition, kinetic                   
              experiments using stopped-flow fluorescence and CD will be                     
              performed.  An increase in our understanding of the deter-                     
              minants of protein folding and stability has important                         
              implications for most aspects of proteins and their functions,                 
              including drug design and proteins for medical and industrial                  
              uses.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The US and Japanese scientists involved in this effort have                    
              complementary skills and experience in studying structural                     
              and functional properties of proteins and enzymes.  Both have                  
              obtained significant funds for their individual efforts on                     
              this problem and their previous collaborations have been                       
              highly productive, and their research original and important.                  
              Their continued joint efforts should contribute to our                         
              understanding of proteins in a wide variety of ways.
