Title       : The Composition of Stars and Star Clusters in the Galaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9016778

Award Number: 9016778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161757             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Boesgaard boes@ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Herbig  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the most basic questions astronomers are asked by the layman            
              is "where did the atoms composing the Earth and our bodies" come               
              from?"  Indeed during the last generation astronomers have put a               
              great deal of work into answering this question by mapping the                 
              enrichment of interstellar gas by heavy element atoms from stellar             
              explosions that occur after these atoms are formed from hydrogen               
              by complex nucleosynthetic reactions in the deep interiors of                  
              highly evolved stars.  Although earlier work concentrated on                   
              determining the chemical abundance of the iron group elements,                 
              recent investigations have shown that the iron-group abundance                 
              enhancements did not start until comparatively late in the history             
              of the Galaxy.   Better indicators of enrichment during the early              
              era (including the first hour after the Big Bang) are provided by              
              the elements oxygen, carbon, and beryllium.   The oldest stars                 
              betray this history best, but they are faint and difficult to                  
              observe.  Moreover, the absorption line leading to abundance                   
              determinations of beryllium is located in the ultraviolet part of              
              the spectrum that is inaccessible to Earth-based astronomers except            
              in high mountain, low-latitude observatories such as Mauna Kea in              
              Hawaii.  The Principal Investigator (PI) has been active in                    
              studying chemical evolution studies of old stars in the Galaxy for             
              years and will extend her investigation to the faint halo stars in             
              the Galaxy with this three year award.  Recent advances in detector            
              technology should also permit the PI to obtain not only more                   
              accurate abundances but also to sample the chemical evolution in               
              stars that were formed during the original collapse of the Galaxy              
              from a proto-galactic cloud.  The abundance results for beryllium              
              may also permit a more constrained model of the Big Bang to be                 
              developed.
