Title       : Statistical Mechanics in General Relativity and Gravitational Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9016982

Award Number: 9016982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46818              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry E. Kandrup kandrup@astro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent years have witnessed increasing applications of                    
              nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and dynamical systems                     
              theory in relativistic astrophysics and quantum field theory.                  
              Professor Kandrup will investigate certain general features                    
              underlying many of these applications and show how such                        
              investigations can provide significant new insights into                       
              specific problems.                                                             
                   The other area to be considered entails an application of                 
              ideas from statistical physics and quantum field theory in the                 
              early Universe.  One principal area in statistical mechanics to                
              be considered is the "relaxation" and stability of classical                   
              self-gravitating systems of stars.  Relevant questions to be                   
              addressed include:  Why do galaxies look so similar one to                     
              another and "so relaxed" when their nominal relaxation time is                 
              much greater than the age of the Universe?  Can this apparent                  
              relaxation be derived from first principles as a consequence of                
              the "mixing" properties of a system of self-gravitating point                  
              masses?  Could "mean field fluctuations" or other collective                   
              effects induce an effective relaxation on a time scale short                   
              compared with the "collisional" relaxation time?  In what sense                
              are all self-gravitating systems unstable, and could this                      
              generic instability lead to the formation of a massive black                   
              hole at the center of a galaxy?                                                
                   Relevant questions to be addressed in field theory                        
              include:  To what extent can various field theoretic processes                 
              in the early Universe be modeled via simple stochastic                         
              equations?  What does one mean by "gravitational entropy"?  Is                 
              it possible to envision changes in topology in semiclassical                   
              quantum gravity as "tunneling" events, characterized as                        
              instantons?  Could one, e.g., make precise the idea that the                   
              Universe "tunneled into Being" as a quantum fluctuation?  What                 
              would this imply about the "initial conditions" at the Big                     
              Bang, and could this "explain" the observed "arrow of time"?
