Title       : New Methods in Modeling and Control of Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9016050

Award Number: 9016050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tryphon T. Georgiou georgiou@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is research on certain aspects of modeling and                            
              control of dynamical systems.  In particular, an                               
              integrated approach to modeling and control of linear                          
              dynamical systems will be developed based on the                               
              notion of a graph.  The notion of a graph of a                                 
              dynamical system and the notion of the gap metric are                          
              important new ideas in systems theory.  The gap metric                         
              is a notion of distance between systems suitable for use                       
              in the context of robust stabilization and control.                            
              Approximation of models of linear dynamical systems                            
              can be done with use of the gap metric.  This is                               
              motivated by the need to synthesize controllers using                          
              "low" order models.  The description of the modeling                           
              error appears naturally in the form of uncertainty in                          
              the graph of a given system -- graph being the set of all                      
              bounded input-output pairs of the system.  The first                           
              part of the research will be on such modeling theory.                          
              In the second part of the research, a framework of                             
              modeling which uses estimates of the autocorrelation                           
              function of a given signal will be developed.  In                              
              particular, measuring noisy input-output data of an                            
              unknown linear system can be cast into this framework.                         
               An approach to recursive spectral estimation based on                         
              autocorrelation (covariance) data is proposed.  The gap                        
              metric will be used to obtain a-priori bounds on                               
              spectral estimates and on estimates of the uncertainty                         
              in the graph of the sought model.                                              
              The third part of the research will be to continue the                         
              development of recent results on a new approach to                             
              spectral factorization.  This is based on a sequence of                        
              transformations on the graph of a given linear system.                         
              The technique is based on an iterative scheme and                              
              holds the potential of leading to fast and efficient                           
              algorithms for spectral factorization and recursive                            
              filtering.
