Title       : U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Studies in Robust Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1991      
File        : a9016501

Award Number: 9016501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Dorato   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              0112000   System Theory                           
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1454,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Italy award will support a long-term visit by                        
              Professor Peter Dorato of the University of New Mexico to the                  
              Politecnico di Torino to collaborate with Professor Roberto                    
              Tempo and others of that institution.  The main focus of the                   
              research will be on the extension of the U.S. principal                        
              investigator's theory of U-parameter design for robust feed                    
              back systems to multi-variable systems and multi-objective                     
              design problems. The principal investigator's theory of U-                     
              parameter design is based on the parameterization of all                       
              robustly stabilizing compensators by an arbitrary bounded-                     
              real function, or matrix is the multivariable, when the plant                  
              perturbations are assumed to be unstructured perturbations,                    
              specified in the frequency domain.  This fee parameter-                        
              function has been exploited to optimize system performance                     
              for the nominal plant, in the case of single-input-output                      
              systems.  A major thrust of the proposed sabbatical research                   
              will be to extend these results to multivariable systems.                      
                                                                                             
              A final area of proposed research will be the study of robust                  
              control for systems with both unstructured frequency-domain                    
              uncertainty and parameter uncertainty.  The principal                          
              investigator has focused his research in the former area and                   
              the Italian investigator has focused his research in the                       
              latter area.  It is expected that this research will provide                   
              further insight into the design of robust multivariable                        
              systems.  This should provide design tools for the accurate                    
              control of complex systems in the presence of significant                      
              uncertainties in plant dynamics.
