Title       : U.S-France Cooperative Research: The Role of Protein Kinases and Phosphoprotein
               Phosphatases in Regulation of Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1991       
File        : a9016743

Award Number: 9016743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Dottin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in developmental                
              biology between Dr. Robert Dottin, Hunter College, City                        
              University of New York, and Dr. Michel Veron, Pasteur                          
              Institute, Paris, France.  The objective of the project is to                  
              investigate the mechanisms by which protein kinases and                        
              phosphoprotein phosphatases mediate signal transduction in                     
              Dictyostelium.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Signal transduction refers to the process by which extracell-                  
              ular stimulatory molecules, such as peptide hormones, growth                   
              factors and neurotransmitters, mediate intracellular events,                   
              such as gene induction. In Dictyostelium discoideum,                           
              extracellular cAMP activates genes by binding to cell surface                  
              receptors.  Binding of this agonist activates the synthesis                    
              of intracellular messengers.  For extracellular cAMP to                        
              induce a Dictyostelium gene, activated nuclear regulatory                      
              proteins must interact with regulatory regions on DNA.                         
              Reversible protein phosphorylation is involved in the                          
              activation/inactivation process.  Therefore, the two                           
              researchers propose to investigate by a molecular genetic                      
              approach the role of protein kinases and phosphoprotein                        
              phosphatases in the induction of genes by extracellular                        
              cAMP.  Dr. Veron has focused on the cloning and the expression                 
              of the regulatory subunit of cAMP depended kinase.  Dr.                        
              Dottin and his research group have identified a large number                   
              of clones encoding the catalytic subunit of different protein                  
              kinases and phosphoprotein phosphatases. Together they                         
              propose to characterize these clones to ascertain their                        
              potential roles in these signal transduction pathways.  These                  
              studies will help to define a fundamental process, the                         
              mechanisms by which cells respond to their extracellular                       
              environments.
