Title       : Facility for High Performance Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1995      
File        : a9016567

Award Number: 9016567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1110369            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Cotter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides funds for continuation of the Mid-Atlantic            
              Mass Spectroscopy Laboratory (MAMS) at Johns Hopkins University.               
              Funds provide support for the laboratory's collaborative research              
              activities, from which investigators at a number of institutions               
              benefit, for research training at the graduate and post-graduate               
              level, and for continued technique development activities.  Dr.                
              Cotter is an outstanding young investigator known particularly for             
              his technique development activities, especially in use of time of             
              flight (TOF) and plasma desorption mass spectrometry.                          
              Collaborative projects include structural studies of lipids and                
              composition of lipid membranes, structure function relationships               
              in enzymes and other proteins, and structures of oligosaccharide               
              side-chains on glycoproteins and glycolipids.                                  
                  In the last decade or so, mass spectrometry (MS) has become a              
              technique of increasing usefulness to biologists and biochemists.              
              MS is of particular use in the analysis of lipids, of                          
              polysaccharides, of the types and sites of naturally occurring                 
              modifications of proteins, and of other aspects of protein                     
              structure including primary sequence.  Because of the expense of               
              their purchase and operation of the spectrometers, the disparate               
              types of biological problems for which MS is useful, and the real              
              but often infrequent need for MS in a given research project, mass             
              spectrometry is particularly suited for central facilities such as             
              MAMS that provide analyses for investigators at a number of                    
              institutions.  The focus on collaborative research insures that the            
              projects undertaken are not simply routine analyses, but instead               
              are challenging problems that help provide a suitable  environment             
              for continued development of MS techniques.
