Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Integrating a Theorem Prover and a
               Specification Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1991     
File        : a9016780

Award Number: 9016780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12650              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Guttag   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Garland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2880,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in software                     
              engineering between Drs. John Guttag and Stephen Garland,                      
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Drs. Michel Bidoit                   
              and Christine Choppy, Laboratoire de Recherche Informatique,                   
              University of Paris-Sud, France. The investigators propose a                   
              joint project that will first work on combining Assegigue, a                   
              specification environment under development at the University                  
              of Paris-Sud, and LP, a theorem proving system under                           
              development at MIT. They will then experiment with using the                   
              combined system to develop and reason about specifications.                    
                                                                                             
              There is now widespread agreement that precise specifications                  
              can play a useful role in software development and maintenance.                
              The most vexing problems in building systems deal with                         
              overall system organizations and the integration of components.                
              Modularity is the key to controlling this, and specifications                  
              are essential for achieving modularity.  Both the US and                       
              French research groups have adopted a style of specification                   
              that emphasizes brevity and clarity rather than executability.                 
              To make it possible to test specifications without executing                   
              or implementing them, both groups have developed techniques                    
              that enable specifiers to make claims about logical properties                 
              of specifications.  However, whereas the French have centered                  
              their research around the technology needed to produce and                     
              manage large scale specifications, the MIT group has centered                  
              its research around the technology needed to check claims                      
              about logical properties of specification.  By combining these                 
              two complementary research efforts, the investigators plan to                  
              produce a tool that can be used to develop, reason about and                   
              manage large-scale formal specifications of software.
