Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Thermodynamics Propertiesof Mantle Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1991     
File        : a9016362

Award Number: 9016362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2050               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Hofmeister   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0510802   Rock Properties-Mineral                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1573,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in geology                      
              between Dr. Anne Hofmeister, University of California at                       
              Davis, and Dr. Pascal Richet, Institut de Physique du Globe,                   
              University of Paris VI, France.  The objective of the project                  
              is to improve thermodynamic calculations for mantle-minerals                   
              based on spectroscopy.                                                         
                                                                                             
              One of the fundamental problems in geophysics concerns the                     
              deduction of the thermal character of the Earth's interior by                  
              comparing seismic measurements to physical properties of                       
              minerals measured in the laboratory. Progress is severely                      
              impeded by infeasibility of performing calorimetry at                          
              pressure.  In order to overcome this difficulty, predictions                   
              of thermodynamic properties based on spectroscopy can be                       
              used. Currently, the calculations are very accurate to 1000                    
              K, but calorimetric data above such temperature is insufficient                
              to evaluate the investigators' current models.  In this                        
              project they propose to perform calorimetry and thermal                        
              expansivity at high temperatures and compressibility                           
              experiments at room temperature (in Paris) and spectroscopic                   
              measurements at temperature and pressure (at Davis) on                         
              selected mineral samples. Direct comparison will enable the                    
              researchers to establish the accuracy of Kieffer's thermo-                     
              dynamic model at high temperatures. Their goal is to refine                    
              the model, so that it is reliable under mantle conditions.                     
              This project will benefit from the complementary expertise of                  
              the two investigators in modelling thermodynamic properties                    
              through spectroscopy. The results of this study should improve                 
              understanding of the thermal state of the Earth's interior.
