Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Theoretical and Phenomeno- logical Studies in
               Elementary Particle Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9016750

Award Number: 9016750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Pakvasa pakvasa@uhheph.phys.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. I. Sanda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xerxes R. Tata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Langacker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto D. Peccei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1245,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a cooperative research project in                      
              "Theoretical and Phenomenological Studies in Elementary                        
              Particle Physics" between a group at the University of Hawaii                  
              at Manoa led by Professor Sandip Pakvasa and a group of                        
              Japanese scientists from the University of Tsukuba, the                        
              National Laboratory for High Energy Physics (KEK), and                         
              Tohoku University.  Professor Yasuo Hara, Institute of                         
              Physics, University of Tsukuba, is the leader of the Japanese                  
              group. Together the scientists will pursue joint investigations                
              into areas of intense current activity in theoretical                          
              physics.  One of the main topics will be studies of mixing, CP                 
              violation and rare decays of mesons.  Related topics of                        
              interest are methods of calculation of weak decays with focus                  
              on chiral  symmetry.  Another class of phenomema to be studied                 
              is testing of gauge structure of electro-weak theories,                        
              extensions beyond the standard model, the nature of the                        
              symmetry-breaking mechanism, and the search for new particles.                 
                                                                                             
              Many members of the U.S. and Japanese groups have collaborated                 
              in the past.  Their studies will have implications  for                        
              future high energy machines such as SSC and also the TeV                       
              Linear Colliders currently under study in Japan at KEK and at                  
              SLAC in the United States.  The groups also have  strong                       
              interest in neutrino masses, mixings and oscillations, and                     
              will study the implications of solar and atmospheric                           
              neutrino date of Kamiokande and other experiments for their                    
              implications, as well as neutrinos and axions in astrophysics                  
              and the early universe.
