Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Biology): Research on Pika, Qinghai, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1992    
File        : a9016551

Award Number: 9016551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46585              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stephen Dobson fdobson@acesag.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a two.year collaborative project between                               
              two American principal investigators .. F. Stephen                             
              Dobson of Auburn University and Andrew T. Smith of                             
              Arizona State University .. and Wang Xuegao of the                             
              Northwest Plateau Institute of Biology, Chinese                                
              Academy of Sciences.  This institute is located in                             
              the city of Xining in the Qinghai.Xizang (Tibetan)                             
              Plateau.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Direct observation of the number of offspring                                  
              produced in a lifetime by each member of a known                               
              set of individuals, or "Lifetime Reproductive                                  
              Success (LRS)" is an important measure indicating                              
              fitness differences between the sexes or among                                 
              individuals that live under different social or                                
              ecological conditions.  Studies of LRS are                                     
              essential for a broad understanding of adaptation                              
              in a social context.  Professors Dobson and Smith                              
              will measure LRS for a natural population of                                   
              black.lipped pikas (Ochotona curzoniae), small                             
              mammals related to rabbits that inhabit alpine                                 
              meadows on the                                                                 
              Qinghai.Tibetan Plateau.  Black.lipped pikas                                   
              present a model system for such an investigation                              
              because:  1) high mortality rates cause a nearly                               
              complete annual turnover in the population; 2) high                            
              population density ensures a large number of                                   
              cohesive families (the primary social unit); 3)                                
              most environmental factors associated with LRS can                             
              be easily measured; 4) among families a variety of                             
              mating systems (monogamy, polygyny, polyandry) are                             
              simultaneously present; and 5) these mating systems                            
              are formed annually during a short episode of male                             
              dispersal, and once formed each family mating                                  
              system remains stable throughout the year.  These                              
              characteristics allow for contrast of LRS between                              
              males and females concurrently occupying different                             
              mating systems.
