Title       : U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Specifying and Finding Solutions to
               Constraint and Search Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1991       
File        : a9016958

Award Number: 9016958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14350              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. L. Liu liucl@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Reingold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nachum Dershowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 4710,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between US                      
              and French computer scientists.  The US investigators are:                     
              Dr. C.L. Liu, Dr. Edward M. Reingold and Dr. Nachum                            
              Dershowitz, all from the University of Illinois at Urbana.                     
              The French collaborators include:  Dr. Rene Schott, University                 
              of Nancy and Claude Kirchner and Michael Rusinowitch, of the                   
              Lorraine campus of INRIA, the French National Institute for                    
              Research in Computer Science and Automation. The research                      
              will focus on algorithmic solution of restraints and the                       
              design and analysis of search algorithms.                                      
                                                                                             
              The task of designing algorithms for finding optimal or                        
              near-optimal solutions to problems as a set of constraints                     
              has received added impetus from needs engendered by advances                   
              in VLSI circuit design.  At the same time, some modern                         
              programming languages (e.g. Prolog) can be viewed as                           
              systems that search for solutions to programs specified as                     
              sets of constraints.  With parallel computers, new issues in                   
              constraint solving have arisen.  Furthermore, future                           
              programming environments may contain built in theorem                          
              provers and constraint solvers.  Techniques for analyzing                      
              search algorithms need to be developed. This project will                      
              address two major areas in VSLI research.  In the design and                   
              synthesis area, most of the effort in the short term future                    
              will be devoted to research in physical design. In the long                    
              term, the investigators will build up their effort in the                      
              area of higher level synthesis, in particular, working on                      
              topics such as logic minimization, module generation and                       
              state assignment. The project will benefit from the extensive                  
              and the complementary expertise of the two groups in the                       
              physical design of integrated circuits.  The problems to be                    
              considered will have important applications to very large                      
              scale integration, very high level programming languages,                      
              automated deduction and design of efficient search and                         
              constraint-solution algorithms.  The results of the                            
              theoretical work will have a direct benefit to our ability                     
              to design the wiring and placement of multichip modules, a                     
              very important concept which is being exploited by US                          
              electronics firms.
