Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Structure and Evolution of Protogiant Planet
               Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1994    
File        : a9016785

Award Number: 9016785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22270              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Bodenheimer peter@ucolick.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas N. C. Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1214,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will provide support for a two year cooperative                     
              research project on protogiant planet formation, between                       
              Professor Peter H Bodenheimer and colleagues at the Lick                       
              Observatory, University of California, Santa Cruz, and                         
              Professor Satoru Ikeuchi and colleagues from the National                      
              Astronomical Observatory, Japan.  The formation of the solar                   
              system is one of the most important unsolved problems in                       
              astrophysics and planetary science.  Recently accumulated                      
              observational data on the existence and evolution of                           
              protostellar disks around young stars seem to indicate that                    
              systems, similar to those that lead to the formation of the                    
              solar system, may be abundant, and that the formation of                       
              planetary systems may be an ongoing process instead of a                       
              long-ago event.  The aim of this project is to is to undertake                 
              a theoretical investigation of the formation of giant planets                  
              to help interpret these observations.  Giant planets are                       
              thought to have been initiated by the accumulation of small                    
              solid particles that existed in the primordial solar nebula.                   
              After the build up of this core to a few earth masses, it is                   
              believed that the protoplanet was able to gravitationally                      
              capture relatively large amounts of gas from the nebula, and                   
              that the final formation stages were dominated by gas                          
              accretion.  It is intended during this project to analyze                      
              this process of gas accretion, using a three-dimensional                       
              hydrodynamic computer code. Through this analysis, it is                       
              hoped to determine the mass accretion rate as a function of                    
              time, the rate of accretion of spin angular momentum as a                      
              function of time, and the change in the location of the                        
              protoplanetary orbit as a function of time.                                    
                                                                                             
              Both the US and Japanese researchers involved in this                          
              collaboration have made intensive investigations into the                      
              general problem of the origin of the solar system and are                      
              highly regarded for their past research in the subject area.                   
              The research skills of the two groups are very complementary.                  
              If the research is successful it should give us some insight                   
              into how the final mass of giant planets was determined and                    
              how the regular satellite systems originated, and should                       
              provide a very valuable theoretical component to our                           
              understanding of the process of planet and solar system                        
              formation.
