Title       : Fundamental Processes in Metal Cluster Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1992  
File        : a9016495

Award Number: 9016495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Rosenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program supports the continued work of Dr. Edward Rosenberg of                 
              the Chemistry Department, California State University at                       
              Northridge, for the investigation of the role of ligand                        
              mobility in metal cluster reactions.  In particular, Rosenberg                 
              will study the transfer of hydrogen between oxygen or nitrogen                 
              and metal carbonyl cluster systems and investigate the source                  
              of the kinetic isotope effect previously observed for this                     
              reaction.  He will also study substitution and addition                        
              reactions of some osmium and ruthenium clusters containing                     
              face-capping nitrogen ligands in order to elucidate the role of                
              stereochemical nonrigidity in this reaction.  These studies                    
              will potentially provide new insights into the mechanism of                    
              activation by metal surfaces in catalysis.                                     
                                                                                             
              One mechanism for protonation consistent with the observed                     
              kinetic isotope effect is proton tunneling, but an alternative                 
              mechanism is intermolecular transfer.  Low temperature                         
              protonation reactions of ruthenium carbonyls by deuterated acid                
              will be studied in order to determine the extent to which                      
              proton transfer is intra- or intermolecular.  In related work,                 
              a series of dinuclear rhenium compounds will be studied to see                 
              if cluster fluxionality can result in a symmetrical hydrogen                   
              transfer intermediate, a usual requirement for proton                          
              tunneling.  For the stereochemical nonrigidity studies, a                      
              trinuclear ruthenium cluster will be reacted with diazomethane                 
              and its deuterated analog to investigate the unexpected room                   
              temperature oxidative addition of CH in this reaction and the                  
              involvement, if any, of the bridging hydride.
