Title       : R/R: Strengthening and Repair of Nonductile Reinforced Concrete Frames Using
               External Steel Jackets and Plates (Collaborative Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1992   
File        : a9016828

Award Number: 9016828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Engelhardt mde@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James O. Jirsa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Kreger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1498,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is supported under NSF Announcement NO. 90-23,                    
              "Repair and Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance of                  
              Structures."                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The need to strengthen existing buildings with inadequate                      
              seismic resistance is an urgent problem in the field of                        
              earthquake engineering.  A major class of existing structures                  
              identified as posing one of the greatest seismic hazards are                   
              nonductile concrete frames.  A number of strengthening                         
              techniques for concrete frames include addition of structural                  
              walls, addition of steel bracing, and enlarging of columns and                 
              beams using reinforced concrete jackets.  An alternative                       
              approach to concrete jackets is the use of external steel                      
              jackets and plates attached to the existing members.  Steel                    
              jackets may offer significant advantages of reduced labor,                     
              reduced cost, and reduced disruption to existing facilities,                   
              as compared to the use of concrete jackets.                                    
                                                                                             
              The proposed research program will investigate critical issues                 
              associated with the use of external steel jackets and plates                   
              for strengthening nonductile concrete frames.  The project                     
              consists of a number of interrelated tests, divided into three                 
              major phases:                                                                  
              I - behavior of steel-to-concrete connections; II - behavior                   
              of individual members strengthened with steel jackets; and III                 
              - behavior of beam-column subassemblages strengthened with                     
              steel jackets.  The overall objective of the project is to                     
              develop design guidelines for the effective implementation of                  
              steel jackets as a strengthening and repair technique.                         
                                                                                             
              This project is one part of a collaborative research activity                  
              involving an academic institution and two professional                         
              engineering offices in a common effort to implement research                   
              results into practice.
