Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Charge-Density-Wave Materials and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9016655

Award Number: 9016655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Thorne ret6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1761,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a US-French collaborative research                     
              project in condensed matter physics.  The US investigators                     
              are: Dr. Robert Thorne, Cornell University, Dr. Joseph Brill,                  
              University of Kentucky, Dr. Guebre Tessema, Clemson University,                
              and Dr. T. M. Tritt, Naval Research Laboratory.  The French                    
              counterparts are: Dr. Pierre Monceau, Center for Research on                   
              Very Low Temperatures, Grenoble, and Drs. J. Rouxel and M.                     
              Sargent from the Laboratories of Solid State Chemistry in                      
              Nantes and Rennes.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Charge density wave (CDW) conductors are among the richest                     
              systems in condensed matter physics, exhibiting collective                     
              charge transport with many analogies to superconductivity and                  
              remarkable dynamical effects associated with disorder and                      
              many degrees of freedom.  The goals of this project are 1) to                  
              prepare new and improved materials, 2) to understand the                       
              elastic anomalies associated with CDW pinning, and 3) to                       
              understand the stress-induced density wave transition in bi-                   
              metallic selenides.  The project will be divided into three                    
              parts as follows:  1) Poor material quality has been a major                   
              obstacle to progress in understanding CDW systems.  The                        
              research groups at Rennes and Nantes have great expertise in                   
              preparing novel inorganic low-dimensional conductors, while                    
              the Cornell group has been developing methods for preparing                    
              higher purity crystals of the most widely studied CDW                          
              conductors.  A collaboration between these laboratories is                     
              proposed to prepare crystals with improved purity and                          
              morphology, and to identify and explore other promising                        
              materials systems.  2) The highly anomalous electromechanical                  
              properties of CDW conductors are poorly understood.  High-                     
              sensitivity elastic modulus measurements in high magnetic                      
              fields and ultrasound measurements are proposed by the Kentucky                
              and Grenoble groups to examine the role of the CDW amplitude,                  
              normal carrier screening and CDW-phonon interactions in these                  
              properties. 3) A novel stress-induced metal semi-conductor                     
              phase transition and non-ohmic conduction have recently been                   
              discovered by the Clemson, Rennes and Grenoble groups in the                   
              quasi-one-dimensional conductor tantalum-molybdenum selenide.                  
              In collaboration with the Naval Research Laboratory, X-ray and                 
              magnetotransport studies in stressed crystals are proposed to                  
              establish the nature of the low-temperature density wave state.
