Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research (Photoconversion/ Photosynthesis):
               Photoisomerization Dynamics of Large Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9016782

Award Number: 9016782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10450              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Frederick jhf@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1952,
Abstract    :
              This award will facilitate cooperation in chemistry between                    
              Professor John H. Frederick of the University of Nevada,                       
              Reno, and the high resolution spectroscopy group headed by                     
              Professor Keitaro Yoshihara at the Institute for Molecular                     
              Science, Okazaki for a period of two years.  The scientists                    
              will undertake a detailed study of the photoisomerization                      
              dynamics of stilbene and the spectroscopic analysis of                         
              cis-stilbene analogs.  This system is a prototype for many                     
              naturally occurring photoisomerization reactions, including                    
              those associated with photosynthesis and vision.  These                        
              processes typically involve large molecules with many                          
              electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom and are therefore                    
              very difficult to treat theoretically.  To eliminate some of                   
              these difficulties, the scientists will employ a two-fold                      
              approach:  (1) focusing only on a few of the low frequency                     
              vibrations that are pivotal in the isomerization reactions of                  
              cis-stilbene, and (2) first studying simpler systems that                      
              display activity in the same types of low frequency vibrations                 
              as cis-stilbene, but which do not undergo an isomerization                     
              reaction.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The goal of this collaborative project, which involves the                     
              close interplay of experiment and theory, is to clarify the                    
              details of the fundamental isomerization process and add                       
              insight into the photochemical processes occurring in a                        
              variety of environments, including biological systems (vision                  
              and photosynthesis), surface coatings, and conductive                          
              polymers.  The study of cis-trans isomerization is very                        
              important not only because this reaction is the most                           
              fundamental chemical reaction, but also because of its                         
              important role in photosynthesis (bacteriorhodospin) as well                   
              as in photoreception (vision, etc.).
