Title       : A Parameterization of Subgrid-Scale Land-Atmosphere Interactions for Atmospheric
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1992  
File        : a9016562

Award Number: 9016562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roni Avissar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In computer models of the atmosphere, calculations  are                   
              carried out at horizontal intervals. Thus a calculation is                     
              representative of an area in which the fine-grain detail of                    
              natural variations is smeared out. Formulas included in the model              
              that attempt to account for important thermal and dynamic effects              
              of such detail, at least in some statistical sense, are referred               
              to as "parameterizations". The land surface, in particular, norm-              
              ally contains significant horizontal variations in topography,                 
              vegetative cover, moisture, and thermal characteristics within a               
              model grid square of typical dimensions (ranging from 10 sq km in              
              mesoscale models to 1 million sq km in models of global extent).               
              The two approaches used in current state-of-the art parameter-                 
              izations either do not account for subgrid-scale heterogenity of               
              complex biophysical mechanisms, or neglect the effects of known                
              subgrid scale land-atmosphere interactions such as slope-valley                
              winds, lake breezes, and other thermal circulations caused by                  
              varying vegetative cover. Before improvements in current model                 
              computer algorithms are implemented it is important to assess the              
              impact of such variations on the models' behaviour at differing                
              spatial scales.                                                                
                   Avissar proposes to carry out such assesments, by using a                 
              combination of a very flexible (in terms of optional resolution)               
              and well-tested computer model (the Colorado State University-                 
              Regional Atmospheric Modelling System), and detailed low-level                 
              measurements made by flight transects over hilly, bare,                        
              agricultural, and forested areas in two past observational                     
              programs.                                                                      
                   The PI's prior research in boundary-layer and agricultural                
              meteorology as well as in developing regional models of the                    
              atmosphere will contribute to advances in this problem area,                   
              which has application to improvement of short, medium and long-                
              term forecasting, as well as research in climate change on                     
              regional and global scales.
