Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Data Analysis of FermiLab Experiment E-653 and
               Measurement of the Oscillatins of Muon Neutrinos into Tau-Neutrinos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9016679

Award Number: 9016679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville W. Reay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will provide support for continuing collaboration                   
              between scientists from the Department of Physics, Ohio State                  
              University, lead by Professor Neville W Reay, and scientists                   
              from Nagoya University, Japan, lead by Professor Kimio Niwa.                   
              The objectives of this project are to continue to investigate                  
              areas in theoretical physics of mutual interest, namely                        
              mixing and CP violation in the decays of B-mesons and the                      
              gage structure of electro-weak theories beyond the standard                    
              model.  Collaboration between these two groups has continued                   
              for the last decade and their past activities have produced                    
              several important results in charm physics. This award will                    
              provide support for the completion of the analysis of the                      
              Fermilab experiment E653.  E653 has very important data on                     
              the semileptonic decays of charmed particles.  These decays                    
              are the key to measuring the K-M matrix, one of the most                       
              fundamental quantities in elementary particle physics.  At                     
              the present time the existing semileptonic decays data is                      
              confusing and the E653 data can bear directly on resolving                     
              these issues.  It is also intended to undertake a hybrid                       
              emulsion experiment (Fermilab P803) to measure the oscillation                 
              of Muon-neutrinos into Tau-neutrinos, which could decide                       
              whether Tau-neutrinos are the long sought after dark                           
              matter in the universe.  The observation of an effect on P803                  
              would have a dramatic effect on our understanding of particle                  
              physics.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The collaboration between these two groups is long-standing                    
              and successful, and both the US and Japanese groups have                       
              demonstrated a high competence in the techniques involved.                     
              The strengths of the US and Japanese participants are                          
              complementary.  Collection of data by both U.S. and Japanese                   
              scientists on the project is done at Fermilab, together with                   
              some of the electronics analysis.  Analysis of emulsions and                   
              additional electronic analysis is carried out in Japan.  If                    
              the project is successful, the results of the research will                    
              be of great scientific interest to the particle physics                        
              community.
