Title       : Dissertation Research: The Systematics and Evolution of Jaltomata (Solanaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1991   
File        : a9016430

Award Number: 9016430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11317              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Anderson ander@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The PIs proposed a study of the taxonomy, pattern of phylogenetic              
              relationships and evolutionary processes in Jaltomata.  A                      
              neotropical, herbaceous to suffrutescent genus of the Solanaceae.              
              One species of this poorly understood and taxonomically confused               
              genus is of particular interest because it is undergoing                       
              progressive domestication in Mexico as a fruit crop; fruits and                
              root-stocks of several other species are also consumed by humans.              
              The PIs will construct a chloroplast DNA-based phylogeny.  Based               
              on this rigorously constructed phylogeny, independently derived                
              patterns of morphological and karyotypical evolution and                       
              biogeography will be tested.  They will also explore evolution of              
              breeding systems.  Jaltomata is especially suitable for the study              
              of evolutionary process and pattern for several reasons.  Generic              
              boundaries present a challenging problem; some workers retain the              
              tubular flowered Jaltomata species as Hebecladus, and species of               
              Saracha and Physalis have been treated as Jaltomata.  There is                 
              much morphological diversity among species (habit, vestiture,                  
              corolla shape and color, etc.).  The group, therefore, lends                   
              itself to the study of morphological evolution as it relates to                
              phylogeny, chromosomal evolution, the evolution of altitude /                  
              habitat preference and breeding system evolution.  The genus                   
              includes a diversity of breeding systems such as autogamy,                     
              facultative autogamy, and obligate outcrossing.
