Title       : U.S.-Denmark Collaborative Research on a Theoretical Description of the Stopping
               of Swift Projectiles by Material Foils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9016299

Award Number: 9016299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16250              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Sabin sabin@qtp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1441,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor John R. Sabin of the                             
              University of Florida and several of his graduate                              
              students to collaborate in theoretical materials research                      
              with Professor Jens Oddershede of the Chemistry                                
              Department of the Odense University, Denmark.  Both                            
              research groups are highly productive and recognized for                       
              their expertise in quantum chemistry.  They share an                           
              interest in understanding the physical process of energy                       
              deposition in matter by swift, massive particles.  The                         
              Florida group offers strengths in the theoretical aspects                      
              of this question, while the group in Denmark has                               
              particular strengths in the experimental and theoretical                       
              aspects.  They propose a series of theoretical and                             
              numerical studies related to molecular stopping in                             
              several systems.  In particular, they will investigate                         
              the moments of oscillator strength distributions in small                      
              molecules, and also apply a less rigorous approach to                          
              calculate stopping cross sections in larger systems.  In                       
              both cases, a good deal of experimental data exists that                       
              has not been examined for theoretical significance.                            
                                                                                             
              The interaction of swift, massive particles with matter                        
              is a field with implications for such diverse studies as                       
              detector design and dosimetry, target design for the                           
              light ion beam fusion program, radiation therapy in                            
              medicine and ion beam implantation of impurities in                            
              solids.  The proposed collaborative work will be the                           
              first consistent theoretical study of energy deposition                        
              processes in molecules.
