Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Micromechanics of Granular Materials/August
               1991/Potsdam, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1991     
File        : a9016659

Award Number: 9016659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hayley H. Shen hhshen@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1443,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for the participation of ten US                    
              scientists in a joint US-Japan seminar on "Micromechanics of                   
              Granular Materials". Granular material is an assembly of                       
              discrete particles, the macroscopic behavior of which is                       
              significantly influenced by the properties of those individual                 
              particles and their interactions.   A wide range of engineering                
              problems involve characterizing and handling granular                          
              materials, and solutions to these problems often rely on                       
              phenomenological formulas.  To improve these phenomenological                  
              formulations, much research is undertaken aimed at increasing                  
              our understanding of how microscopic information relates to                    
              the macroscopic behavior of granular materials.  Research                      
              undertaken by US and Japanese scientists in this area is                       
              complementary, US researchers concentrating on the formulation                 
              of rapidly deforming granular flows and the utilization of                     
              computer simulation, and Japanese researchers concentrating                    
              on the mathematical description and physical experiments of                    
              discrete systems. This seminar should therefore provide an                     
              excellent forum for scientists from each country to exchange                   
              results and discuss future research in this area.                              
                                                                                             
              The seminar will be held on August 5-9, 1991 at Clarkson                       
              University, Postdam, New York.  The co-organizers are                          
              Professor Hayley Shen, Department of Civil and Environmental                   
              Engineering, Clarkson University, and Professor Masao Satake,                  
              Department of Civil Engineering, Tohoku University, Japan.                     
              Specific topics to be discussed at the seminar include (1)                     
              constitutive relations with internal variables; (2) transiti-                  
              onal behavior including elastic to plastic, quasi-static and                   
              rapid deformation; and (3) two-phase flows.  This will be the                  
              fourth seminar in a series that started in 1978.  The prior                    
              seminars have been very valuable and the published proceedings                 
              well respected.   This seminar will allow this successful                      
              cooperation between the two countries to continue, and should                  
              lead to further exchanges of information and more extensive                    
              research collaboration.
