Title       : The Annual Silica Cycle in a Mid-Ocean Gyre
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1994   
File        : a9016083

Award Number: 9016083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205741             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Brzezinski brzezins@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Global mass-balance considerations, vertical nutrient profiles,                
              seasonal nutrient cycles and preliminary silica flux data all                  
              indicate the large subtropical mid-ocean gyres may account for                 
              the majority of the global oceanic production of biogenic silica.              
              Diatoms are  reported to bloom episodically in summer in                       
              response to mixing events.  However, the available evidence                    
              suggests that most of the annual silica production occurs during               
              extended periods of low primary productivity and low diatom                    
              abundance in summer and autumn.  While virtually all of this                   
              silica is redissolved within the water column, the most                        
              conservative estimates of the export of silica out of the upper                
              150m indicate that it is considerable in global terms.                         
                                                                                             
              This project represents a seasonal study of the production,                    
              redissolution and vertical transport of biogenic silica in the                 
              Sargasso Sea in conjunction with the U.S. JGOFS time-series                    
              observations southeast of Bermuda.  The study will address two                 
              major objectives: (1) to evaluate the role of the oligotrophic                 
              mid-ocean gyres in the global oceanic silica cycle, and (2) to                 
              assess the importance of the siliceous phytoplankton in new                    
              production and the vertical export of organic matter in these                  
              areas.  This study will obtain year-round data for three years on              
              the vertical flux of particulate silica at the JGOFS time-series               
              site and will measure silica production and dissolution rates in               
              the upper ocean at key times of year.  These measurements will be              
              joined with the planned JGOFS time-series core measurements of                 
              dissolved silicic acid and particulate silica to achieve the                   
              first full seasonal study of the cycling of silica in the ocean.
