Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: Hydrolysis of Phosphate Esters of Theoretical
               Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1991      
File        : a9016267

Award Number: 9016267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ludwik Adamowicz ludwik@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1952,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the quantum chemical group of                          
              Professor Ludwik Adamowicz of the University of Arizona in                     
              collaboration with the geophysics group of Professor Ivan                      
              Ortega-Blake of the Institute of Physics of the National                       
              University of Mexico (UNAM) at Cuernavaca.  The aim of the                     
              research is to study various elemental chemical processes                      
              related to phosphate-bond hydrolysis in order to better                        
              understand the crucial biological process of phosphate-bond                    
              hydrolysis as a source of bioenergy.                                           
                                                                                             
              The development of high-level theoretical methods for                          
              molecular electronic structures, as well as advancements in                    
              the theory of molecular interactions, have always been                         
              related to progress in computing technologies, both in                         
              hardware and software.  At present, accomplishing the                          
              solution of the Schrodinger equation for molecular systems                     
              with the number of electrons exceeding one hundred is                          
              potentially feasible.  This would allow the study of molecules                 
              and processes of biological interest such as the hydrolysis                    
              of phosphate compounds.  For these systems, besides the                        
              accurate ab-initio calculations, it is necessary to extend                     
              the theoretical models to include collective effects of                        
              condensed media via numerical simulations.  For this                           
              research,the theoretical methodologies developed by both groups                
              are complementary and, when combined, will become a more                       
              powerful tool for theoretical explorations.  The expertise of                  
              the Arizona group lies in advanced quantum chemical techniques                 
              for determining molecular electronic structure and inter-                      
              molecular interaction energies.  The strength of the Mexican                   
              group rests on computer simulation techniques and determination                
              of the macroscopic properties of gas and liquid phases.                        
              Ultimately, both groups share an interest in biologically                      
              relevant processes.
