Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: Development of Physiological Selection
               Criteria for Breeding Drought Resistant Genotypes of Grain Sorghum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1991     
File        : a9016396

Award Number: 9016396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9624               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfredo J. Huerta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Mexico award will support a collaborative project                    
              between Professor Alfredo Huerta of Miami University at Oxford,                
              Ohio and Professor Sergio Castro-Nava of the Universidad                       
              Autonoma de Tamaulipas, Mexico.  The investigators intend to                   
              study physiologically based selection criteria for development                 
              of drought resistant varieties or hybrids of grain sorghum.  A                 
              second objective is to further basic understanding of drought                  
              resistance mechanisms in plants.  Experiments will be conducted                
              in the field at the agricultural research station in Tamaulipas                
              and in greenhouses at the Department of Botany in Oxford, Ohio.                
                                                                                             
              Water availability is the major limiting factor for crop                       
              productivity worldwide.  In the state of Tamaulipas, Mexico,                   
              grain sorghum is a major crop and the state contributes almost                 
              half of the total sorghum produced in Mexico.  Three quarters                  
              of the sorghum produced in Tamaulipas is cultivated as a                       
              rainfed crop, thus exposing the crop to a high probability of                  
              water stress during some part of its development, with resultant               
              very low yields.  Current advances in the development of                       
              locally adapted varieties and hybrids of sorghum have not                      
              focused on drought tolerance.  This collaboration between a                    
              plant pathologist (Huerta) and a breeder (Castro) will lead to                 
              results on the physiology and metabolism of drought tolerance                  
              that should help to focus on new directions and possible new                   
              selection criteria for these crops.
