Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Rheology and Deformation Mechanisms of
               Materials with Perovskite, Ilmenite and GarnetStructures at High Pressure and
               Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9016342

Award Number: 9016342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Green   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0510802   Rock Properties-Mineral                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1574,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in geophysics                   
              between Dr. Harry Green, University of California, Davis, and                  
              Professor J.C. Doukhan, Laboratoire de Structure et Proprietes                 
              de l'Etat Solide, University of Lille-Flandres-Artois,                         
              France.  The objectives of the project are to investigate the                  
              rheology and deformation mechanisms of materials with                          
              perovskite, ilmenite and garnet structures at high pressure                    
              and temperature and to study applications to flow in the                       
              Earth's mantle.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The Earth is slowly cooling by convection in its interior.                     
              Earthquakes, volcanoes and continental drift are all                           
              consequences of this slow convective flow in the rocks of the                  
              mantle. Considerable experimental work has been performed on                   
              the mechanisms of solid-state flow in the upper mantle over                    
              the last twenty years, but the type of apparatus capable of                    
              controlled deformation and stress measurement at pressures                     
              equivalent to greater depths does not exist.  Recent results                   
              in Dr. Green's laboratory strongly support the use of                          
              structural analogues of deep mantle phases to advance the                      
              understanding of deep mantle flow.  In this project, the                       
              investigators propose a collaborative effort to determine the                  
              rheology and flow mechanisms of perovskite, ilmenite and                       
              garnet structures at high pressure and temperature.  The                       
              results of this study will contribute greatly to models of                     
              deep-mantle and/or whole-mantle convection and will allow                      
              semi-quantitative assessment of the current controversy over                   
              whether or not the lower mantle is significantly more                          
              viscous than the upper mantle.  Experiments will be conducted                  
              in the US with unique high pressure deformation equipment.                     
              Analysis by transmission electron microscopy will be carried                   
              out in France.  The project will benefit from the expertise                    
              of the US investigator in the rheology of geological materials                 
              and the extensive experience of Dr. Doukhan in transmission                    
              electron microscopy of the deformation microstructure of                       
              complicated ceramic and mineral crystal structures.
