Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Metallic Superlattices with Artificial
               Superstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9016752

Award Number: 9016752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Falco falco@ccit.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1771,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a two year cooperative research                        
              project between Professor Charles M Falco, Department of                       
              Physics, University of Arizona and Professor Teruya Shinjo,                    
              Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Japan.                      
              The project will involve the experimental study of several                     
              interesting physical properties of artificial multilayers                      
              consisting of metallic elements. Artificial multilayers are                    
              new materials which do not exist in nature.  As such there                     
              are a number of unusual, and potentially useful, physical                      
              phenomena exhibited by these materials including, for                          
              example, magnetic excitations, perpendicular magnetic                          
              anisotropy, dimensionality crossover effects, and unusual                      
              magneto-optic properties.  The particular physical properties                  
              to be studied include perpendicular magnetization in ultrathin                 
              magnetic layers, giant magnetoresistance of ferromagnetic                      
              multilayers, and lattice dynamics and elastic properties of                    
              epitaxial multilayers.  A variety of techniques available in                   
              Arizona and Kyoto will be used to characterize these materials                 
              including x-ray diffraction, Brillouin light scattering,                       
              superconducting measurements and a variety of surface science                  
              probes. The materials themselves will be prepared by                           
              alternately depositing two elements using vacuum deposition                    
              and sputtering techniques.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The expertise of the US and Japanese scientists is complemen-                  
              tary.  Professor Falco is an expert in the structural and                      
              electronic properties of thin films and superlattices, while                   
              Professor Shinjo is an expert on the magnetic properties,                      
              particularly the Mossbauer spectroscopy, of these systems.                     
              The study of artificially prepared multilayers is considered                   
              to be among the frontier topics in solid state physics                         
              research and the results of this collaboration will be of                      
              great scientific interest.  It is expected that the collabor-                  
              ation will generate new data that will improve our under-                      
              standing of the magnetic properties of metallic superlattices                  
              which may lead to new systems for magnetic storage applicat-                   
              tions.
