Title       : Gene Structure & Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1992   
File        : a9016548

Award Number: 9016548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Tartof   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Cancer Research
	      7701 Burholme Avenue, Fox Chase
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-2490

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In Drosophila, position effect variegation results when a                      
              euchromatic gene has been placed adjacent to a block of centromeric            
              heterochromatin.  In this context the euchromatic genes adjoining              
              the heterochromatin are repressed in some cells, but not in others,            
              thereby giving rise to a tissue or organ composed of patches of                
              mutant and wild type cells.  The most reasonable explanation for               
              the inactivation seen in variegating rearrangements, is that the               
              usual compacted structure of heterochromatin is propagated past the            
              breakpoint into the neighboring euchromatic sequences, thereby                 
              repressing their function.  We have shown that, in Drosophila,                 
              there are perhaps 20-30 dosage sensitive loci capable of dominantly            
              modifying variegation.  These are known as Enhancers and                       
              Suppressors of Variegation (E(var)and Su(var)) and may be divided              
              into two classes (I and II).  Class I genes behave as Enhancers                
              when duplicated and as Suppressors when mutant or deficient.  Such             
              Loci are the majority type and probably code for structural                    
              polypeptides that composed heterochromatin.  On the other hand,                
              class II genes function as E(var) when deficient and as Su(var)                
              when duplicated.  Only two class II genes are known so far.  The               
              fact that the reduction or removal of a class II gene product may              
              increase the spread of a heterochromatic domain implies that the               
              wild type function of such loci negatively regulate the propagation            
              of heterochromatin.  This suggests that the class II genes play a              
              pivotal role in the assembly of heterochromatin.  In order to                  
              obtain a deeper understanding of position of effect variegation,               
              we propose to clone by recombinant DNA techniques the class II gene            
              E26A, and to understand how it participates in the assembly of                 
              heterochromatic domains.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The results from this study should provide greater insight into the            
              structure and function of eukaryotic chromosomes.
