Title       : Separators in Two or More Dimensions and Parallel Algorithm Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9016641

Award Number: 9016641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Miller glmiller@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9218,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to understand how to design fast          
              and processor-efficient algorithms with an emphasis on algorithms that         
              are targeted toward fine-grain parallel architectures.  The approach           
              will be to solve mostly graph theoretic problems that arise from the           
              solution to more concrete problems such as finding approximate                 
              solutions to partial differential equations using the finite element           
              method.  Almost all of this work assumes that the underlining graphs           
              possess some further geometric or topologic structure, with the hope           
              of finding fast and processor-efficient algorithms for problems which          
              otherwise seem hard to parallelize efficiently.                                
                   Processor-efficient algorithms will be developed for constructing         
              graph separators which arise in sparse linear systems.  These                  
              separators will then be used in the construction of more efficient             
              direct and iterative methods for solving these systems.  The                   
              relationship between graphs obtained using geometric constraints and           
              those obtained using topological constraints will be studied.                  
                   The bulk of the research will be in the design of processor-              
              efficient parallel algorithms for abstract machines that possess a             
              message passing architecture, such as the Parallel Random Access               
              Machine.  Many of the parallel algorithms that have been developed are         
              efficient and simple enough that, when machines are available that can         
              efficiently perform message passing, there should be substantial               
              speedups.  The next one or two generations of parallel machines will           
              be able to handle the large amount of traffic generated by the                 
              pointer-based algorithms.  Algorithms will be designed for the                 
              Parallel Random Access Machine model augmented with unit cost                  
              operations such as prefix-sum or scan.  Algorithms for the augmented           
              model should be simpler, and thus have a better chance of efficient            
              implementation on the newer machines.
