Title       : Population Dynamics and Ecosystem Processes: Theoretical Study of the Stability
               Development of Food-Web Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1993     
File        : a9016896

Award Number: 9016896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22126              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. DeAngelis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oak Ridge National Lab
	      Bethel Valley Road
	      Oak Ridge, TN  37831    865/574-9798

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a two year cooperative                         
              project between a group from the Environmental Sciences                        
              Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory led by Dr Donald                       
              Deangelis, and a group from Ryukoku University, Japan, led by                  
              Professor Ei Teramoto.  The objective of the proposed                          
              research is to demonstrate how the macroscopic processes of                    
              energy and nutrient flow in an ecosystem are related to the                    
              spatiotemporal behavior and fate of species populations                        
              within that ecosystem.  Traditionally, two general theories                    
              have been applied to the understanding of ecological food                      
              webs, namely the population and community dynamics theory,                     
              emphasizing the modelling of population numbers, and the                       
              ecosystem process theory, emphasizing the modelling of energy                  
              and nutrient flows.  There has been relatively little                          
              interaction between ecologists employing each of these                         
              approaches and this has hindered the development of ecological                 
              theory.  This project aims at developing theoretical approach                  
              to ecological food webs which integrates both approaches.                      
              Two specific food webs are to be studied; a termite-microbial-                 
              detritus interaction in a subtropical ecosystem, and a                         
              periphyton-grazer community in artificial streams.  The                        
              project will involve the development of models linking                         
              ecosystem energy and nutrient flows with population dynamics.                  
              This integrated approach, may help clarify several important                   
              theoretical questions including the relationships of energy                    
              and nutrient supply regimes to the stability and species                       
              diversity within an ecosystem, the coevolution of species in                   
              relation to structure and processes in food webs, and the                      
              causes and effects of spatiotemporal heterogeneity of                          
              ecosystems.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Both the US and Japanese scientists involved in the project                    
              are highly regarded in their fields.  The two groups have                      
              complementary research interests with similar aims but                         
              different orientations, the US group being more oriented                       
              towards ecosystem processes, and the Japanese group more                       
              towards population/community dynamics. This project should                     
              yield new insights into the interplay between the dynamic                      
              processes of species populations in an ecosystem and the                       
              ecosystem processes of energy and nutrient flow, which could                   
              have important implications in the context of both landscape                   
              ecology, and issues such as the greenhouse effect, acid rain                   
              and biodiversity.
