Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Phase Transitions in Dense Astrophysical
               Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1993      
File        : a9016293

Award Number: 9016293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19974              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Thomas thomas@astro.me.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a two year cooperative                         
              research project on dense astrophysical plasmas, between                       
              Professor Hugh M Van Horn, Department of Physics and Astronomy,                
              University of Rochester, and Professor Setsuo Ichimaru,                        
              Department of Physics, University of Tokyo, Japan.  In dense                   
              astrophysical objects, such as neutron stars, white dwarfs,                    
              low mass stars (brown dwarfs), the solar interior, and giant                   
              planets, collections of ionized nuclei and electrons constitute                
              dense plasmas, which exhibit various kinds of phase changes.                   
              In recent years, due to advancements in condensed-matter                       
              theories coupled with progress in computer-simulation                          
              capabilities, it has become possible to carry out detailed                     
              analyses of those phase-transition processes in dense                          
              astrophysical plasmas.  The aim of this proposal is to                         
              undertake theoretical and computer-simulation studies on a                     
              number of those phase transition processes.  The processes to                  
              be studied include: (1) the possibility that neutron stars                     
              may have glassy rather than crystalline crusts, and what the                   
              consequences are of that; (2) the possibilities of phase                       
              separation in binary carbon/oxygen and iron/carbon mixtures,                   
              which have been suggested as energy sources in very cool                       
              white dwarfs; (3) iron/hydrogen phase separation, which may                    
              have interesting consequences for the evolution of low mass                    
              stars and "brown dwarfs"; and (4) hydrogen/helium phase                        
              separation in giant planets and brown dwarfs, which may prove                  
              a significant energy source in these bodies.                                   
                                                                                             
              The two groups involved in this collaboration complement each                  
              other well.  The Japanese scientists have a long history of                    
              important contributions in areas of dense plasma physics and                   
              condensed matter physics relevant to this collaboration, and                   
              also have a strong interest in astrophysical applications.                     
              The US group has a similar interest in astrophysics, together                  
              with a strong interest in the relevant properties of matter at                 
              high densities.  If successful this project will make a                        
              significant contribution to research problems at the interface                 
              between the disciplines of dense plasma physics, condensed                     
              matter physics and astrophysics.
