Title       : Dissertation Research: The Influence of Concurrent Costs andRisks on the
               Foraging Behavior of Grazing Mayflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1991   
File        : a9016102

Award Number: 9016102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Peckarsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter R. Ode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Foraging organisms typically must consider many factors when                   
              making decisions about how and when to move within and between                 
              patches of food.  The objectives of this research are to (1)                   
              contrast the responses of two streams insects which are                        
              morphologically and behaviorally distinct to combinations of                   
              costs and risks experienced while foraging, (2) examine in detail              
              how one                                                                        
              potential cost, the presence of competitors, influences foraging               
              behavior, and (3) determine the influence of forager density and               
              resource levels on growth and reproduction.  Behavioral                        
              observations of responses to forced contacts with competitors and              
              predators under different environmental conditions will be used                
              to compare the relative importance of the different factors.                   
              Behavioral observations of interactions between feeding                        
              individuals at different densities and resource levels will be                 
              used to determine the nature of interactions between potential                 
              competitors.  Experiments which measure growth rate and fecundity              
              will determine if resource levels and the presence of competitors              
              influence fitness.  The principle contribution of this research                
              will be an assessment of interactions between multiple concurrent              
              costs and risks faced while foraging, and a determination of the               
              role of competition.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Potential applications of the findings include: management of                  
              trout in stocked streams, and prediction of effects of                         
              alterations of stream habitats.  Basic information from the study              
              will also contribute to the understanding of mechanisms that                   
              maintain species diversity and increase the robustness of                      
              conservation practices.
