Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Infrared Synchrotron Radiation Studies of
               Adsorbate-Substrate Vibrations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9016771

Award Number: 9016771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwyn P. Williams gwyn@bnl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Synchrotron Light Sou
	      
	      Upton, NY  11973    /   -

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1765,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in physics                      
              between Dr. Gwyn Williams, Brookhaven National Laboratory and                  
              Dr. Paul Dumas, Laboratoire de Spectrochimie Infrarouge et                     
              Raman, Thais, France.  The objective of the project is to                      
              study low frequency modes of adsorbates on metal and                           
              semiconductor surfaces.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Recent developments in infrared synchrotron radiation sources                  
              have led to the demonstration of their utility as a probe of                   
              low frequency absorbate-substrate vibrational modes. Such low                  
              frequency vibrations of adsorbed atoms and molecules contain                   
              direct information on the adsorbate-substrate bond, which                      
              controls the stability, reactivity and mobility of adsorbates.                 
              Few techniques can access these vibrations. Electron Energy                    
              Loss spectro-scopy (EELS) has provided the most abundant                       
              information due to its particularly good sensitivity.                          
              However, its resolution has limited its use for line-shape                     
              and isotopic shift studies, as well as for work at higher                      
              pressures. In this project, the US and French investigators                    
              will use the new infrared synchrotron radiation facility at                    
              Brookhaven to perform both and EELS studies on surfaces of                     
              transition and noble metals and semiconductors in the low                      
              frequency region, combining their expertise EELS (on the                       
              French side) and surface reflection-absorption spectroscopy                    
              (on the US side). Dr Williams is internationally recognized                    
              as a leader in synchrotron radiation spectroscopy and is                       
              responsible for the development of the far-infrared beamline                   
              at Brookhaven. Dr. Paul Dumas has developed an outstanding                     
              surface vibrational laboratory, including research on                          
              infrared, electron energy loss, and Raman and laser spe-                       
              ctroscopies. Results of this research are expected to                          
              contribute to the understanding of the geometry and bonding                    
              of adsorbates on surfaces, still one of the most important                     
              problems in surface science.
