Title       : Introducing Ethics Cases in Engineering Coursework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1992      
File        : a9112430

Award Number: 9112430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30154              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz C. Luegenbiehl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              To exercise leadership, science and engineering educators need to              
              provide their students with the tools to identify and respond                  
              appropriately to professional problems with ethical dimensions.                
              This project is a pilot study to develop innovative materials for              
              engineering faculty to use to introduce issues of engineering                  
              ethics into their classrooms.  The faculty will develop case study             
              materials based on their own professional experiences.  They will              
              be prepared to develop the case studies and to discuss ethical                 
              issues with their students through a series of workshops and                   
              extensive individual consultation with the project director.  The              
              case studies and experiential essays based on the teaching                     
              experiences will be published and disseminated to the engineering              
              schools.  Presentations will be made at appropriate professional               
              meetings.  The pilot study will also investigate the possibility               
              of broadening the ethics program to a larger group of campuses,                
              through liaison with the Midwest Undergraduate Private Engineering             
              Colleges.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This proposal focuses on an important area in Ethics and Values                
              Studies.  The investigator is very well qualified; the plan is                 
              thoughtful and feasible; university support is extremely good.                 
              Results are likely to improve the teaching of engineering ethics               
              on this campus and in undergraduate curricula nationwide.  Support             
              is highly recommended.
