Title       : Relationship Between Atomic Structure and Mechanical Properties of Interfaces
               and Free Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1993      
File        : a9112196

Award Number: 9112196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bassani bassani@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vaclav Vitek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted on the mechanical properties of grain               
              boundaries and bicrystals from both atomistic and continuum points             
              of view.  The validity of a continuum description of the                       
              heterogeneous nature of grain boundaries at the atomic scale has               
              been established through comparisons with detailed atomistic                   
              simulations.  This has led to the classification of locally stable,            
              metastable and unstable grain boundary structures and                          
              identification of the physically more reasonable structure among               
              the multiple ones found for a given bicrystal.  The research builds            
              on these findings and continues to emphasize the relation between              
              atomistic and continuum theories.  A detailed study of the internal            
              stresses in interface regions and at free surfaces, which can                  
              generally be of significant magnitude, will be undertaken.  The                
              implication of the loss of positive definitieness or strong                    
              ellipticity for the fourth-order tensor of elastic moduli and the              
              corresponding possibiity, respectively, of locally negative strain             
              energies or bifurcations and discontinuities will be studied.                  
              Better bounds or estimates for the effective properties of the                 
              atomically heterogeneous continuum model will be developed.  The               
              theory wil be applied to grain boundaries and interfaces between               
              two different metals, free surfaces, interfaces between thin films             
              and substrates, and the influence of alloying, manifested in                   
              segregation and/or ordering, on elastic properties.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              Studies of the mechanical properties of materials usually use a                
              continuum approach even though materials are known to be made up of            
              discrete elements such as atoms and molecules.  The mechanical                 
              properties are dependent on the structure of grain boundaries                  
              bewteen crystal grains and on the existence of bicrystals.  It is              
              possible to study the structure of grain boundaries from an                    
              atomistic approach.  However, there is very little work which                  
              connects the atomistic study of grain boundaries with the continuum            
              approach.  This grant proposes to do just this.  A consistent                  
              approach will be taken to study grain boundaries from an atomistic             
              point of view and then connect this with the continuum description.
