Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Emulsion PolymerizationProcess Control
               Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1991      
File        : a9112486

Award Number: 9112486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61252              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christos Georgakis C.Georgakis@Lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cesar A. Silebi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Dimitratos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elicabe E. Guillermo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed S. El-Aasser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Emulsion polymerization is widely used in industry to produce                  
              latices for applications such as latex paints, adhesives,                      
              coatings, binders in paper and textile products, synthetic                     
              rubber, etc.  The latex stage of the production is coagulated                  
              to give bulk polymer, or a final product, which after suitable                 
              treatment is made available in its original latex form ( for                   
              example, acrylic paints).  In addition, environmental concerns                 
              and regulations have initiated a major trend driving away from                 
              paint products with high solvent content leading to widespread                 
              use of water based latices.  The control of emulsion                           
              polymerization reactors is still a difficult task.  The                        
              problems of controlling emulsion polymerization processes are                  
              due to their multiphase nature which is not well understood.                   
              Newly emerging sensor technology combined with advances in                     
              modeling and process control, introduce the potential to                       
              better control such industrial systems and provide US                          
              industries with a competitive edge in emulsion polymerization.                 
              This grant is for equipment only a prototype process control                   
              facility for emulsion polymerization.  Included are a fully                    
              instrumented polymer reactor and automatic sensor and control                  
              equipment.  Various process design and experimental testing of                 
              different control strategies will be carried out including the                 
              testing of new on-line sensors.
