Title       : Dissertation Research: Chloroplast Genome Evolution in a Non-photosynthetic
               Plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1991  
File        : a9112623

Award Number: 9112623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison E. L. Colwell  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The genus Conopholis belongs to a family of parasitic                     
              plants, the Orobanchaceae.  The plants are obligate parasites on               
              other plants, from which they derive all of their nutrients and                
              water.  Possibly as a direct result of this parasitism these                   
              plants have lost the ability to photosynthesize and lack the                   
              characteristic green color conferred by the presence of                        
              chlorophyll.  The plastids (the organelle which in green plants                
              houses the photosynthetic metabolism and has its own circular                  
              genome containing about 120 genes, including some of those                     
              involved in photosynthesis) of  Conopholis contain a genome only               
              a third the size of that in green plants and have lost several                 
              important photosynthesis genes.  This has occurred through the                 
              accumulation of several large deletions of DNA.  The large amount              
              of variation in the plastid genome detectable between different                
              populations of Conopholis indicate that it is continuing to                    
              evolve at an accelerated rate.                                                 
                   DNA sequencing methods will be used to investigate how these              
              deletions have occurred and what has happened to plastid genes                 
              which have not been deleted.  Those that remain intact will be                 
              investigated for non-photosynthetic functions.  The evolution of               
              the non-functional photosynthesis genes remaining in the plastid               
              genome will be compared with their counterparts in the nuclear                 
              genome in order to find out if they have had different fates as a              
              result of different molecular processes occurring in these two                 
              genomes.
