Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Light Scattering Characterization of
               Polymer Solutions and Dispersions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9112622

Award Number: 9112622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62220              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hunkeler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Light scattering photometry is an absolute characterization                    
              method which can be used to investigate the dilute solution                    
              behavior of macromolecules and the colloidal properties of                     
              suspensions, emulsions and dispersions.                                        
              A light scattering photometer and laser differential                           
              refractometer will be purchased by the School of Engineering                   
              at Vanderbilt University.  These complementary instruments                     
              will both employ Argon Ion lasers (488 nm) with  the                           
              differential refractometer used to provide optical parameters                  
              for the scattering measurements.  The light scattering                         
              photometer will operate over a broad angular and temperature                   
              range and function in both the static and dynamic modes.  Both                 
              pieces of equipment will be computer interfaced.  They are                     
              intended for an interdisciplinary polymer program which                        
              includes projects involving several academic departments.                      
              They will be principally dedicated to research in Chemical                     
              Engineering including the molecular measurement of water                       
              soluble polymers, kinetic and latex characterization of                        
              heterophase polymerizations, and in analyses aimed at                          
              improving the precision of light scattering.  The photometer                   
              will also be used for engineering education in the laboratory                  
              component of a graduate polymer course.  Additionally, it will                 
                                                                                             
              be applied to the investigation of research areas in polymer                   
              science and engineering including the conformation of polymer                  
              chains prior to degradation, the mechanism of polymer                          
              separation inside a sorbent pore of a Gel Permeation                           
              Chromatograph, and determination of structure-property indices                 
                                                                                             
              to improve the quality of biomaterials such as those used in                   
              artificial organs.
