Title       : Disturbance and Environmental Variability Effects on Plant Colonization and
               Establishment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1993      
File        : a9112757

Award Number: 9112757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. Beatty susan.beatty@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Ecologists, biogeographers, and other scientists recently have            
              devoted considerable attention to the study of factors that                    
              influence the form and extent of biological diversity within                   
              various types of locales.  Among the factors that have been studied            
              intensively are the impacts of various types of natural and human-             
              induced disturbances (like fires or floods) and the response of                
              vegetative and faunal communities to changes in general                        
              environmental conditions (like changes in temperature or                       
              precipitation).  Relatively little research has been devoted to                
              interactions between these general factors, however.  This project             
              will focus on description and analysis of vegetation change in the             
              mixed deciduous forest ecosystems of the Huyck Preserve in upstate             
              New York.  The project will focus on answering two questions:  (1)             
              What role does disturbance play in determining the species                     
              composition and richness of forest and old field communities? and              
              (2) What responses in understory forest-vegetation phenology and               
              spatial population dynamics can be related to environmental                    
              variability within and between years?  These questions will be                 
              answered using data gathered through a variety of means, including             
              vegetation censuses and mapping, tree-ring measurements,                       
              measurement of vegetation gaps, testing of soil samples, and                   
              experiments in which environmental variables are controlled to                 
              replicate different climatic regimes.                                          
                   This project will provide new information about and new                   
              insights into the ways that different forms of disturbance and                 
              different types of environmental change affect the number, form,               
              and location of different species in temperate mixed deciduous                 
              ecosystems.  Because analyses of these two general factors will be             
              conducted simultaneously, the project will also enhance                        
              understandings of interactions among disturbances and different                
              forms of environmental variability as they affect vegetation.  The             
              conclusions of this project therefore will contribute to increased             
              knowledge of the fine-scale dynamics within and between vegetative             
              communities, and they also will advance the development of more                
              comprehensive regional and global models that relate natural change            
              to human and physical activities.
