Title       : Dissertation Research: Economic Strategies and Human Interaction in the
               Levantine Early Neolithic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1991      
File        : a9112725

Award Number: 9112725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Bar-Yosef obaryos@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Professor of                        
              Anthropology at Harvard University, Mr. Ian Kuijt will collect                 
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Kuijt will build upon                  
              preliminary excavations conducted at the early Neolithic site of               
              'Iraq ed-Dubb which is located northwest of Ajlun, Jordan and                  
              situated in an extensively forested region 550 meters above sea                
              level.  Previous work indicates that this cave site was occupied               
              ca. 10,000 years ago and that it contains an oval stone                        
              structures with multiple mud floors, indicating repeated                       
              occupation.  Mr. Kuijt and his colleagues will conduct one season              
              of research which combines continued excavations inside the cave               
              with limited survey and excavations outside of it and in front of              
              neighboring caves.  Within the cave wide horizontal exposure will              
              delineate and excavate two of the stone structures (the third has              
              already been exposed).  Floral and faunal materials will be                    
              collected and analyzed and these will provide information on both              
              basic subsistence and season of occupation.  Lithic materials                  
              will be examined to determine sources of origin and to                         
              reconstruct how the inhabitants moved over the landscape.                      
                                                                                             
              The early Neolithic in the Near East dates to ca. 10,000 years                 
              ago and marks the first domestication of plants and animals in                 
              the Old World.  Intensive archaeological attention has been                    
              focussed on the low lying areas within the Jordan Valley where                 
              this process, in part at least, appears to have taken place.                   
              Little is known however how such sites fit into a broader                      
              regional context and whether, for example, these first                         
              agriculturalists relied completely on new food crops or whether                
              they incorporated them into a broader seasonal round which                     
              included hunting and gathering.  If the former is the case then                
              it is unclear how lowland agriculturalists interacted with                     
              hunting and gathering populations from higher elevations.  In                  
              this context, the site of 'Iraq ed-Dubb is both important and                  
              unique because of its location in just such a highland area.                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              archaeological data from an unknown area/period which will be of               
              interest to a wide group of scientists.  It will increase our                  
              understanding of how complex agriculturally based societies                    
              emerged and will assist in the training of an extremely promising              
              young scientist.
