Title       : Divided Government in the American States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1991      
File        : a9112648

Award Number: 9112648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49826              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris P. Fiorina mfiorina@hdc.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Divided government occurs when  different political parties control            
              the executive and legislative branches of government.  Once a rare             
              occurrence in American politics divided government has become                  
              increasingly commonplace.  As a consequence, the subject of divided            
              government has attracted increasing scientific attention not least             
              because the growth of divided government is variously blamed for               
              budget deficits, policy paralysis, and increasing partisan conflict            
              in government.  To date most scholarly attention has focussed on               
              divided government at the national level of American politics.                 
              However, the evidence is that the incidence of divided government              
              has increased just as rapidly in the American states and with                  
              similar consequences.  This innovative project undertakes to                   
              examine the nature and determinants of divided government in the               
              American states.                                                               
                                                                                             
              In addition to the intrinsic importance of American state                      
              government, there are sound scientific reasons for examining                   
              divided government at the state level.  Although a number of                   
              explanations have been advanced to explain the growth of divided               
              government, the national focus of previous research has precluded              
              rigorous analysis since these studies have been limited to a single            
              case.  By focussing on divided government in the American states,              
              this project will take advantage of the substantial variance in                
              divided government at the state level to refine and test competing             
              hypotheses.  Of particular interest is the hypothesis that divided             
              government is a consequence in large measure of the growing                    
              professionalism of state legislatures which has tended increasingly            
              to shelter legislators -- especially members of the Democratic                 
              party -- from competitive electoral pressures.  If                             
              substantiated, this explanation has important implications for the             
              current debate about legislative term limitation.                              
                                                                                             
              When completed this project should provide much richer and more                
              rigorous explanations of both the causes and consequence of divided            
              government.
