Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9112033

Award Number: 9112033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16152              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn M. Warner  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Political Scientists do not understand very well the process by                
              which diverse groups are forged into effective and enduring                    
              political coalitions such as political parties. Although a                     
              variety of explanations have been advanced which variously                     
              emphasize the importance of the political environment, the role of             
              leadership, the nature of basic social and economic divisions in               
              society, and the nature of existing political and social                       
              institutions, rigorous tests of these competing explanations have              
              been hampered both by inadequate theory and by a lack of                       
              appropriate data.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This ambitious doctoral dissertation research refines and tests a              
              theory of party formation through comparative analyses of the                  
              formation of Christian Democratic parties in Italy and France                  
              following World War II.  Blending statistical analyses and                     
              intensive case studies this project will test a series of                      
              interrelated hypotheses linking the development of parties to the              
              degree of support provided by government officials, the existence              
              of ancillary institutions such as churches which support party                 
              formation, and the choices made by party leaders.                              
                                                                                             
              When completed this study will provide important insights into the             
              process by which democratic political parties are established and              
              succeed or fail.  In addition to contributing to fundamental                   
              knowledge about political processes the lessons learned from this              
              research should provide valuable guidance to he development of                 
              democratic political parties in the formerly authoritarian states              
              of eastern europe.
