Title       : Dissertation Research: Natural Selection at the DNA Sequence Level in the pgd
               Region of Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1991  
File        : a9112480

Award Number: 9112480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Begun  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Genetic variation within populations is ultimately the                    
              source of all evolutionary change.  Allozyme data were for the                 
              most part insufficient for determining the relative importance of              
              mutation, genetic drift, recombination, and natural selection in               
              determining the distribution of genetic variation in nature.  DNA              
              data are qualitatively different in that they provide a history                
              of genetic variation in natural populations, thereby allowing one              
              to make inferences regarding the type of selection acting on a                 
              locus (i.e., purifying, directional, balancing) and the variants               
              within a locus which are a target of selection.  The work                      
              outlined in this proposal is an attempt to understand patterns of              
              selection over the distal half of the X chromosome in Drosophila               
              malanogaster and Drosophila simulans.  Previous data suggest the               
              allozyme polymorphism at phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (pgd) is               
              a target of selection in D. manlanogaster.  It is proposed to                  
              build on these data with a molecular analysis of population                    
              variation at pgd.  The molecular data will allow determination of              
              the influence of selection and recombination on the distribution               
              of variation at this locus and localize specific variants on                   
              which selection acts.  This X-linked gene is located near the                  
              telomere, a region known to have low recombination rates.                      
              Theoretical results and preliminary data suggest that a                        
              significant fraction of DNA variation in the region could be                   
              influenced by genetic "hitchhiking" associated with the fixation               
              of advantageous mutants.  Thus, pgd may have had a complex                     
              history, with variation influenced by local and regional                       
              phenomena.  Therefore, in addition to detailed study of pgd, DNA               
              variation at several gene regions on either side of pgd  will be               
              measured in order to place the pgd data in a large context and                 
              determine the impact of selective substitutions on DNA variation               
              over the distal portion of the X chromosome.
