Title       : Color Image Enhancement and Segmentation for Computer Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1991      
File        : a9112350

Award Number: 9112350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Rodriguez rodriguez@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
              The field of computer vision has dealt mostly with monochrome                  
              images, leaving the use of color images largely unexplored.                    
              Because of advances in computer technology and in monochrome                   
              image processing and interpretation, it is reasonable to begin                 
              directing more effort toward the incorporation of color                        
              information into computer vision systems.  New techniques for                  
              color image enhancement, analysis, and segmentation need to be                 
              developed that apply directly to the vector pixel values, rather               
              than simply applying monochrome techniques to the red, green, and              
              blue component images.  In addition, theoretical models for color              
              image processing and interpretation need to be developed so that               
              a unified theory for color computer vision will exist.                         
                                                                                             
              Planning activities will start with ascertaining which existing                
              techniques can be readily extended to apply to color images and                
              which new techniques must be developed.  Also, methods for                     
              multispectral image analysis will be reviewed in order to                      
              determine which techniques can be adapted to color images.                     
              During the planning period, some preliminary analysis of various               
              techniques will be performed through software implementation.                  
              This will help determine which methods offer the most promise and              
              warrant further research.  The result of these planning                        
              activities will be the formulation of a research project for the               
              development of specific image enhancement, analysis, and                       
              segmentation procedures for a color computer vision system.
