Title       : Engineering Values as a Barrier to the Effective Use of Skilled Workers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1992  
File        : a9112265

Award Number: 9112265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70630              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Kuhn Sarah_Kuhn@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Wheeler  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to an interdisciplinary team of                    
              researchers to identify functional and disfunctional mechanisms in             
              use in designing technologies for the workplace.  The study evolves            
              from the investigators' prior work in the Shop Floor Programming               
              Project (SFPP) at the University of Lowell.  The SFPP's goal was               
              to create machinist-friendly software, to overcome rigid divisions             
              of labor that assign programming functions to engineers and                    
              executing functions to machinists.  Computer scientists and                    
              engineers have found it difficult to work with machinists so as to             
              enable them to retain or augment a decision making role in using               
              graphics-based software.  These difficulties mean that innovation              
              and flexibility are lost in the workplace.  This project proceeds              
              by contrasting skill-based with heirarchical or Taylorist                      
              principles, in the observation of the interactions of machinists               
              and computer scientists and manufacturing engineers in the SFPP.               
              The study will record meetings and working sessions on videotape               
              for transcription and conduct group sessions for analysis of the               
              tapes; examine documents, artifacts, and working journals from SFPP            
              participants; and revise the theoretical framework based on                    
              findings.  The software generated by the SFPP can itself be                    
              analyzed for what it reveals about assumptions and values.  Results            
              will include hands-on development and implementation of skill-based            
              technological systems, publications in periodicals that reach                  
              professional, managerial, and worker communities, speaking                     
              engagements, exchanges among people working on these issues in the             
              U.S. and abroad, and planning for curriculum development in                    
              undergraduate science and engineering.                                         
                                                                                             
              The topic of this proposal is of highest priority for Ethics and               
              Values Studies.  The qualifications and track record of these                  
              investigators are excellent.  The project provides an important                
              test for theories and methodologies to study innovation in the                 
              workplace.  Results will be useful for a wide range of individuals             
              and groups.  The proposal is recommended for support.
