Title       : New Computational and Experimental Methods for the Structural Characterization
               of Homogeneous Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1993  
File        : a9112988

Award Number: 9112988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark R. Landis landis@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With funding from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                              
              Organometallic Chemistry program, Professor Clark Landis of the                
              University of Wisconsin, Madison will undertake the development                
              of new computational and experimental tools for elucidation of                 
              solution structures of organometallic molecules.  Landis will                  
              develop methods for fitting experimental Nuclear Overhauser                    
              Effect timecourses in NMR spectra of organometallic molecules                  
              with timecourses that are calculated based on a population of                  
              possible conformers.  Ensembles of possible conformers will be                 
              generated using force field minimization methods combined with                 
              systematic or Monte Carlo searching techniques.  Solvent                       
              mixtures of high viscosity will be used to partially eliminate                 
              the loss of NOE due to rapid spin relaxation that normally                     
              results from the rapid rotation of small molecules.  Secondly,                 
              a new empirical force field method (SHAPES) that is                            
              specifically designed for describing complex geometries of                     
              transition metal containing compounds will be developed.  Both                 
              techniques will be applied to the determination of structures                  
              of homogeneous asymmetric hydrogenation and alpha-olefin                       
              catalysts.  The ultimate aim of the research is the                            
              determination of the reasons behind the high stereoselectivity                 
              of these catalysts and the prediction of new and more highly                   
              stereoselective catalysts for these and other types of                         
              reactions.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              New methods for the determination of structures of transition                  
              metal organometallic molecules in solution will be studied.                    
              Complex molecules in solutions are constantly twisting and                     
              turning, with consequent changes in overall shape.  One of the                 
              methods to be developed to study molecular shapes in solution                  
              will utilize a variation of nuclear magnetic resonance                         
              spectroscopy (Nuclear Overhauser Effect).  The existence of                    
              various conformational isomers (molecules with different                       
              twists) of the dissolved organometallic compounds will be                      
              considered in the interpretation of the spectral data so as to                 
              provide structural information for all participating isomers.                  
              Only an average structure can be deduced using existing                        
              methods.  The second method to be developed will allow for the                 
              determination of structures using molecular mechanics methods                  
              that are specifically tailored to include parameters for                       
              transition metals.  Such techniques are well developed for                     
              small organic molecules and proteins but have only begun to be                 
              applied to the computation of structures of organometallic                     
              molecules.  The ultimate objective of the work is to be able to                
              understand the origins of stereoselectivity in reactions                       
              catalyzed by organometallic compounds.  Such reactions are very                
              important in the chemical industry with applications to the                    
              manufacture of commodity, fine and specialty chemicals.  An                    
              understanding of catalytic stereoselectivity potentially                       
              influences issues such as energy and raw materials utilization.
