Title       : The Determinants of Economic Growth in the Short and Long Terms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1992       
File        : a9112974

Award Number: 9112974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Fischer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The eighties were the decade in which macroeconomists returned to              
              growth theory and turned to development.  The new growth theory                
              deals explicitly with development, seeking to account for the                  
              apparent non-convergence of per capita income levels between                   
              developing and industrialized countries.  A hallmark of much of                
              the new literature is the demonstration that distortions and                   
              policy interventions that can be shown to affect the level of                  
              income in conventional models, can affect the steady state growth              
              rate in the new models.  The theory also emphasized the roles of               
              technology, international trade, human capital, economies of                   
              scale, and the possible need for a co-ordinated big investment                 
              push to break out of a low income equilibrium.  The empirical                  
              work associated with the new growth theory consists largely of                 
              cross-country regressions.  But there has been remarkably little               
              focus on the long-term influence of macroeconomic policies on                  
              growth.  The contribution of this project comes from pulling the               
              different strands of the theoretical and empirical literatures                 
              together to achieve as comprehensive an understanding of the                   
              development process as possible, and within that framework, to                 
              focus on the policy choices that are open to governments.  The                 
              project will also focus on the influence of macroeconomic                      
              policies on developing countries growth rates.                                 
                                                                                             
              More specifically, this program on growth and development:                     
              (1)  isolates the contributions of physical and human capital                  
              investments to growth in different countries, and attempting to                
              explain the determinants of physical investment;                               
              (2)  identifies the policy choices that governments can make to                
              influence the accumulation of factors and the efficiency of their              
              use;                                                                           
              (3)  identifies and explains differences in total factor                       
              productivity growth among countries; and                                       
              (4)  focuses on the technologies for the accumulation of human                 
              capital, and the question of the type of educational policy that               
              is most conducive to economic growth.
