Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Variational Problems from Nonlinear Elasticity in
               Several Space Dimensions"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9112884

Award Number: 9112884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Bauman bauman@purdue.math.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigator will examine                   
              several problems involving nonlinear elliptic systems of partial               
              differential equations in two and three space dimensions.  The                 
              specific systems to be considered come from the theory of                      
              nonlinear elasticity, and the principal investigator will study                
              the properties of solutions that are the energy minimizers of the              
              associated variational problems.  Her primary goal is to                       
              determine various regularity properties of solutions and to                    
              examine their qualitative behavior.  The main tools to be used                 
              are previous results of the principal investigator concerning                  
              maximum principles and a'priori estimates.                                     
                   The solutions of many problems that describe physical                     
              reality are what mathematicians call "variational" solutions,                  
              that is, the correct physical solution is the mathematical                     
              solution of a variational problem.   In ordinary language, a                   
              variational solution is one that maximizes or minimizes a                      
              fundamental quantity like the total energy of a system.  For                   
              example, the bubbles in your glass of beer are spherical, because              
              the spherical shape minimizes the surface energy.  In this                     
              project the principal investigator will study various                          
              mathematical properties of solutions of variational problems that              
              model two- and three-dimensional nonlinear elastic phenomena.
