Title       : Workshops on Intelligent Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1991    
File        : a9112828

Award Number: 9112828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Brodie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Verizon Laboratories, Inc.
	      
	      Waltham, MA  02154    /   -

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6855,
Abstract    :
              Millions of disjoint information / computing resources must be                 
              able to be used cooperatively, efficiently, and transparently.                 
              Without integration and increased "intelligence", the dramatic                 
              benefits and massive investments in currently disjoint computing               
              resources may be lost.  The required technical advances depend on              
              technology integration rather than on any one technology.  Such                
              integration requires a shared vision and an identification of the              
              research, development, and application problems and                            
              opportunities.  The workshop addresses core technologies to                    
              support advanced features of next generation information systems,              
              which we label intelligent and cooperative information systems.                
              Core technologies include information/data/knowledge/object                    
              management, operating systems, artificial intelligence,                        
              distributed computing, and interoperability. Systems development               
              and cooperative, distributed work are being addressed in separate              
              but related workshops.  The workshop addresses this challenge                  
              through the collective insight and collaboration of academic and               
              industrial researchers in the key technologies.  Technical                     
              objectives are to: (i) define the vision, (ii) identify the key                
              technologies and integration alternatives; (iii) characterize the              
              research and development status, (iv) outline technical                        
              challenges, and (v) investigate specific issues across disjoint                
              technologies.  Technical results and recommendations will be                   
              widely disseminated to the research and development communities.               
              The unique aspects of this workshop are the focus on technology                
              integration and international cooperation.
