Title       : Dissertation Research: Cassowary Foraging Ecology and Fruit Choice, and
               Consequent Evolutionary Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1991  
File        : a9112535

Award Number: 9112535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra W. Mack  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                     Fruits have evolved as a means for plants to disperse                   
              their seeds.  The progeny of a zoochorous plant that is                        
              unsuccessful in attracting animal dispersers will likely have                  
              lower survival than a plant of the same species that does attract              
              dispersing agents.  Tightly coevolved frugivore-plant systems are              
              relatively rare, but a bird-plant interaction in Papua New Guinea              
              offers special opportunities for such a study.                                 
                     The dwarf cassowary (Casuarius bennettii) is frugivorous                
              and may be the sole disperser of many large-seeded plant species               
              in New Guinea.  One hundred twenty 50 x 10 m transects are to be               
              monitored monthly for the purpose of quantifying crop parameters,              
              fruit characteristics, and phenological patterns.  Scats are to                
              be analyzed to compare cassowary diet with fruit availability on               
              the transects.  An effort will be made to determine the most                   
              important factors determining cassowary fruit choice.  Using                   
              manipulations (such as exclosures), fruit traps, and                           
              observations, it will be possible to ascertain whether these                   
              large birds are the sole consumers or sole dispersers of their                 
              primary food plants.  Radio-tracking is to be utilized in order                
              to learn about ranging patterns, habitat use, and specific                     
              foraging movements.  Finally, this information is to be used in                
              conjunction with floral comparisons to estimate the importance of              
              cassowaries to the evolution and maintenance of New Guinea's                   
              flora.
