Title       : REG: Mini-Supercomputer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1991      
File        : a9112216

Award Number: 9112216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jerome Sackman                          
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60645              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Moran b-moran@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wing K. Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Rudnicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Belytschko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon M. Keer  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A graphical mini supercomputer will be purchased.  This computer               
              has vector and parallel processing capabilities which are the focus            
              of two of our research projects.  Furthermore, vector and parallel             
              processing capabilities will make feasible the large scale                     
              scientific computations which are an essential feature of all of               
              the projects described herein.  The 2 CPU system configuration                 
              offers multi-processing features and will permit single users to               
              achieve speeds up to a sizeable fraction of the speed of a CRAY-               
              XMP.  Multi-user capabilities ensure ready access to the system.               
              The equipment will be dedicated to support research in                         
              computational mechanics and will be used in beginning and ongoing              
              research projects including:                                                   
                                                                                             
                   I) Adaptive ALE Finite Elements for Material Forming                      
                      Simulations (Liu, Belytschko)                                          
                  II) High Temperature Heterogeneous Materials (Keer, Moran)                 
                 III) Adaptive Mode Decomposition Methods (Belytschko)                       
                  IV) Accurate Three-Dimensional Calculations for Advancing Slip             
                      Zones in the Earth's Crust (Rudnicki, Keer)                            
                   V) A Dynamical Systems Approach to Observing and Predicting               
                      Seismicity (Rudnicki).                                                 
                                                                                             
              These diverse research projects have a common feature in that they             
              each involve extensive amounts of large scale scientific computing,            
              development of efficient and accurate software for the engineering             
              applications and the training of students in all facts of                      
              scientific computing.  This equipment will complement our Cray                 
              usage at the national supercomputer centers for intermediate                   
              development phases and those computations which require extensive              
              visualization.
