Title       : Environmental Ethics, Uncertainty, and Preservation Policy: The Case of the
               Florida Scrub
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9112661

Award Number: 9112661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin Shrader-Frechette Kristin.Shrader-Frechette.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earl D. McCoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9145,
Abstract    :
              This research enables a biologist and a philosopher to examine                 
              two ethical issues related to science.  On the abstract level,                 
              they will consider what ethical principles are relevant to                     
              ecologists' interpretations of uncertain scientific results that               
              might have consequences for environmental policy.  Concretely,                 
              they will consider how ecologists should apply these principles                
              to a current problem in policy, preservation of the unique and                 
              rare Florida scrub habitat.  The investigators begin having                    
              completed an analysis of normative assumptions involved in                     
              ecological concepts and conclusions.  In this project, they will               
              consider how conflicts between ethical principles can be                       
              resolved, by developing second-order principles and examining                  
              alternative, plausible consequences from their use.  They will                 
              test their results from this procedure by examining the case of                
              the preservation of the Florida scrub habitat.  Because the case               
              is environmentally significant but biologically uncertain, the                 
              ethical constraints on how to interpret research relevant to its               
              preservation are likely to be applicable in many situations of                 
              environmental ethics and public policy.  The research has three                
              objectives:  to examine the ethical obligations of ecologists in               
              interpreting and disseminating their results; to identify the                  
              normative assumptions in alternative positions on how ecologists               
              ought to interpret their results in problematic cases; and to                  
              assess the consequences, in a specific case, of taking particular              
              stands on interpretation and dissemination.  The results should                
              illuminate public and professional debates about ethical                       
              standards for science and scientific obligations to the public.
