Title       : Movement in Depth and Velocity: Cortical Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1993    
File        : a9112596

Award Number: 9112596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Emerson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rochester Sch Med
	      30 Administration Building
	      Rochester, NY  14627    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One feature of visual systems that is very important is                        
              detection of image motion.  Such motion may occur across the                   
              visual field, or have a component toward or away from the                      
              observer, called "motion in depth."  To understand how the visual              
              system handles motion it is important to learn how nerve cells in              
              the complex network of the visual cortex respond physiologically               
              to moving stimuli, including selectivity to particular directions              
              or velocities of motion.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project combines a mathematical modelling approach with                   
              physiological recording of single cortical neurons.  The intent                
              is to obtain detailed functional information about connectivity                
              in the visual pathway that cannot be obtained through other                    
              methods such as anatomical labelling or tissue culture.  Visual                
              stimuli will be mainly those of a moving bar array which will be               
              modulated in space and time, using the principles of "white                    
              noise" to produce a randomized stimulus sequence.  One part of                 
              the study will test how velocity sensitivity may be modeled in                 
              cortical cells, and how it may suggest connectivity and cellular               
              mechanisms for that selectivity.  The other part will test                     
              selectivity for movement sensitivity in three dimensions,                      
              analyzing monocular and binocular responses to the stimulus                    
              components.  This powerful approach should give results that will              
              have an impact not only on visual neuroscience, but also on                    
              computer vision, artificial intelligence, and neural networks.
