Title       : Biochemical Adaptations in the Ecological Interface of Insects with Pro-oxidant
               Containing plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1991       
File        : a9112892

Award Number: 9112892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sami Ahmad   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Pardini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   Oxygen is necessary for life on earth because it drives                   
              crucial aerobic life processes.  Ostensibly, oxygen also imposes               
              universal toxicity as its reactions in living cells generate                   
              hydrogen peroxide and highly reactive free radicals of oxygen.                 
              These toxic by-products of oxygen metabolism are responsible for               
              many deleterious processes such as peroxidation of essential                   
              lipids, alterations in genes, impaired protein synthesis and                   
              enzyme inactivation, aging and decrease in energy productions.                 
              Mammalian toxicologists have shown that several antioxidant                    
              enzymes are crucial for cell viability and organismal health,                  
              because they efficiently remove toxic oxygen products.                         
                   Herbivorous insects constitute about half of the three-                   
              quarters of a million described species, and they are subject to               
              both endogenous and exogenous sources of oxygen toxicity.  The                 
              sources for exogenous oxygen toxicity are the pro-oxidant plant-               
              defensive compounds called allelochemicals.  A unique pattern of               
              antioxidant enzymes has been discovered in recent years in                     
              insects.  The proposed studies are designed to elucidate the role              
              of these enzymes in protecting insects against oxygen toxicity                 
              derived from pro-oxidant allelochemicals.  The long-term goal of               
              this research is to gain the necessary basic information on the                
              interaction of insects with plants, such that environmentally                  
              compatible insect pest control techniques can be developed.
