Title       : Structural Studies of Thiamin Dependent Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1992     
File        : a9112795

Award Number: 9112795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Thiamin diphosphate (TDP, the vitamin B1 coenzyme) is one of                   
              the most important coenzymes in carbohydrate metabolism                        
              catalyzing e.g. the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to                   
              acetylCoA in the reaction catalyzed by the pyruvate                            
              dehydrogenase multienzyme complex, enabling the product of                     
              glycolysis to enter the citric acid cycle.  High resolution                    
              structural of such TDP-dependent pyruvate decarboxylating                      
              enzymes are being conducted by a variety of techniques.  The                   
              principal target has been brewers'yeast pyruvate decarboxylase                 
              (PDC, E.C. 4 1.1.1) recently purified as fully active alpha4                   
              and beta4 homotetramers in addition to the alpha2beta2                         
              heteroteramer reporter earlier.  In a most important and                       
              exciting recent development the alpha 4 structure was                          
              crystallized in the laboratory already providing novel                         
              information, and pointing to the likely success of resolution                  
              to at least 2.4 A. PDC is the most widely studied TDP-dependent                
              eznyme and is therefore the best one on which to undertake the                 
              detailed structural studies proposed below.  In addition to the                
              x-ray developments major progress has been made in the                         
              spectroscopic characterization of enzyme-bound intermediates.                  
              It is proposed to extend these studies along the following                     
              lines of inquiry: 1.  structural work on PDC by x-ray                          
              crystallographic methods (this part of the research is a                       
              collaborative effort with SAX, Fuery and coworkers at the VA                   
              Hospital Biocrystallography Lab/Univ. of Pittsburgh)n to                       
              determine: a. the structure of the "TDP fold", identify the                    
              putative beta-turn-alpha-turn-beta structure at the TDP binding                
              site; b. the basis of interaction between the TDP and Mg2+ with                
              PDC; c./ the conformation of bound TDP, and of putative                        
              covalent intermediates; d. the nature of protein-protein                       
              interactions in PDC, i.e. among subunits in the absence and                    
              presence of the allosteric regulator pyruvamide; 2. mechanistic                
              work of PDC, especially to elucidate the nonoxidative and                      
              oxidative chemistry of the enzyme-bound enamine; 3.                            
              immunochemical structural studies on PDC to determine                          
              immunochemical differences, if any, among isoforms; and on                     
              pyruvate dehydrogenase to probe its structure with the                         
              monoclones already at hand; 4. structural work on PDC and its                  
              TDP fold by NMR methods to determine the microenvironmental                    
              factors in catalysis.  A collaboration has been initiated with                 
              S. Hohmann, who has cloned PDC in a variety of forms, and has                  
              and will supply the yeast containing the site-directed mutants,                
              as well as the clones to address both structural and                           
              mechanistic questions.
