Title       : Separations of Macromolecules of Environmental Interest by Flow Field-Flow
               Fractionation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9112917

Award Number: 9112917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry N. Blount, III                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58609              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha M. Wells mjmwells@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              This Career Advancement Award will allow Dr. Wells to acquire                  
              new skills in the analytical separations area of field flow                    
              fractionation.  Field flow fractionation is capable of                         
              resolving and characterizing a broad range of macromolecular,                  
              colloidal, and particulate materials.  This project focuses on                 
              the separation of large molecules of environmental importance                  
              by these methods.  Field flow fractionation will be used to                    
              determine the molecular weight and polydispersity of dissolved                 
              organic macromolecules and will be useful in studies of the                    
              interactions between fractionated macromolecules and                           
              anthropogenic environmental contaminants.  This is of                          
              substantial environmental significance.  The objectives of this                
              activity are to establish greater competence in the theory and                 
              application of field flow fractionation.  This technique will                  
              be used in experiments aimed at understanding the chemistry of                 
              naturally-occurring macromolecules such as humic and fulvic                    
              acids and their constituents.  Determinations of molecular                     
              weight and polydispersity, and semi-preparative recovery of                    
              these macromolecules will be emphasized.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              This Career Advancement Award will support activities that will                
              expand Dr. Wells' research career potential.  The award will                   
              provide for the acquisiton of new skills in areas that will                    
              enrich her research activities.  This activity will complement                 
              her previous professional activities in government and                         
              industry.
