Title       : Archaeological Research at the Formative Mayan Site of K'axob, Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9112310

Award Number: 9112310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. McAnany tricia@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Patricia McAnany                 
              will conduct one season of fieldwork at the archaeological site                
              of K'axob and analyze the materials collected.  The site, located              
              on a low rise in the lowland swamp and riverine country of                     
              northern Belize, covers about 84 hectares and includes                         
              approximately 90 structures with detectable surface elevation.                 
              The majority of these are low platforms.  Prior excavation has                 
              indicated that this Mayan site includes stratified Formative                   
              Period strata and therefore it documents the early phase of the                
              rise of Mayan civilization.  In 1990, Dr. McAnany conducted test               
              excavations at a large mound - Structure 18 - and recovered a                  
              sequence of human burials which cover most of the Formative and                
              succeeding Classic periods.  She will continue this work and                   
              expose a large horizontal area in this portion of the site.                    
              Excavation will also be conducted at other structures within this              
              complex as well as at other plaza groups.  While all classes of                
              recovered remains will be studied, analysis will focus in three                
              specific areas: 1. Domestic architecture will be analyzed to                   
              document chronological changes in the use of space within one                  
              location and to investigate differences in architectural                       
              elaboration among locations. 2. Burial practices.  Since the way               
              individuals are interred can yield information on social                       
              organization, and how this changes over time attention will be                 
              focussed on the predicted 170+ remains.  3. Flora and molluscs.                
              These materials provide a basis for environmental reconstruction               
              and through their analysis it should be possible to trace                      
              changing land use and agricultural practices.                                  
                                                                                             
              Prior to European arrival, the Maya peoples built a civilization               
              in the inhospitable lowland jungles of Middle America.  During                 
              its height in the Classic Period, cities centered around large                 
              temples and a priestly elite, were established and considerable                
              archaeological research has provided a good picture of this                    
              interval.  However, much less is known about the preceeding                    
              periods which set the groundwork for this achievement and Dr.                  
              McAnany's research should help to remedy this situation.  It                   
              focusses on the development of the social inequality which is                  
              manifest during the Classic Period and which, Dr. McAnany                      
              believes  provided a driving force for change.  By studying                    
              variation in architecture, land use and burial practices she                   
              hopes to study this process in detail.                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to many archaeologists.  It will increase our                 
              understanding of the emergence of Mayan civilization and provide               
              insight into how complex societies arise.
