Title       : Collaborative Research: In Experimental Studies of Auction Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9112771

Award Number: 9112771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23385              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Levin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              There are three parts in this project.  The first part deals with              
              learning processes in common value (mineral rights) auctions.                  
              Inexperienced bidders in these auctions suffer from the winner's               
              curse, earning negative profits and bidding above the expected                 
              value conditional on winning the item.  Experience bidders adjust              
              to the adverse selection forces, eventually earning positive                   
              profits.  The question is exactly what it is that subjects are                 
              learning.  Are they simply learning to bid less for any given                  
              environment, a reaction to losing money as a consequence of                    
              winning, or learning to understand the adverse selection forces,               
              which would indicate some ability to generalize across                         
              environments.  The research has practical implications for                     
              understanding bidding behavior in mineral rights auctions and                  
              coincides with recent theoretical interest in learning processes               
              in economics as well.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The second part studies private value double auctions.  Recent                 
              developments in theoretical analyses of double auction mechanisms              
              have concentrated on single shot auctions in which traders'                    
              valuations are drawn randomly from distributions whose structure               
              is common knowledge, and in which traders have inelastic demands               
              or supplies for a single unit of consumption at a reservation                  
              price that is privately known.  The motivation for detailed game               
              theoretical studies of particular trading rules is to elaborate                
              precisely how trading rules and each trader's strategic behavior               
              using his private information combine to determine terms of trade              
              that reflect substantially all the disbursed information.  In                  
              this project, the experimental investigation of these trading                  
              rules is designed to determine the behavioral robustness of these              
              predictions.  These studies are important since double auctions                
              are a fundamental trading environment for market economies.                    
                                                                                             
              The last part deals with experimental and field studies of                     
              auctions with incentive contracts.  Incentive contracts make the               
              payment depend both on the bid and the realized cost.  If                      
              realized cost exceeds the firm's bid, the firm is responsible for              
              some farction of the cost overrun; if the firm succeeds in                     
              keeping its cost below its bid, it is reqarded by being allowed                
              to keep part of the cost underrun.  Incentive contracts are of                 
              considerable potential practical importance in Department of                   
              Defense weapons acquisition and are commonly employed in the                   
              construction industry as an alternative to fixed price bid                     
              contracts.  Further, Nash equilibrium bidding theory makes                     
              several clear and novel predictions for incentive contracts that               
              have yet to be subject to systematic study.
