Title       : Light Scattering, Rheo-Optical, and Rheological Studies on Concentrated Polymer
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9112726

Award Number: 9112726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy C. Berry gcberry@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study comprises four distinct areas of investigation:  (1)                
              Static and dynamic light scattering on aligned nematic solutions of            
              a rodlike polymer, and rheological and rheo-optical studies on                 
              aligned and unaligned nematic solutions of the same solutions; (2)             
              Similar studies on the nematic phase of a thermotropic copolymer,              
              as a function of temperature; (3) Static and dynamic light                     
              scattering, and rheological studies on moderately concentrated                 
              solutions of polystyrene in decalin; and (4) Static and dynamic                
              light scattering on dilute solutions of polymers prone to                      
              intermolecular association.  In the first study, the Leslie                    
              viscosities, the Frank curvature elasticities, and the order                   
              parameter will be determined over a range of chain length and                  
              polymer concentration.  These parameters will also be used in the              
              analysis of nonlinear rheological behavior in fast flow behavior.              
              In the second, a preliminary study will be undertaken to evaluate              
              the feasibility of the scattering studies to determine certain                 
              Leslie viscosities and Frank elasticities on a solvent-free aligned            
              nematic polymer.  In the third, the thermodynamics and chain                   
              dynamics will be studied over a range of conditions, from the Flory            
              Theta state to "good solvent" conditions.  The appearance of                   
              relaxation in the dynamic scattering due to chain entanglements                
              will be of special interest.  Finally, in the fourth, the                      
              possibility that certain thermochromic effects in dilute solution              
              are linked to (metastable) intermolecular association will be                  
              investigated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research aims to clarify the solution behavior of various                 
              types of important polymers, especially those able to form liquid              
              crystals.
