Title       : RUI: The Partition of Unstable Polytopes of Polynomials and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1992   
File        : a9112039

Award Number: 9112039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. R. Pujara rpujara@delta.cs.wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The thrust of the project is to develop an algorithm to                        
              partition an unstable standard polytope of polynomials                         
              into stable and unstable regions.  This will be an                             
              extension of the Principal Investigator's work for the                         
              partition of unstable polygons of polynomials (convex                          
              hull of finitely many coplanar polynomials).  Since the                        
              strong theoretical foundation for the resolution of this                       
              problem has already been laid in the Principal                                 
              Investigator's earlier work, a reasonable solution of the                      
              partition problem for polytopes looks quite promising.                         
              It is also proposed that the partition approach has                            
              several useful practical applications.  For example, this                      
              approach could be utilized to find a controller that                           
              would stabilize a given uncertain plant with affine                            
              coefficients in the parameters over a certain compact                          
              domain of its uncertainty.  The concept of Youla's                             
              parameterization of all stabilizing controllers for a                          
              nominal plant is utilized to achieve this end.  Another                        
              potential application is to obtain maximal robustness                          
              bounds for the parameters involved in the characteristic                       
              polynomial of a control system when the coefficients                           
              are affinely dependent on the parameter vector.  A                             
              possible approach for this is to partition the unstable                        
              polytope generated by the characteristic polynomials                           
              and identify the maximal domain of parameter vector                            
              by identifying the values of the parameter vector                              
              corresponding to the boundary of the partition.
