Title       : Control of Scholarly Communication in the Network Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1992 
File        : a9112998

Award Number: 9112998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis Branscomb lewis_branscomb@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to promote understanding and consensus on             
              how rights in primary scholarly communication should be managed in             
              the emerging digital network environment.  The project is                      
              occasioned by the rapid growth of computer networking and new forms            
              of scholarly communication and publishing.  The project begins with            
              further development of a background paper for understanding control            
              issues at different stages of the dissemination process.  The                  
              investigators have secured the cooperation of the Coalition for                
              Networked Information, to assist with computer conferences and a               
              workshop in which scientists, engineers, and other scholars who use            
              computer networks will respond to the background document.  This               
              process will also provide an occasion for identifying authors or               
              sources for relevant papers examining issues along the continuum               
              of scholarly communication, from research collaboration to site                
              licensing.  The goal is to provide a coherent and accurate overview            
              of the issues and institutions involved in computer networking and             
              publication.  Project results are expected to include journal                  
              articles, a monograph, and ongoing discussions and communications              
              involving relevant professional associations and academic and                  
              commercial institutions.  The investigators also expect to prepare             
              additional proposals for further research on these issues, and for             
              the development of policy models for the consideration of                      
              societies, funding agencies, and publishers.                                   
                                                                                             
              The topic of this proposal is of highest priority for Ethics and               
              Values Studies.  The qualifications and track record of these                  
              investigators are excellent.  The project provides an important                
              effort to identify and classify issues of rights in scholarly                  
              communication associated with new developments in networked                    
              environments.  Results will be useful for a wide range of                      
              individuals and groups.  The revised budget is modest.  The                    
              proposal is recommended for support.
