Title       : Dissertation Research: The Geological History of Polyploidy in Woody Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1991  
File        : a9112358

Award Number: 9112358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4801               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Masterson  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Polyploidy, the condition in an organism of having more than              
              two complete sets of chromosomes, is a common and important                    
              evolutionary phenomenon in flowering plants (angiosperms), but the             
              historical development of polyploidy is poorly understood.  Many               
              questions about the base chromosome number of angiosperms                      
              (important for establishing the extent of polyploidy) and the                  
              origin of polyploidy could be addressed if fossil plants could be              
              used to determine its history.  One of the common physical effects             
              of polyploidy is a general increase in cell volume and in the size             
              of guard cells, the leaf epidermal cells that control the opening              
              and closing of the gas exchange pores or stomates of plants.  At               
              least two previous studies have used guard cell measurements to                
              estimate ploidy levels in fossil taxa of Sequoia and Metasequoia.              
                   The paleobotanist Dr. Peter Crane of the Field Museum and                 
              University of Chicago will supervise graduate student Jane                     
              Masterson in an analysis of the history of polyploidy in four woody            
              angiosperm families: Platanaceae (sycamores), Magnoliaceae,                    
              Juglandaceae (walnuts), and Lauraceae (laurels).  These groups were            
              chosen because all have (1) a long record of fossil remains; (2)               
              well preserved leaf cuticle samples with measurable guard cells at             
              a variety of growth stages; (3) multiple ploidy levels presently               
              known for living species; and (4) a positive correlation between               
              cell size and ploidy level based on preliminary study, including               
              measurement of DNA content in chromosomes using                                
              microspectrophotometry.  The work will establish the antiquity of              
              polyploidy in several angiosperm families and circumscribe the                 
              paleoecological conditions that may have promoted polyploidy.  It              
              will contribute empirical data to the debate surrounding the base              
              chromosome number of flowering plants, and provide the first test              
              in plants of the hypothesized inverse relation between evolutionary            
              diversification (numbers of species in a lineage) and genome size              
              (numbers of chromosomes and DNA amounts).
