Title       : Acquisition of a Low Energy Electron Microscope (LEEM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9112021

Award Number: 9112021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignatius S. Tsong ig.tsong@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Dow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. G. Hembree  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. E. Packard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will provide a commercial Low Energy Electron                     
              Microscope (LEEM) to Arizona State University.   It will be one of             
              two such instruments located at Universities in the United States.             
              The instrument will be located in the Physics building, next to the            
              NSF supported Center for High Resolution Electron Microscopy, and              
              will complement the scanning tunneling microscopes as well as the              
              electron microscopes.  Several features distinguish the LEEM from              
              other microscopes:  (a) it uses very low energy illuminating beam,             
              about 10 eV; (b) the low beam energies are usually below the                   
              threshold of electron stimulated desorption and do practically no              
              damage to the surface; (c) it uses a static rather than a scanning             
              beam, and thus operates in a parallel detection mode which allows              
              real-time imaging of surface kinetic processes at video rates with             
              a lateral resolution of 5 nm.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The surface science research group in the Department of Physics and            
              Astronomy has proposed several experiments aimed at studying the               
              dynamics of surface processes in real time, such as surface                    
              reconstructions and phase transitions induced by temperature change            
              and/or adsorbate coverage, surface compound formation and epitaxial            
              growth, step motions induced by externally applied stress, and                 
              influence of defect structure and defect density on nucleation and             
              growth of thin films.  Theoretical models and simulations of their             
              observations in the LEEM will complement the experimental effort in            
              order to achieve a full understanding of the surface processes.
