Title       : Controlling Access to Data: An Empirical Study of Access Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9112290

Award Number: 9112290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherry I. Brandt-Rauf   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Hilgartner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, issues of access to scientific data have sparked              
              intense controversy and public policy debate.  Little has been                 
              written, however, on how scientists decide who gets access to which            
              data and under what terms and conditions.  Little has been written             
              about how laws, regulations and policies shape and are shaped by               
              data access practices.  This project provides empirical study and              
              analysis of this process.  Drawing on insights and procedures from             
              ethnographic studies of scientific laboratories, this project will             
              examine actual practices of scientists regarding access to data.               
              Using interviewing methods, the principal investigators will                   
              examine access practices in one scientific specialty:  research on             
              molecular structures (e.g., x-ray crystallography and NMR).  They              
              will interview four categories of respondents:  scientists who have            
              been involved in public debate about access to data, scientists who            
              are "gatekeepers," such as journal editors; other scientists doing             
              molecular structures research; and attorneys who have been involved            
              in data access negotiations.  The interviews will examine how                  
              scientists and others construct and erase boundaries to access, the            
              relationship between circumstances and methods of control, and the             
              terms in which scientists and lawyers frame arguments concerning               
              data access and justify their practices and decisions.  Comparisons            
              will be made with results from a study of practices in molecular               
              genetics.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This proposal comes from a uniquely qualified pair of investigators            
              who have found appropriate advisors with which to undertake the                
              project.  The topic is a central one in Ethics and Values Studies.             
              Institutional auspices are very good.  The framework and approach              
              to the subject is suitable, and the research plan good.  The                   
              project is likely to improve our understanding of how laws and                 
              other social sanctions affect data sharing and acknowledgement.                
              I recommend support.
