Title       : A More Complete View of Incomplete Contracts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9112076

Award Number: 9112076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75153              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin E. Hermalin hermalin@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A central feature of contracts is that they are necessarily                    
              incomplete.  It is a fact of life that contracts between parties               
              often require renegotiation and even legal intervention for                    
              definition, clarification, execution, and enforcement.  Yet, there             
              has been limited attention in the literature to either the process             
              of renegotiation or the effects of legal frameworks on contracting             
              and the anticipation of contracting opportunities.                             
                                                                                             
              Through formal modelling, Drs. Hermalin and Katz seek to assess the            
              relative efficiency of renegotiation and judicial interpretation               
              as ways of handling the incompleteness of contracts.  The work                 
              addresses three classes of contracts--sales contracts, debt or                 
              bankruptcy contracts, and a "best effort" service or franchise                 
              contract.  For each area, these investigators will examine (1) the             
              basic assumptions about the information structure of the parties               
              (including the judge), (2) the nature of the contracts that private            
              parties would reach in a given legal environment, and (3) the                  
              outcomes of handling incompleteness under alternative legal                    
              regimes.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research should produce results that will further our basic               
              understanding of contracting and the role of courts in contract                
              enforcement.  As important, the project ties the developing                    
              economics literature on contracting closer to the empirical                    
              realities of law by focusing on the role of the contract                       
              enforcement and damage rules administered by the courts.  Also, the            
              work adds new sophistication to the law and economics literature               
              on contract damages by closely scrutinizing the information                    
              available to the parties and the conditions before them for                    
              renegotiation.  Finally, this effort--in particular, the emphasis              
              on renegotiation--could very well change our view of why contracts             
              are incomplete and what the courts can and should do to deal with              
              this incompleteness.
