Title       : Dissertation Research: The Relative Importance of Host Genetics, Host Density,
               and the Environment to a Natural Plant-pathogen Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9112156

Award Number: 9112156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Dykhuizen dandyk@life.bio.sunsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   For many years ecologists have identified pathogens as                    
              theoretically important forces influencing basic processes in                  
              natural plant populations.  These processes include, first, the                
              evolution and/or maintenance by natural selection of sexual                    
              reproduction (which provides novel combinations of genes that may              
              enable offspring to  resist local pathogens genetically) and,                  
              second, the evolution of dispersal by offspring (which may help                
              them physically escape local pathogens).  In the first process                 
              the pathogen population responds to host plant genetics, while in              
              the second it responds  to host plant density.  In addition, the               
              pathogen can be expected to respond strongly to its physical and               
              biological environment.  This research will determine for one                  
              plant-pathogen system which of these three factors or their                    
              combinations the pathogen population responds to most strongly.                
              This then sheds light on  the actual role the pathogen population              
              is having in the plant population's biology.  The plant being                  
              studied is the rush, Juncus dichotomous and the pathogen is a                  
              parasitic smut fungus,  Cintractia junci.  These organisms occur               
              together in the Long Island pine barrens.                                      
                    The results of this research directly apply only to                      
              nonagricultural plants and pathogens, but its methodology can be               
              a model for applied problems.  With increasing public concern                  
              about the health and environmental costs of using agricultural                 
              pesticides and given the fact that they are not fully effective,               
              detailed population studies on the interaction of pest organisms               
              with crop plants are needed to suggest safe and effective ways of              
              reducing crop losses.  Population studies involving pathogens and              
              crops and incorporating genetics, density, and variables together              
              could be very useful.                                                          
              **
