Title       : Energization and Disruption of Magnetic Arcades in the Solar Corona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1991   
File        : a9112722

Award Number: 9112722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : June 1,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon A. Linker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zoran Mikic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               Coronal mass ejections (CME's) provide a spectacular                          
              manifestation of solar activity. The plasma and magnetic flux                  
              ejected into the solar wind by CME's subsequently interacts with               
              the Earth's magnetic field to produce geomagnetic disturbances.                
              It is planned to investigate possible initiation mechanisms for                
              CME's.  This will permit examination of the hypothesis that CME's              
              and flares are minefistations of a  single event, an ideal or                  
              resistive instability of the overall magnetic configuration.  The              
              investigation will center around a study of the dynamical                      
              evolution of global coronal field structures (single and multiple              
              arcades, as well as helmet streamer configurations) in response                
              to shearing photospheric motions. The behavior of the corona will              
              be modelled using time dependent magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)                     
              simulations.  The global evolution of the coronal field will be                
              followed self-consistently in spherical geometry over several                  
              solar radii in response to motions applied at the photosphere.                 
              The resulting evolution of the plasma density and velocity will                
              be compared to available CME observations. Semi-implicit methods               
              will be employed to allow for efficient computation of slow                    
              energy build-up in the coronal magnetic fields. Initially, a 2-                
              dimensional (axisymmetrical) description will be used, followed                
              by development of a 3-dimensional simulation and description.
