Title       : A Current Generating System for a Multi-Directonal Wave Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9112078

Award Number: 9112078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Flipse   (Principal Investigator current)
              R. P. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F. C. Michelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Offshore Technology Research Center, a National Science                    
              Foundation Engineering Research Center is a joint venture between              
              Texas A & M University and the University of Texas, will design,               
              build and install a current generating system in its new multi-                
              directional wave basin.  The objective is to provide a more                    
              realistic, scaled, approximation of conditions found in the                    
              offshore environment.  The conclusion of currents in the wave                  
              basin will further the study of deep ocean engineering problems                
              by permitting the controlled and reproducible combination of                   
              waves and currents in the laboratory.                                          
                                                                                             
              The current generator will expand the OTRC laboratory                          
              capabilities to include the physical model study of interactions               
              between waves, currents and offshore structures.  Within the                   
              context of the OTRC research agenda the most affected thrust                   
              areas are in (1) Hydrodynamic Loading and (2) Structural                       
              Integrity of Deep Water Systems.  The expanded experimental                    
              capability to incorporate currents will result in advances in:                 
                   o the study of the kinematics of long-crested and shorted-                
              crested seas in currents,                                                      
                   o the study of hydrodynamic-structural interactions affected              
              by both waves and currents, such as wake formation, shielding,                 
              vortex shedding, and structural vibrations, and                                
                   o the study of the wave and current effects on the drag,                  
              added mass and damping coefficients of vessels, offshore                       
              structures and rigid and complaint members within structures.
