Title       : Valuation and Management of Tropical Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9112324

Award Number: 9112324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony C. Fisher fisher@are.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to bring biological and geological             
              relationships into the structure of an economic model for the                  
              valuation and management of tropical forests.  The economic model              
              is grounded in theory and incorporates recent developments in the              
              modeling of dynamics and decision-making under uncertainty.  The               
              project's application to a specific planning problem will                      
              demonstrate the importance of this multidisciplinary approach to               
              the complex issues surrounding tropical deforestation and resultant            
              global change and loss of genetic diversity.                                   
                                                                                             
              The first part of the project will develop a theoretical model for             
              the management of tropical forests that address some special                   
              constraints and uncertainties associated with their use.                       
              Specifically, uncertainty, irreversibility, and spatial                        
              relationships modify traditional management schemes to reflect the             
              character of tropical management issues.  The inclusion of spatial             
              interactions between plots allows the model to address the                     
              complementary issues of minimum habitat size, reforestation, and               
              externalities.  The second part of the study involves an                       
              application of the model to a land planning case in Thailand.  Data            
              collected to describe the benefit flows from use options and the               
              types of biological interactions across plots will be inserted in              
              a computer algorithm that will solve the nonlinear programming                 
              problem for the Thai data.  The planning model will determine                  
              spatial and intertemporal allocation patterns among a group of land            
              users.
