Title       : Synoptic Studies of Convective Systems, Frontogenesis and Baroclinic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9112727

Award Number: 9112727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56383              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Sanders   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1527,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Sanders proposes to complete two case studys in which                     
              significant weather features are present which have not been                   
              intensively analyzed previously, and a third study in which the                
              prediction skills of two operational Numerical Weather Prediction              
              models are assessed and compared. The region covered in the third              
              study is the western North Atlantic, and the period of concern is              
              the winter of 1988-89, when a significantly enhanced                           
              observational system was deployed at sea as part of project                    
              ERICA. ERICA was mounted after Sanders' prior pioneering research              
              focussed attention on the weather phenomenon he labelled                       
              "explosive marine cyclogenesis". The subject phenomenon of the                 
              first study is an organized but isolated thunderstorm system                   
              which produced many tornadoes and much damaging hail, again cap-               
              tured in an ehanced observational network, this time deployed du-              
              ring the 1985 O-K PRESTORM field project. That of the second                   
              study  is a form of sloping roll circulation that often develops               
              as part of the process of frontal formation. It is associated                  
              with alternating lines of heavy and little rain, and with alter-               
              nating layers of saturated and extremely dry air aloft. Sanders                
              has been a leader in synoptic meteorology for decades. He has                  
              established a record of using methods and theory in the forefront              
              of atmospheric science in the study of those weather systems                   
              which directly affect human safety and property.
