Title       : Modeling Responses to Scientific Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1991   
File        : a9112305

Award Number: 9112305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59459              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Sulloway   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Sulloway is continuing his research on why scientists accept               
              or reject new theories.  Often scientists, in possession of the                
              same relevant facts, nevertheless take diametrically opposed                   
              viewpoints toward theoretical innovations.  The research design of             
              this study, which is multivariate in nature, seeks to assess the               
              role of 80 different background factors in mediating how several               
              thousand scientists have responded to 30 highly diverse                        
              controversies in the history of science.  Under this grant, Dr.                
              Sulloway is using questionnaire data drawn from participants in                
              three recent scientific controversies (cold fusion, continental                
              drift, and sociobiology) to illuminate the central role played by              
              patterns of identification with authority in mediating attitudes               
              toward innovation.  This information provides a direct test of the             
              hypothesis that birth order, the single best predictor of the 80               
              considered in this study, is a powerful mediator of identification             
              with parents, and through parents, with authority.  He is also                 
              investigating the way in which scientists respond to novel claims              
              made on behalf of spurious, difficult-to-detect, or nonexistent                
              phenomena.  By studying reactions to the "discovery" of N-rays and             
              response to the recent claims on behalf of "cold fusion," Dr.                  
              Sulloway is highlighting the role that complex patterns of                     
              subjective influences can play in shaping attitudes toward                     
              scientific innovation.
