Title       : First-Principles Calculation of Ternary Phase Diagrams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1995     
File        : a9114646

Award Number: 9114646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan M. Sanchez jsanchez@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A first-principles electronic theory of alloy phase stability is               
              used to investigate the thermodynamic properties and the                       
              temperature-composition phase diagrams of binary and ternary                   
              systems.  The emphasis of this study is on the development and                 
              testing of computational schemes - based on quantum mechanical                 
              calculations of binding energies, vibrational entropies and                    
              configurational entropies - in order to predict solid state phase              
              stability.  Electronic structure calculations of the total energy              
              of ordered compounds are carried out using the Linear Muffin-Tin               
              Orbital and the Local Density Approximations.  The Liner Muffin-Tin            
              Orbitals total energy calculations are used to obtain multiatom                
              effective chemical interactions, equilibrium lattice constants,                
              bulk moduli, Debye temperatures, Gruneisen Constants and expansion             
              coefficients of configurationally ordered compounds.  These                    
              calculations provide all information necessary for the computation             
              of equilibrium phase diagrams.  Ternary equilibrium and metastable             
              phase diagrams will be calculated for a number of important                    
              alumindes to establish trends which may offer predictive results.              
              %%%                                                                            
              Calculations of accurate alloy phase diagrams have usually been                
              based on experimental input and phenomenological models.  The                  
              resulting phase diagrams were sometimes lacking in predictive                  
              capability.  The research proposed here will calculate phase                   
              diagrams based on first-principles; essentially providing only the             
              properties of the atoms making up the alloy.  The calculation of               
              first-principles phase diagrams is an important step in the design             
              of new materials having desired properties.  The present work will             
              develop techniques to do these calculations for the more difficult             
              case of ternary alloys.
