Title       : Pastoral Systems Past and Present: A Comparative View
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9114320

Award Number: 9114320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Ryan  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Lee Cassanelli, Ms Kathleen Ryan will               
              collect ethnographic data for her doctoral dissertation.  She                  
              will conduct two seasons of field research with Massai                         
              pastoralists in southern Kenya to study herd management                        
              strategies. The Massai depend on cattle for subsistence and                    
              maintain large herds of animals.  Ms Ryan wishes to know what, at              
              a traditional level of subsistence, are the constraints which                  
              such herds impose and what constitute the most successful                      
              management strategies.  During a preliminary field season, she                 
              has obtained permission to work with traditional Massai groups.                
              She plans to examine herd compositions in terms of animal age and              
              sex distribution.  She will also look at culling strategies which              
              are employed, labor requirements for care of animals, how cattle               
              are redistributed and exchanged through bridewealth, inheritance               
              and other practices.  The redistributive effect of cattle raiding              
              will also be studied.  Finally, Ms Ryan will examine Massai                    
              strategies to deal with cattle disease and other disasters.                    
                                                                                             
              While the data collected will be ethnographic, the goals of this               
              research are archaeological in nature.  Cattle were first                      
              domesticated ca. 10,000-12,000 years ago and they formed the                   
              subsistence base for prehistoric societies in many parts of the                
              Old World.  During some time periods in areas such as Ireland,                 
              cattle played a major role in shaping social organization and Ms               
              Ryan believes that one can begin with cattle themselves,                       
              determine the requirements for a successful management strategy,               
              and on this basis gain insight into human social practices.                    
              Since the Maasai rely so heavily on cattle they provide an ideal               
              context to examine relationships of this type.                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data which may be generalizable to many contexts and therefore be              
              of interest to many archaeologists.  It will yield insights into               
              present day African subsistence practices and will assist in the               
              training of a promising young scientist.
