Title       : Dissertation Research: Sedentism, Food Production, and Pottery Origins in the
               Tropics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1991      
File        : a9114356

Award Number: 9114356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10031              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Augusto Oyuela-                 
              Caycedo will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  During               
              previous work near the town of San Jacinto, Columbia, Mr. Oyuela-              
              Caycedo located a series of sites one of which, San Jacinto 1,                 
              contained pottery which radiocarbon dated to ca. 5940 years ago.               
              The sherds were recovered in a secure stratigraphic context,                   
              contained within what appear to be a series of hut floors and are              
              now the oldest known pottery recovered from good stratigraphic                 
              context in the New World.  Mr. Oyuela-Caycedo will return to San               
              Jacinto 1 with a team of workmen.  They will uncover an area of                
              ca. 64-100 square meters and excavate it to the base of the                    
              archaeological deposit.  Materials recovered will permit degree                
              of sedentism to be determined.  Because of excellent preservation              
              of floral and faunal remains, exploited resources will be                      
              identified and their contribution to the diet ascertained.  The                
              use of space at the site will also be reconstructed.                           
              Characterization of soils and grain size distribution will                     
              provide information on the processes of site formation and on the              
              reconstruction of the depositional environment as well as post-                
              depositional alteration. Pottery and lithics will also be                      
              analyzed.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The site of San Jacinto 1 is important for several reasons.                    
              First, the early date of the pottery is of significance for the                
              light it may shed on the sequence of cultural development in the               
              New World.  Given the generally poor preservation of faunal and                
              floral remains, relatively little excavation has taken place in                
              such tropical regions as Columbia.  Because these archaeological               
              materials appear to be in association with house structures, it                
              will be possible to examine the interrelationship among such                   
              variables as the domestication of plants, invention of pottery                 
              and the emergence of a sedentary way of life.  While                           
              archaeologists know that these factors are related, it is unclear              
              how in the development of complex societies these interact and                 
              which come first.  Mr. Oyuela-Caycedo has found other sites from               
              the same time period in the region and the study of San Jacinto 1              
              in this broader context should shed new light on this underlying               
              cultural complex.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  The appearance                
              of a settled way of life marked a major transition in the                      
              development of human culture and work at San Jacinto 1 should                  
              improve our understanding of this process.  It will provide data               
              of interest to a number of archaeologists and will contribute to               
              the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
