Title       : US-Czechoslovakia Research on Effects of Growth Rate on Gonadal Differentiation
               in Common Carp and European Tench
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9114675

Award Number: 9114675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10160              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Shelton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 5930      U.S.-CZECHOSLOVAKIA PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1127,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project between                              
              Dr. William L. Shelton of the University of                                    
              Oklahoma and Dr. Otomar Linhart of the Fisheries                               
              Research Institute, Vodnany, Czechoslovakia, will                              
              determine how gonadal differentiation of common                                
              carp (Cyprinus carpio) and the European tench                                  
              (Tinca tinca) is affected by growth rate,                                      
              controlled by density dependency and temperature.                              
              The basic relationship determined in these                                     
              studies will be applied to protocol optimization                               
              of androgen-induced sex reversal.  Functionality                               
              of the phenotypic sex is emphasized as a                                       
              component of a breeding program to produce all-                                
              female progeny for aquaculture.  U.S. and                                      
              Czechoslovakian scientists will collaborate on                                 
              this research, and conduct the investigation on                                
              carp and tench in their own countries.  They will                              
              stock progeny of each species at various                                       
              densities in different habitats (ponds, tanks,                                 
              net enclosures) during year one, and examine the                               
              time/size-related chronology of gonadal                                        
              differentiation histologically.  In year two,                                  
              they will develop a temperature/size-time                                      
              relationship of gonadal differentiation.  During                               
              the third year, they will integrate the density-                               
              temperature mediated gonadal differentiation with                              
              efficacy testing of functional sex reversal with                               
              methyltestosterone.  This investigation merges                                 
              the dichotomy of a basic question and a pragmatic                              
              problem.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project in aquaculture and ecosystem                                      
              dynamics fulfills the program objective of                                     
              advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                                     
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern                               
              Europe to combine complementary talents and pool                               
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and                               
              competence.
