Title       : Controlling Chaos in Semiconductor and Diode-Pumped Solid State Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9114232

Award Number: 9114232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajarshi Roy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program will study control of the                                
              chaotic dynamics of solid state laser systems that                             
              contain intracavity nonlinear elements.  These laser                           
              systems are rapidly finding important applications in                          
              optical communications and information processing,                             
              materials processing, medicine and laser radar.                                
              Specific goals include novel pulsed operation and                              
              complex periodic waveform generation by                                        
              semiconductor and diode-pumped solid state lasers.                             
              These goals will be achieved through the development                           
              of control techniques that are applicable to chaotic                           
              systems.  Control algorithms that have very recently                           
              been developed by Ott, Grebogi and Yorke will be                               
              implemented on laser systems to obtain specific                                
              complex waveforms that cannot be generated by                                  
              stable systems.  This will require novel electronic and                        
              optical techniques for fast feedback and control of                            
              laser parameters.  We will attempt to control                                  
              multimode laser systems and develop the techniques                             
              for switching between complex periodic waveforms,                              
              such as the antiphase states demonstrated recently in                          
              a diode-pumped solid state laser.  Such studies should                         
              have an impact not only on the development of new                              
              laser systems and optical communications, but on the                           
              control of systems of chemical reactions and                                   
              biological systems as well.  A fundamental                                     
              understanding of the statistical nature of chaotic                             
              dynamics and the influence of quantum noise in                                 
              chaotic lasers will be developed.
