Title       : U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop on Nonlinear Optical Materialsand Devices;
               Orlando, Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9114636

Award Number: 9114636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4292               (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Van Stryland ewvs@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Hagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marion J. Soileau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mansoor Sheik-Bahae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1493,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a follow-up workshop in the U.S. of a previous             
              workshop in Australia on "Nonlinear Optical Materials and Devices"             
              sponsored jointly by the Center for Research in Electro-Optics and             
              Lasers ?CREOL! of the University of Central Florida and the                    
              Optoelectronics Division of the Surveillance Research Laboratory               
              ?SRL! in Salisbury, South Australia.  This award provides funds to             
              rent a suitable venue with conference facilities within the Orlando            
              area for a five-day period in early 1992 as well as to provide                 
              local travel support for CREOL participants.                                   
                                                                                             
              Nonlinear optics and laser science are fundamental to optics-based             
              technologies which will assume increasing importance in the next               
              century.  These technologies, involving optical computing,                     
              information processing, displays, communications, manufacturing                
              industry and medicine, could eventually rival the present day                  
              technologies based on electronics and silicon in these areas.  This            
              workshop will focus on three areas for further collaboration: (1)              
              optical limiting understanding and technology (with collaboration              
              between Drs. E.W. Van Stryland, D.J. Hagan and Mansoor Sheik-Bahae             
              in the U.S. and Drs. J. Hermann and P. Chapple in Australia); (2)              
              multiple quantum well ?MQW! growth and characterization (with                  
              collaboration between Dr. A. Miller at CREOL and Dr. R. T. Hartley             
              of the Australian Defense Science & Technology Organization ?DSTO!             
              who runs two molecular-beam epitaxy ?MBE! machines for growing                 
              HgTe-CdTe MQW superlattices on GaAs and CdZnTe substrates for                  
              infrared detector applications, where DSTO's growth facilities for             
              MQW's complement CREOL's characterization facilities); and (3)                 
              growth of nonlinear crystals and laser host materials (with                    
              collaboration between Dr. Bruce H.T. Chai at CREOL and Drs. Bob                
              Seymore and Peter Picone at DSTO).
