Title       : An InP/InGaAsp Based Thyristor for Optical Amplification and Power Switching
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9114689

Award Number: 9114689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian H. Zhao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We propose a project directed towards exploring an                             
              ultra high power thyristor based on InP                                        
              homojunctions and the related heterostructures.                                
              With higher resistivity and direct band gap InP                                
              homojunctions the thyristor is expected to greatly                             
              out perform those commercial Si thyristors in                                  
              power handling capability and  switching speed.  A                             
              new device based on InP related heterostructures is                            
              proposed which combines both electrical and optical                            
              power switching and lasing action into a single                                
              device.  The lasing action is realized by introducing                          
              a heterostructure laser into the thyristor structure.                          
              This new device could be a basic building block for                            
              a wide range of applications such as power                                     
              integrated circuits, ultra high power switching, and                           
              optical amplification and communications because                               
              the proposed device can be easily scaled up or                                 
              down depending on the structure of the thyristor.                              
              The proposed project will investigate how to best                              
              utilize, in a single device, the band discontinuity                            
              advantage for optical performance (lasers) and to                              
              suppress the disadvantage for electronic                                       
              performance (thyristors) by utilizing the unique                               
              capability being developed by ETDL and some                                    
              industrial partners to grow graded, lattice matched                            
              InGaAsP thin films.  The proposed research will                                
              also contribute to the knowledge base related to                               
              heterointerfaces.
