Title       : High Temperature Fracture of Ceramic Matrix Composites: A Micromechanics
               Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1991    
File        : a9114713

Award Number: 9114713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: HUSEYIN A. SEHITOGLU                    
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne P. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Ceramic matrix composites ar a new class of advanced materials                 
              intended for high temperature engineering applications.  They                  
              exhibit enhanced strength and fracture toughness over monolithic               
              ceramics due to the interaction of a propagating crack with the                
              second phase reinforcing material.  Theories for the mechanisms of             
              toughening in brittle matrix composites, based on crack bridging               
              and a fracture process zone, have been developed over the past few             
              years.  While these mechanisms have been studied in detail for both            
              continuous fiber and whisker reinforced ceramics at room                       
              temperature, their fracture behaviors at elevated temperature are              
              not well characterized.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The first goal of this research is the development of a new                    
              experimental approach which will provide a quantitative measure of             
              fracture processes at high temperature.  The approach involves a               
              simple experimental technique which permits simultaneous                       
              measurement of crack growth resistance curves and direct                       
              observation of microscopic fracture processes during controlled                
              loading over a temperature range of 20-1,7500C.  The second goal is            
              to study the behaviors of three important and well characterized               
              materials, representing a range of properties: SiC whisker                     
              reinforced alumina, Nicalon fiber/LAS glass ceramic, and                       
              carbon/carbon composite.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The primary significance of the research is that it will provide               
              the tools to determine the fundamental mechanisms of fracture and              
              deformation of ceramics at high temperature.  With these tools,                
              materials developers can design ceramic matrix composites with                 
              improved fracture behavior and application designers will be able              
              to predict the reliability of their structural components under                
              high temperature conditions.
