Title       : Conference on International Comparison of Prices and Productivity - Miami, FL
               Fall 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1994     
File        : a9114948

Award Number: 9114948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge Salazar-Carrillo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  International comparisons of prices,  real income,                        
              output and productivity have attracted considerable interest                   
              over the last two decades.  Much of the research in this area                  
              was initiated through the International Comparisons Project                    
              (ICP),  with funds from the World Bank.  Currently,  the                       
              Project is continuing its work under other governmental                        
              auspices,  notably,  the statistical offices of the United                     
              Nations and the European Economic Community. Its output is                     
              being used by a growing number of researchers as well as                       
              decision-makers,  but general understanding of the concepts                    
              and processes involved in producing these international                        
              indicators of economic performance remains modest.                             
                   The present proposal seeks support for conference on                      
              international economic comparisons to be held in the fall of                   
              1992.  The meeting will take place at the Center for Economic                  
              Research of Florida International University in Miami,                         
              Florida.  Its purpose is to elucidate recent methodological                    
              trends in the area of quantitative economic comparisons                        
              across countries and to expand the interaction of academic                     
              researchers with governmental as well as non-governmental                      
              specialists.  Papers will be presented under six broad                         
              topics:  economic theoretic approaches to international                        
              comparisons,  aggregation methods,  consistent temporal                        
              spatial comparisons, sectoral productivity comparisons,                        
              regional comparisons, and applications and policy issues.                      
                   The distinguished group of participants in the proposed                   
              conference can be expected to contribute new insights and new                  
              momentum to an important area in international economics.                      
              Their discussions also promise to enhance general                              
              understanding of the current  "state of the art".
