Title       : Industry-University Cooperative Research: Flow of Polymers in Complex Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9114536

Award Number: 9114536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330870             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Graessley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The flow of molecularly well-characterized polymer liquids in                  
                                                                                             
              a wavy channel will be investigated quantitatively and in                      
              considerable local detail.  This model geometry provides a                     
              complexity of flow approaching that encountered in the                         
              commercial processing of polymer materials, and yet also                       
              allows the effects of non-Newtonian behavior on the stress and                 
                                                                                             
              velocity fields to be determined by non-invasive optical                       
              techniques.  An apparatus to accomplish this was developed and                 
                                                                                             
              tested under a previous grant (CBT-88-19660).  The use of                      
              nearly-monodisperse model polymers will now allow comparisons                  
                                                                                             
              with the predictions of constitutive equations based on                        
              molecular theory.  Researchers at Exxon Corporate Laboratories                 
                                                                                             
              will participate in the work, supplying the model materials                    
              and collaborating in characterization, analysis and                            
              interpretation of results.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Viscoelastic effects dominate the flow behavior of polymers in                 
                                                                                             
              many commercial processing operations.  Viscoelastic                           
              properties also depend strongly, and essentially universally,                  
                                                                                             
              on the large scale molecular architecture (molecular weight,                   
              distribution, branching) of the polymer.  Molecular theories                   
              can now successfully account for many of these architectural                   
              effects, but are still relatively untested, even for                           
              qualitative                                                                    
              guidance, in the complex flow histories that typify a real                     
              processing situation.  This research will supply such tests                    
              with model materials, allowing thereby a direct contact with                   
              the predictions of molecular theory.  It will also provide a                   
              detailed body of information (the velocity and stress fields)                  
                                                                                             
              for use in testing the computational methods of non-Newtonian                  
                                                                                             
              fluid mechanics.  The purposeful design of polymeric                           
              architecture (e.g., molecular weight distribution) for                         
              optimal processing behavior and for final product properties                   
              is a long-time goal throughout the polymer industry.                           
              Differences in behavior frequently correlate with differences                  
                                                                                             
              in architecture, but molecular theories of polymer rheology                    
              are still untested in processing flow regimes.  Moreover,                      
              detailed data for evaluating the computational methods of non-                 
                                                                                             
              Newtonian fluid mechanics are very limited even for commercial                 
                                                                                             
              polymers, where the architecture is uncertain and where                        
              molecular                                                                      
              theories to account for the effects of molecular weight                        
              distribution are only now being developed.  The wavy-wall                      
              study, utilizing model materials, offers a way to close some                   
              of these gaps in the connections between molecular                             
              architecture and the processing behavior of polymers.
