Title       : Modeling Deformation Induced Texture in Titanium Using Analytic Solutions for
               Single Crystal Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9114861

Award Number: 9114861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: HUSEYIN A. SEHITOGLU                    
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Dawson prd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A method for modeling large deformation behavior of alloys                     
              comprised of low symmetry polycrystalline metals will be developed.            
              Such polycrystals involve single crystals with fewer than five                 
              active slip systems.  Of particular importance are the alpha phases            
              of titanium alloys.  Because of the inherent kinematic constraint,             
              numerical simulations of polycrystal behavior based on single                  
              crystal slip are computationally intensive.  On the other hand, the            
              restricted number of slip systems permit an analytical treatment               
              of the rate insensitive behavior of both the single crystal and the            
              polycrystal.  This analysis will be carried out for HCP crystals               
              with emphasis on titanium.  The analytical results will be used to             
              replace, in whole or in part, the numerical solution of nonlinear              
              equations that describe responses of individual grains.  The                   
              polycrystalline properties necessary for finite element analysis               
              of forming processes thus may be obtained more directly from the               
              average grain behavior.  This should make the determination of the             
              evolution of the polycrystalline anisotropy far more accurate and              
              efficient.  The predicted development of anisotropy will be                    
              compared with anisotropy observed in samples of titanium deformed              
              in the laboratory under realistic processing conditions.
