Title       : Research on Novel Short-Wavelength, Short Pulse Laser Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1994   
File        : a9114744

Award Number: 9114744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland Sauerbrey   (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the last three years, our NSF funded program                              
              let to a number of significant results in the  areas                           
              of short wavelength laser spectroscopy, laser                                  
              materials, and laser plasma interaction.  For the                              
              first time we used inner shell photoionization of                              
              molecules to generate new, excimer like molecular                              
              states.  It was demonstrated that the laser produced                           
              plasma excitation technique can also be used to                                
              promote new chemical reactions to form molecular                               
              ions.  These results will have decisive impact on                              
              future schemes of molecular short wavelength                                   
              lasers, plasma chemistry, the spectroscopy of inner                            
              shell excited molecules, and even the understanding                            
              of dense molecular clouds in the neighborhood of                               
              quasars.  Another highlight of our program was the                             
              investigation of high intensity phenomena in laser-                            
              materials interaction and the production of sub-100                            
              nm lines polymers by direct ultraviolet laser                                  
              ablation.                                                                      
              The proposed program for the next three years                                  
              focuses on three new ideas.  The time is now ripe                              
              to undertake experiments towards photoionization                               
              pumped ionic excimer lasers.  In this project we will                          
              bring together the progress on photoionization                                 
              pumping of atomic short wavelength lasers                                      
              pioneered by one of the investigators.  The second                             
              project will focus on investigating the possibility for                        
              new UV and VUV excimer like solid state lasers.                                
              The objective is to combine the efficiency and                                 
              tunability if excimers with the compactness and                                
              relative simplicity of solid state lasers.  Finally, we                        
              will explore a new idea to produce gain in                                     
              dissociating molecules in a proposal we call the                               
              disomer (or disoplex) laser scheme.  Such                                      
              amplifiers would be universal for all dissociating                             
              molecular states and would have unsurpassed                                    
              bandwidth for the amplification of pulses in the 10                            
              fs range.
