Title       : Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Chiefdoms: Guatavita Valley, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1991       
File        : a9114862

Award Number: 9114862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl H. Langebaek  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Carl Langebaek                  
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will conduct              
              archaeological survey and excavation in the Guatavita Valley                   
              located in a highland plateau ca. 25 km north of Bogota,                       
              Columbia. When the Spanish first arrived in this region, they                  
              found a hierarchical society with clear differentiation between                
              chiefs and commoners.  Although the archaeology of the region is               
              not well known, available data trace settlement back to ca. 600                
              BC and indicate that before Spanish arrival, regional specialists              
              produced salt as well as blankets and gold ornaments.  To                      
              increase knowledge of this region Mr. Langebaek will direct a                  
              surface survey of the valley.  The location of all sites will be               
              mapped and surface materials collected.  Limited excavation will               
              also be carried out.  On this basis, it should be possible to                  
              construct a detailed ceramic chronology and to trace changes in                
              settlement pattern over time.  Because excellent soil maps exist,              
              this process can be placed into a detailed ecological context.                 
                                                                                             
              Following the development of agriculture and pastoralism in many               
              parts of the world, one can trace changes in social organization               
              which lead, ultimately to the rise of states.  Early in this                   
              process, chiefdoms arose and anthropologists still do not                      
              understand the mechanisms through which this happened.  Some                   
              argue that population growth, permitted by a more stable                       
              subsistence base, provided the driving force while others point                
              to factors such as the development of long distance trade.  Mr.                
              Langebaek's research addresses this issue.  It will provide an                 
              independent data base which covers this transition.  The                       
              Guatavita Valley is relatively small and thus offers a manageable              
              unit.  It is also unusual because good ethnohistoric                           
              documentation (provided by the Spanish) is also available and                  
              thus gives a solid point from which one can work back in time.                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will provide data of                     
              interest to many archaeologists.  It will increase our                         
              understanding of how complex societies arise and will assist in                
              the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
