Title       : The Mechanics of the Generation and Propagation of Thermoelastically Generated
               Lamb Waves in Plates and Panels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9114533

Award Number: 9114533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jerome Sackman                          
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian P. Burger c-burger@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Gien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An experimental/numeric study will be carried out for acquiring the            
              understanding of the basic mechanics of the generation and                     
              propagation of thermoelastically generated Lamb waves that is                  
              needed to exploit these waves for nondestructive evaluation of                 
              wafers, plates and panels.  Since Lamb waves propagate in the plane            
              of a plate and affect the whole thickness, they are excellent for              
              determining the extent and severity of defects such as surface                 
              cracks, delaminations and local changes in material properties.                
              Broadband transient Lamb waves will be generated by irradiating a              
              small area on the surface of a plate with a short duration fiber               
              guided laser pulse.  The resultant thermal shock generates a wave              
              which is then sensed by a fiber-optic interferometer.  Data                    
              analysis will be in the frequency domain where the imprints that               
              defects leave on the wave are most clearly evident.  The numeric               
              and experimental methods will be combined to study the basic                   
              parameters involved in the generation and propagation of these                 
              waves and in the ways in which they are influenced by defects.  The            
              resultant knowledge will be used to design efficient means for                 
              generating waves with desirable characteristics and to optimize the            
              overall system for identifying and characterizing defects both for             
              quality control and safety assurance.
