Title       : Continuous Czochralski Growth of Silicon Single Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9114593

Award Number: 9114593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : January 1,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vishwanath Prasad   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jurek Koziol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                   A continuous solid-feed Czochralski (CCZ) growth process for              
              silicon single crystals will be researched.  By reducing the melt              
              height and keeping it fixed, this process can suppress many kinds              
              of unsteady kinetics and inhomogeneities.  The impurity build-up,              
              the oxygen incorporation and the resistivity in axial direction can            
              be much better controlled by continuously charging the polysilicon             
              and doping.  The design of a commercially viable CCZ process which             
              can produce crystals of much better quality and at lower costs will            
              be developed.  A three-dimensional numerical study of convective               
              transport processes involving heat, mass and momentum transfer                 
              together with the melting of solid pellets and solidification at               
              the melt/crystal interface will be performed to characterize the               
              process parameters suitable for continuous growth of crystals.                 
                   Innovative techniques for flow visualization and heat transfer            
              experiments will be used to develop a basic understanding of                   
              thermohydrodynamic phenomena and pellets melting.  Based on this               
              information, suitable modifications in the present CZ crystal                  
              puller will be researched and the optimal conditions for CCZ growth            
              will be characterized.  Full-scale experiments will then be                    
              conducted at an industrial research facility.  This collaborative              
              research effort between the university and industry is expected to             
              lead to the development of an efficient, cost-effective CCZ unit               
              which should be of great importance to the United States                       
              semiconductor industry.
