Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conferences in theMathematical
               Sciences; 'Hopf Algebras and Their Actions on Rings'; August 11-15, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1991  
File        : a9114403

Award Number: 9114403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24022              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Bergen jbergen@condor.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      25 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   There has been renewed interest in Hopf algebras in the last              
              several years because of the major example of quantum groups.                  
              General knowledge about Hopf algebras may be useful to those                   
              interested in quantum groups; conversely, quantum groups have                  
              introduced some new purely algebraic ideas into Hopf algebras.                 
              Independent of any connection to quantum groups, there have been               
              many new developments in Hopf algebras, including the solution of              
              two old conjectures.  There has also been much work extending                  
              facts about group actions to actions and coactions of Hopf                     
              algebras.  In addition, in light of the interest in Hopf algebra               
              techniques in ring theory, operator algebras, and combinatorics,               
              the field would appeal to an audience of Hopf algebraists, ring                
              theorists, combinatorists, and operator algebraists.                           
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Hopf Algebras and                   
              Their Actions on Rings to be held August 11-15, 1992 at DePaul                 
              University.  Professor Susan Montgomery of the University of                   
              Southern California will be the principal lecturer.  To stimulate              
              interest and activity in mathematical research, the National                   
              Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS                     
              Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences.  Each              
              five-day conference features a distinguished lecturer who                      
              delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current research in              
              one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences.  The                    
              lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon              
              these lectures, which is normally published by the American                    
              Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and Applied                 
              Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association                
              and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.  Certain features                
              differentiate these conferences from typical research                          
              conferences.  These are: (1) Focus on a single important and                   
              timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued               
              effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel              
              review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published                 
              monographs for a wider audience.
