Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Copper Resistance Plasmid in Escherichia
               coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1992     
File        : a9114640

Award Number: 9114640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon D. Silver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
              This award supports two three-month visits by Dr. Simon D. Silver              
              of the University of Illinois College of Medicine at Chicago over              
              a two-year period to the University of Melbourne, Australia, to                
              perform laboratory work with Dr. Barry Thomas Owen Lee on copper               
              resistance plasmid in Escherichia coli.  The researchers will                  
              characterize in detail 64Cu2+ transport in whole cells, right-                 
              side out, and inverted membrane vehicles from wild type E. coli                
              K-12 and with a series of mutant strains defective in copper                   
              uptake, efflux and homeostasis that already have been isolated                 
              and preliminary characterized by the Melbourne group.  These                   
              mutations are both in chromosomal genes (cut) required for normal              
              cellular nutrition and in plasmid genes (pco) governing                        
              resistance to high toxic copper levels.  The kinetic parameters                
              (Km, Vmax, Ki's for alternative substrates) will be determined                 
              for the apparently two chromosomally-determined copper uptake                  
              pathways.  If the vesicle assays work, then these will be free of              
              complications of cell-wall binding and also intracellular binding              
              by copper-homeostasis proteins hypothesized by the Camakaris/Lee               
              group.  Similarly uptake kinetics will be measured with inside-                
              out vesicles produced by French Press disruption, as has been                  
              done in other laboratories for other cations.  Alternative                     
              substrates for uptake, especially related divalent cations, will               
              be tested both as inhibitors of 64Cu2+ uptake and as radioactive               
              substrates in transport assays.  From such detailed cation                     
              transport kinetics the researchers expect to piece together a                  
              complex picture of perhaps two uptake pathways, plus a single                  
              chromosomal- and plasmid-determined efflux pathway, and in                     
              addition genes determining intracellular copper-binding proteins               
              that function both in storage and in passage of newly accumulated              
              Cu2+ to either its intracellular sites or to the efflux system.
