Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Dynamic Security Analysis of Electric
               Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9114192

Award Number: 9114192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anjan Bose   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0310000   Municipal Service                       
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1467,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports Professor Anjan Bose and a                                 
              graduate student of Arizona State University to                                
              collaborate in electrical engineering research                                 
              with Professor Edmund Handschin and his research                               
              team at the University of Dortmund, Germany.                                   
              The subject of their collaboration is the                                      
              dynamic security analysis of electric power                                    
              systems.  Both groups are actively involved in                                 
              research in this important new area of electric                                
              power engineering, but they bring different                                    
              strengths and different research approaches to                                 
              the problem.  For example, in the area of                                      
              parallel processing, the Arizona group is                                      
              concentrating on finding parallel algorithms                                   
              that will operate on available multiprocessors,                                
              while the German group is seeking the best                                     
              parallel architecture to solve the dynamic                                     
              equations.  Both are involved in the development                               
              of worst case contingency screening tools for                                  
              power system control centers.  In this area, the                               
              Arizona group has concentrated on faster, though                               
              less accurate, analytical methods while the                                    
              German group is developing expert systems that                                 
              are more accurate than analytical methods but                                  
              more limited in other ways.  A major objective                                 
              of the collaboration is to find a balance                                      
              between these approaches that will optimize                                    
              dynamic analysis.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The continual on-line assessment of security of                                
              the large interconnected power transmission and                                
              generation grid is a complex problem of great                                  
              importance to North America and Western Europe,                                
              both of which have suffered regional blackouts                                 
              that have had serious economic consequences.                                   
              The security of the electric power network lies                                
              in its ability to withstand unexpected                                         
              disturbances or contingencies.  Yet current                                    
              state of the art assumes stable operation of the                               
              system during any disturbance, because                                         
              calculations required for realistic modeling of                                
              a dynamic, fluctuating operation cannot be done                                
              fast enough for on-line operation.  The ongoing                                
              U.S.-German research assisted by this award                                    
              focuses on solving this dynamic security                                       
              analysis problem.
