Title       : Growth Dynamics of Thin Metal Films on Compound Semiconductor Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1992   
File        : a9114108

Award Number: 9114108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Hermanson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental understanding of the formation of metal overlayers on            
              compound semiconductor surfaces will provide valuable insight into             
              a variety of complex metal-interfacial phenomena crucial to the                
              intelligent design of electronic devices.  This work will focus on             
              developing a quantitative model of the kinetic processes associated            
              with the formation and development of ordered structures for                   
              metallic films on compound semiconductor surfaces.  Initial efforts            
              will focus on the adsorption of group V and metals on the surface              
              of III-V compound semiconductors.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              In the first phase of the research, a newly developed time-                    
              dependent Monte Carlo model will be combined with tight-binding and            
              first-principles pseudopotential total energy models to investigate            
              the growth of antimony and bismuth on gallium arsenide in the sub-             
              monolayer to one monolayer regime.  The desciption of fundamental              
              chemical processes such as chemisorption, migration, incorporation,            
              and desorption, will contribute to a comprehensive understanding of            
              the elementary surface reactions.  In the second phase of the                  
              research the growth of antimony and bismuth in the range of two -              
              twenty monolayers will be examined where factors controlling                   
              pseudomorphic growth and the transition to three-dimensional island            
              growth take place.  Future work will address the issue of film                 
              defect formation, such as the nature of two-dimensional island                 
              growth during deposition, and identification of the conditions                 
              important for defect formation.                                                
              The grant supports a postdoctoral associate and is done in                     
              collaboration with researchers at Battelle Pacific Northwest                   
              Laboratories.
