Title       : Autonomous System for Cylindrical Plunge Grinding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9114484

Award Number: 9114484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Malkin malkin@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kourosh Danai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   The aim of this research project is to develop and evaluate               
              a prototype autonomous grinding system for cylindrical plunge                  
              grinding.  The system will adjust the operating parameters of the              
              cycle from part to part to reduce cycle time while satisfying part-            
              quality constraints in response to in-process and post-process                 
              measurements which characterize the processing conditions and part             
              quality.  In order to cope with quantitative uncertainty of the                
              process, the cycle time reduction methodology will employ if-then              
              rules derived from a simulation of the grinding process.  Only two             
              in-process sensors will be used, a power monitor and a size gage,              
              which can withstand a harsh production environment.  It is shown               
              that information derived from these sensors, together with                     
              post-process measurement (inspection) of part quality (i.e.,                   
              finish and roundness), can be used to characterize the state of the            
              grinding process through process models.  The cycle time reduction             
              methodology will be designed and evaluated in simulation.                      
              Practical implementation and testing of the autonomous system will             
              be on a commercial internal grinder, retrofitted with electrical               
              drives and sensors and interfaced to a personal computer for data              
              acquisition, system identification, and machine control.                       
                   The result of this investigation will provide the scientific              
              and technological basis for commercial development of a new                    
              generation of grinding systems as well as retrofitting (upgrading)             
              of older grinders.
