Title       : Zeolite Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9114829

Award Number: 9114829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294997             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Gavalas gavalas@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1403,9146,9161,9187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Inorganic membranes have the potential for high selectivity                    
              and the ability to operate at elevated temperatures and                        
              reactive atmospheres.  This makes these membranes suitable for                 
              applications outside the range of the well-established organic                 
              polymer membranes.  One application, for example, is in                        
              membrane reactors where an equilibrium-limited reaction such                   
              as hydrocarbon dehydrogenation is carried out with                             
              simultaneous hydrogen separation in order to increase the                      
              yield.  Zeolite membranes have the potential of highly                         
              selective separations for a variety of gas mixtures.  They can                 
              operate at ambient temperatures to carry out, at steady state,                 
              separations which are currently performed by unsteady pressure                 
              or temperature swing adsorption.  Or they can be used at                       
              elevated temperatures in catalytic membrane reactors to                        
              increase the reaction yield or selectivity.  To realize this                   
              potential, the zeolite membranes must be prepared as thin but                  
              mechanically stable layers supported on porous tubes or other                  
              support elements.                                                              
                                                                                             
              In this project, techniques for synthesizing thin zeolite                      
              layers within the walls of porous tubes will be investigated.                  
              The general approach is to deploy the reactants in such a way                  
              that conditions favorable to zeolite crystallization prevail                   
              only over a thin region inside the porous support.  Three                      
              specific techniques will be investigated for delimiting the                    
              crystallization region.  The first will be based on                            
              counterdiffusion of reactants between two aqueous solutions,                   
              the second on fixing the reaction front at the interface                       
              between an aqueous and an organic phase, and third on the                      
              localized precipitation of a precursor gel.  The formation of                  
              the zeolite will be ascertained by X-ray diffraction (XRD),                    
              solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), infrared and                     
              physical adsorption, while scanning electron microscopy (SEM-                  
              EDX) will be used to define the location and thickness of the                  
              layer.  Permeation rate coefficients and separation factors                    
              will be measured for several gases at ambient and elevated                     
              temperatures.  Finally, the use of zeolite membranes as                        
              membrane reactors will be explored in a few catalytic                          
              reactions such as the dehydrogenation of isobutane and the                     
              alkylation of cumene.
