Title       : Design of Chemical Processing Structures and Operating Procedures for Safety and
               Reliability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1994   
File        : a9114050

Award Number: 9114050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Powers gp0c@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Operating procedures have a strong impact on the performance                   
              of chemical processing systems.  These operating procedures                    
              must ensure safe and reliable operation by incorporating                       
              features such as verifiability of procedure steps and                          
              satisfaction of quality constraints.  Operating procedure                      
              synthesis needs to be complemented by the availability of                      
              appropriate flowsheet structures which provide the necessary                   
              infrastructure for processing that satisfies the required                      
              specifications.  Relevant structural characteristics may be                    
              equipment redundancy, presence of auxiliary equipment, bypass                  
              and purge lines and other structures whose function is to                      
              allow safe and reliable transitions from one operating state                   
              to another.  This project is aimed at the simultaneous design                  
              of both an economically viable chemical manufacturing process                  
              and the operating procedure for its safe and reliable                          
              operation.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The PI's strategy introduces structural actions (operators) as                 
              options for producing high integrity sets of operating                         
              procedures for chemical processing systems, allowing synthesis                 
              of operating procedures in otherwise infeasible situations.                    
              The incorporation of "stationary states" in the original                       
              flowsheet is used to increase process flexibility and add                      
              modularity and verifiability to the operating procedures.  The                 
              methodology requires as input: the initial flowsheet                           
              description, local and global constraints, the initial and                     
              goal states, possible procedural and structural actions, a                     
              unit model library, and safety/reliability and economic                        
              evaluation functions.  It produces sets of process flowsheets                  
              and corresponding operating procedures.  The methodology will                  
              be checked against actual industrial test cases.
