Title       : Molecular Evolution of the Genus Staphylococcus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1992        
File        : a9114341

Award Number: 9114341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6790               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald T. Dubin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a long-term visit by Dr. Donald T. Dubin of                
              the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, the                    
              Robert Wood Johnson Medical School to work in the laboratory of Dr.            
              Peter R. Stewart on the molecular evolution of the bacterial                   
              genus Staphylococcus.  Members of the genus Staphylococcus are                 
              widespread in nature, as components of the normal flora of                     
              mammals and sometimes as causes of disease.  Dr. Dubin will spend              
              a 6-month sabbatical leave visiting the laboratory of Dr. Stewart,             
              where he will exchange expertise relevant to molecular                         
              characterization of staphylococcus genomes.  He will apply Dr.                 
              Stewart's procedures, including in vitro induction of deletions                
              and pulsed field gel electrophoresis of chromosomal DNA, to                    
              strains of staphylococci that are of special interest for                      
              epidemiologic and molecular genetic reasons.  These techniques                 
              will be complemented by techniques with which Dr. Dubin's                      
              laboratory has had extensive experience, including the                         
              oligonucleotide hybridization of Southern transfers of                         
              chromosomal DNA and polymerase chain reaction-facilitated                      
              sequencing of segments of genome expected to be useful in                      
              establishing phylogenetic relationships; namely, segments of                   
              ribosomal RNA genes.  The work will be directed toward goals                   
              shared by the two laboratories including better understanding of               
              the interaction between environmental factors (such as heavy                   
              metal pollution) and widespread agricultural and medical use of                
              antibiotics and intrinsic genetic factors, in the rapid evolution              
              of staphylococcal species and strains.
