Title       : Intelligent Material Handling Systems: Integrated Modelling and Control for
               Intelligent Material Handling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1993   
File        : a9114009

Award Number: 9114009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen Robert Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karan Harbison-Briggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0317000   Urban Technology                        
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 6840,9293,
Abstract    :
              This award is in the joint ENG/CISE Research Thrust in Intelligent             
              Material Handling Systems.  The objective is to develop and                    
              demonstrate a novel intelligent material handling system approach              
              that allows very rapid automation of any new                                   
              material handling requirements and that can deal with uncertainties            
              in the environment.  The approach incorporates four basic                      
              components for intelligent materials handling with applications to             
              automated kitting and fixturing.  The Component Program for                    
              Autonomous, Adaptable agents emphasizes the specification of                   
              flexible manufacturing cells, including manipulators and fixtures,             
              to adapt to dynamic environments and to cooperate with other                   
              systems.  The Component Program for CAD-Based Material                         
              Representation utilizes 3-D feature-based models which include                 
              features for both material handling and vision recognition.                    
              through a process of reverse engineering using vision and range                
              sensors with interactive graphics.  The Component Program for                  
              Material Handling Control addresses the design and selection of                
              real-time control strategies for material handling, including                  
              robust, adaptive, and learning schemes with integrated sensor                  
              feedback.  A high level path and trajectory planning system are                
              used to guide the control system based on the feature-based CAD                
              information.   The fourth Component Program is responsible for the             
              Systems Integration Methodology to support the design and                      
              development of cooperating, distributed agents, and allows                     
              transition from human- intensive activities to more autonomous                 
              activities.
