Title       : TOGA: Process-Oriented Diagnostic Modeling for TOGA-COARE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1995       
File        : a9114109

Award Number: 9114109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Somerville rsomerville@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              This research uses an innovation diagnostic modeling approach                  
              together with TOGA-COARE data sets to test and validate critical               
              aspects of physical process parameterizations.  The model is a                 
              computationally efficient and economical one-dimensional                       
              (vertical)                                                                     
              model, resembling a single GCM grid cell, to be applied to sites               
              in the TOGA-COARE domain.  The present version of the model                    
              contains a full set of modern GCM parameterization of subgrid                  
              physical processes.  It includes vertical transport by convection              
              and turbulent mixing, radiative transfer with interactive clouds,              
              and a complete hydrologic cycle.  The ocean model is currently a               
              simple mixed layer, synchronously coupled to the atmosphere                    
              through a surface energy budget computation.  To force the model,              
              the advective terms in the budget equations will be specified                  
              observationally from TOGA-COARE observations.                                  
                                                                                             
              The model is diagnostic rather than prognostic.  Its input is an               
              initial state, plus the time-dependent advection terms in the                  
              conservation equations, provided at all model layers.  Its output              
              is a complete heat and water budget for the coupled ocean-                     
              atmosphere column, including temperature and moisture profiles,                
              clouds and their radiative properties, diabatic heating terms,                 
              surface energy balance components, and hydrologic cycle elements,              
              all specified as functions of time.  Sample integrations of the                
              model for test cases are presented and verified against                        
              observations.  These diagnostic analyses suggest that this type                
              of model may be useful in TOGA-COARE for applications including                
              interpretation of results from multi-dimensional models,                       
              validation of surface flux data, and estimation of sensitivity to              
              alternative physical processes.  The proposal describes a                      
              coordinated program of model development, diagnostic modeling,                 
              and linkages with GCM experiments and with observations.                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it is one of the TOGA-COARE                 
              studies that investigates air-sea interactions in the context of               
              the physical processes that impact climate variability, in an                  
              especially climate sensitive region of the world, the western                  
              Pacific Ocean, the field site of TOGA-COARE.
