Title       : Understanding Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9114519

Award Number: 9114519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $826248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald N. Giere   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan E. Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science and technology have been dominant and pervasive influences             
              in modern culture; yet they have never been generally well                     
              understood.  The Minnesota Center for Philosophy of Science, the               
              Program in History of Science and Technology, the Charles Babbage              
              Institute for the History of Information Processing, the Department            
              of History of Medicine, and the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the            
              University of Minnesota have joined together in a coordinated                  
              effort to understand the operation of science and technology in our            
              society.  The collaborative research efforts among historians and              
              philosophers of science and technology center on four areas:  (I)              
              models, theories, and reality; (II) the history and philosophy of              
              physical science;  (III) the history and philosophy of biological              
              sciences; and (IV) interactions among science technology and                   
              society.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              In area I, historians and philosophers are examining scientific                
              models or theories and their relation to "reality."  They are                  
              examining the nature of scientific representations; the issues of              
              realism, idealization, and experimentation; the application of                 
              mathematics and logic in the empirical sciences; and issues in the             
              philosophy of cognitive science.  In area II, historians and                   
              philosophers are concentrating on questions in the history and                 
              philosophy of quantum mechanics, the nature and status of nuclear              
              models, the nature of light, and the interaction of theory and                 
              experiment in physics.  In area III, they are examining the                    
              interrelationship between biomedical and physical sciences; the                
              institutional organization of biomedical science; and issues in                
              biology, medicine and values including theories and controversies              
              in biomedicine, genetics and society, the enterprises of natural               
              history and evolutionary biology, theories of disease and public               
              health, and the design of clinical research.  Finally, in area IV,             
              they are investigating scientific and technological institutions,              
              ethical issues of science and technology, the interaction of theory            
              and experiment, and the role of government in science-technology               
              interactions.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This grant over five years supports postdoctoral fellows and                   
              graduate students who are participating in research and training               
              in each of these lines of research.
