Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Concentrated PolymerSolutions in Strong
               Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1994     
File        : a9114280

Award Number: 9114280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388500             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Gary Leal lgl20@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale S. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1773,9146,9162,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A critical need exists to develop the technology that will allow               
              processing polymers at faster speeds and that will result in                   
              polymeric materials with higher degrees of molecular orientation.              
              Such advances will make existing processes more competitive and                
              will increase the prospects for manufacturing valuable new                     
              products.  It is likely that these goals can be reached if                     
              experimental techniques for studying polymers at high strain rates             
              are improved and the resulting information is used to develop a                
              microscopic understanding of how polymer liquids flow.  This                   
              project is intended to provide this fundamental knowledge.  It                 
              describes experimental research work on the molecular and fluid                
              mechanics of polymeric liquids subjected to flow types that contain            
              a mixture of shear and extension typically found in commercial                 
              processing operations.  The experiments will investigate, using a              
              range of techniques, the most important parameters affecting the               
              rheological response:  entanglement density and molecular-weight               
              distribution.  A data base of this type on materials that have                 
              well-characterized molecular structures is the necessary starting              
              point.  The molecular understanding so obtained will be used to                
              continue the development of models described in the project.  The              
              ultimate goal is to have a detailed understanding of the highly                
              nonlinear response that exits under these conditions and to use                
              this information to devise new processing procedures that will                 
              optimize the macroscopic properties of polymers.                               
                                                                                             
              This research is jointly supported by the Polymers Program in the              
              Division of Materials Research and the Fluid, Particulate and                  
              Hydraulic Systems Program of the Division of Chemical and Thermal              
              Systems.
