Title       : Antarctic Surveying and Mapping Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9114787

Award Number: 9114787
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2231911            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Witmer rwitmer@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy R. Mullen  (Principal Investigator former)
              James R. Plasker  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jerry L. Mullins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey
	      Mail Stop 970
	      Reston, VA  22092    /   -

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Production and publication of maps of Antarctica serve four                    
              U.S. policy objectives.  Maps are essential for research,                      
              which currently is the principal expression of U.S. interest                   
              in the region.  They are essential for operations and                          
              logistics in support of research or other activities                           
              (including search and rescue).  Maps provide a knowledge                       
              base for support of the range of future U.S. antarctic                         
              interests.  And, by their authoritative  coverage of large                     
              portions of the continent, maps serve to maintain the active                   
              and influential presence of the United States in Antarctica.                   
                                                                                             
              Surveying and mapping comprise a variety of activities                         
              necessary for the successful operation of a multifaceted                       
              scientific and exploration effort in Antarctica. Year round                    
              data acquisition, catalog, and data dissemination activities                   
              will continue in the Scientific Committee for Antarctic                        
              Research (SCAR) Library for Geodesy and Geographic                             
              Information.  Field surveys are planned as part of a                           
              continuing program to collect data suitable for                                
              future satellite mapping programs and to densify extant                        
              data for 1:50,000-scale mapping programs.   These maps will                    
              provide a base to portray scientific information, such as                      
              geologic data, in a specially accurate manner for expert                       
              analysis.  They will also support future expeditions with a                    
              base to design scientific investigations and data collection                   
              activities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The U.S. Geological Survey has been selected to perform the                    
              Nation's antarctic mapping because it is the designated                        
              agency for mapping of the United States and because it                         
              possesses the necessary expertise, antarctic experience                        
              (developed since 1959), and institutional continuity.  A                       
              1991 Memorandum of Agreement between the United States                         
              Geological Survey and theFoundation establishes the purpose                    
              and tasking for the antarctic mapping.
