Title       : Geological and Paleontological Research in Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9114390

Award Number: 9114390
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 1,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Kelley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1392,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Technical Narrative: This proposal will allow Dr. S.M. Raza,                   
              Deputy Director of the Geological Survey of Pakistan (GSP) to                  
              participate in   collaborative research with Dr. John J. Kelley,               
              Brown University.  Since  1973, a geological and paleontological               
              field project has been operative in the Siwalik region in                      
              collaboration with the Geological Survey of Pakistan (GSP).  Dr.               
              Raza has been a key participant in the project since its                       
              beginning.  The primary goal of the current research is to look                
              for Miocene hominoids in the erosional debris deposited in the                 
              Siwalik Hills of Pakistan by the uplift of the Himalaya                        
              Mountains.  The excavation site is fossiliferous and highly                    
              informative about earlier states of higher primate evolution.                  
              Another research goal which has evolved into a large                           
              multidisciplinary effort is to reconstruct the physical and                    
              vegetational settings of past environments and thus come to an                 
              understanding of the evolution of South Asian mammal faunas and                
              their habitats. The project will proceed simultaneously in                     
              fieldwork, fossil data base construction and analysis.  Dr. Raza               
              will be in the United States during the next two summers to carry              
              out his research within the project context and to prepare a                   
              special issue on the Siwalik for the Journal of Human Evolution.               
              The proposal requests funds for equipment and supplies necessary               
              for the proper curation and utilization of the more than 40,000                
              fossil speciments collected by the Siwalik project.  Finally,                  
              funds are requested for the PI to visit Pakistan to install a                  
              computerized fossil database and for the training of the GSP                   
              staff.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Scope: Apart from the mutual benefits to both institutions and to              
              scientific knowledge from this cooperative research, the project               
              will develop human resources through training and promote                      
              institution building not only by strengthening the institutional               
              links with the GSP but by funding the remaining equipment needed               
              to make their magnetostratigraphy laboratory a thoroughly up-to-               
              date facility.  This is appropriate for a country that, in terms               
              of its paleontological wealth, is one of the richest in the                    
              developing world.
