Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Isoperimetric Inequalities for Eigenvalue Ratios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1992      
File        : a9114162

Award Number: 9114162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37377              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Ashbaugh mark@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Work supported by this award concentrates on geometric questions               
              related to partial differential operators defined on surface-like              
              regions known as manifolds.  One can visualize the general thrust              
              of the work by considering a vibrating surface or membrane and                 
              asking for analytic quantities which capture the geometric                     
              properties of the surface.  One such class of quantities consists              
              of eigenvalues of the Laplace operator - a partial differential                
              operator - defined on the surface with certain boundary                        
              conditions imposed on its boundary.  It had long been conjectured              
              that the ratio of the first two Dirichlet eigenvalues of the                   
              Laplacian was maximized for surfaces which were flat discs.  This              
              (the Payne-Polya-Weinberger conjecture) has recently been                      
              verified by the principal investigator.                                        
                                                                                             
              This project will seek to describe surfaces which maximize other               
              eigenvalue ratios.  At the same time, efforts will be made to                  
              extend results obtained in Euclidean space to manifolds.  Since                
              much of what is known is confined to two-dimensional surfaces,                 
              extensions to surfaces and manifolds of higher dimension will                  
              also be addressed.
