Title       : Dissertation Research: Demographic Variation and Social Organization among the
               Iban of West Kalimantan, Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1993    
File        : a9114652

Award Number: 9114652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9658               (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Reed L. Wadley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project supports the dissertation research of an                          
              anthropology graduate student from Arizona State University,                   
              studying the demographic variation in a tribal society in                      
              Indonesia.  Six local societies will be studied to answer                      
              questions about the effects of demographic variables on marriage               
              choice and the resultant patterns of residence and behavior.  The              
              project will test the hypothesis that choice of spouses will vary              
              between communities with local population size and distribution                
              as well as age structure, sex ratios and family size.  Previous                
              studies of the effects of marriage choices and preferential                    
              mating rules did not record detailed demographic data, so the                  
              interaction between demographic processes and marriage rules                   
              could not be intensively studied.  Methods include participant                 
              observation, structured interviews, and in-depth interviews with               
              family heads.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Most demographic research is on large scale societies, yet basic               
              data from simple societies is important to test theories of human              
              demographic function and social evolution.  This research will                 
              also be valuable to decision makers interested in family planning              
              in the tropic world.
