Title       : Cooperative Agreement: Machine Tool Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  1996   
File        : a9114588

Award Number: 9114588
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ming C. Leu                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $932189             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiri Tlusty jtlusty@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jose C. Principe  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              K. Scott Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Sencer Yeralan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research activity is designed to develop the theoretical             
              and experimental knowledge base to enable the development of the               
              next generation metal cutting machine tool.  This machine tool is              
              characterized by the properties of high speed, high power, high                
              accuracy and high static and dynamic stability.  The                           
              characteristics of high speed and power are necessary to reduce                
              costs involved in machining.  The key to achieving this goal is the            
              development of statically and dynamically stable machine tool sub-             
              systems, integrated to form a highly stable machine tool.  Sub-                
              systems such as stiff high speed spindles and new-material, light-             
              weight, stiff structures will be researched and developed.  Major              
              control issues, such as spindle speed control to avoid chatter and             
              servo systems with continuous updating of drive dynamics to reduce             
              following error, will be addressed.  Modelling and simulation of               
              machining processes will be conducted, on a large scale, to allow              
              the incorporation of these models into further development of                  
              Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing systems.                               
                   The research is focused on developing models of machine tools             
              for the aerospace and automotive industry, which represent the two             
              largest segments of manufacturing.  Systematic research of this                
              nature cannot be provided by the domestic industry which is                    
              extremely fragmented and battered by overseas competition.  This               
              work will however, provide for a revival of the domestic machine               
              tool industry, through cooperation and technology transfer, while              
              greatly benefiting a major segment of the manufacturing sector of              
              the United States.
