Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Pine Sawfly Outbreak Distribution Patterns in
               Western U.S. and China: Role of Plant Quality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1993  
File        : a9114616

Award Number: 9114616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64351              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Wagner mike.wagner@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1440,
Abstract    :
              This research proposal addresses the fundamental ecological cause              
              of outbreaks of damaging forest insects in China and the United                
              States.  In this proposal experiments are outlined that will test              
              the role of forest stand conditions (age, density, genotype) in                
              predisposing pine forests to outbreak by an economically                       
              important group of forest defoliators - pine sawflies                          
              (Hymenoptera:  Diprionidae).  Despite extensive literature                     
              implicating stands conditions as a major factor in forest insect               
              outbreaks little is known about the fundamental mechanisms                     
              responsible for this universal phenomenon.  Nearly identical pine              
              sawfly outbreak patterns occur in Pinus ponderosa forests of the               
              western United States and Pinus yunnanenis forests of central                  
              China.  Pine sawfly outbreaks are restricted to low density                    
              stands of a restricted age class.                                              
                                                                                             
              A strongly experimental approach is proposed to rigorously test                
              the importance of stand conditions in predisposing trees to                    
              sawfly outbreaks in both China and the US.  Stand manipulations                
              will be conducted to experimentally create stand densities that                
              replicate the densities of stands known to support pine sawfly                 
              outbreaks.  The importance of two hypothesized mechanisms for the              
              observed outbreak patterns will be tested.  The basic                          
              experimental design is to conduct parallel studies in Sichuan                  
              Province, China and Arizona, USA.                                              
                                                                                             
              Specific research activities to be conducted include a 1 month                 
              visit by Dr. Wagner and 4-6 months of field research each year by              
              a doctoral student and research technicians from Northern Arizona              
              University.  This research will assisted by a scientists and                   
              research staff of the Experiment Center of Sichuan Provincial                  
              Academy of Forestry Science.  Similarly a scientist from the                   
              Sichuan Forestry Academy will conduct research in Arizona for 4-6              
              months each year for two years.  Short term visits by Chinese                  
              scientists to research facilities and study areas in the US will               
              also be supported.  Dr. Wagner and Mr. Hend Xiao both have                     
              extensive previous experience working with pine sawflies on pine               
              species.  This project will improve our basic understanding of                 
              the causes of forest insect outbreaks, improve the training of US              
              and Chinese scientists, and enhance scientific and cultural                    
              exchange between China and the United States.
