Title       : Intelligent Material Handling Systems: Intelligent Distributed Control of
               Material Handling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9114446

Award Number: 9114446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Canny jfc@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Max B. Mendel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jitendra Malik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Fearing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sadashiv Adiga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9293,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of a two-year continuing award in the                   
              joint ENG/CISE research thrust in Intelligent Material Handling                
              Systems.  This research effort involves simulation, control, and               
              implementation of an experimental integrated material handling                 
              systems.  The following research issues, felt to be critical to                
              the success of intelligent material handling systems, are                      
              studied:                                                                       
                   Distributed software architecture using a variety of expert               
                   software packages, with robust communication protocols;                   
                   Object-oriented software for simulation of material handling              
                   systems at various levels of abstraction;  Planning of safe               
                   motion and part acquisition using a variety of sensing                    
                   methods; Real-time sensor processing algorithms for                       
                   intelligent control of operations;  Methods for dealing with              
                   uncertainty due to a variety of sources;  Testing and                     
                   validation of concepts in two "microfactories;"  and Rapid                
                   prototyping of custom end-effectors and fixtures to handle                
                   particular parts.                                                         
              The research involves integration of a number of specialist                    
              programs, running on a variety of processors, using a versatile                
              interface protocol.  The specialist include a package for handler              
              modeling and motion simulation and control, two real-time                      
              multiprocessors for control and sensor processing, a vision                    
              package, a mechanical design package, and an NC machine code                   
              generator.  These systems will communicate via the CPU                         
              interprocess communication protocol, which has been successfully               
              demonstrated with many of the systems.  In addition, the BLOCS                 
              object-oriented simulation package, which was developed at                     
              Berkeley, will be used to model the actual system at several                   
              levels and to validate and improve the design in terms of                      
              information flow, material flow, and error tolerance.                          
              Eventually, BLOCS will perform some high-level monitoring and                  
              control of the actual material handling systems.
