Title       : Development of a New Parametric SCF MO Treatment Capable of Extension to
               Transition Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1991  
File        : a9114964

Award Number: 9114964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Dewar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Professor Michael J. S. Dewar is supported by a grant from the                 
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop a                   
              new semi-empirical self consistent field molecular orbital                     
              treatment which is capable of being extended to transition                     
              metals.  The proposed "fourth generation" semi-empirical                       
              parameterization has already been successfully applied to the                  
              elements C, H, O, and N.  It will now be extended to the                       
              halogens, and eventually to the transition elements which                      
              involve d atomic orbitals.  The improved semi-empirical                        
              parameterization will be applied to a variety of important                     
              chemical problems including: mechanisms of pericyclic                          
              reactions; studies of substituent effects; properties of nitro                 
              compounds; reactions of singlet oxygen; phosphorous and sulfur                 
              chemistry; and chemistry of non-transition metals.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              With the advent of supercomputers coupled with continued                       
              developments in theory, the field of chemistry is rapidly                      
              approaching a time when computed chemical properties will be                   
              reliable enough to substitute for experimental measurements.                   
              Nevertheless, the computational costs involved with reliable ab                
              initio molecular orbital calculations remains high for all but                 
              the very smallest molecules. Semi- empirical methodologies of                  
              the type developed by Professor Dewar continue to offer a                      
              practical alternative to chemists who must deal with large                     
              molecules such as those encountered in the pharmaceutical                      
              industry.
