Title       : Task-Level Force Contraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9114208

Award Number: 9114208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew T. Mason matt.mason@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to explore force constraints as a              
              model of manipulator action.  Robotic manipulation is usually                  
              modeled in terms of programmed motion-goals are specified as the               
              motions of task objects, and robots are programmed by a sequence               
              of arm motions.  The programmed motion model works fairly well,                
              provided that objects move only when rigidly grasped by the                    
              robot.  However, many robot operations violate this assumption,                
              manipulating objects without a rigid grasp.  For example, when                 
              placing an object, the object may slip in the fingers.  Or, when               
              grasping an object, the object may be re-oriented and centered by              
              pushing and squeezing.  Other examples include striking, tilting,              
              and the use of passive compliances.  For these operations, and                 
              many others, the programmed motion model is awkward, because                   
              there is no direct transformation from desired object motions to               
              robot motions.  The research explores the use of task level force              
              constraints, as an intermediate level model of action.  A task                 
              level force constraint is any constraint on the force applied to               
              a task object.  For the operations where programmed motion is                  
              awkward, force constraints often provide a natural and effective               
              way to transform desired object motions to corresponding robot                 
              commands.  The approach is to build a planner, applying methods                
              of classical mechanics to derive force constraints, and then                   
              using a variety of geometrical and analytical techniques to                    
              derive robots command parameters.  Experimental evaluation will                
              use a industrial manipulator and vision system to perform                      
              positioning and assembly tasks in a planar task domain.
