Title       : Nonlinear Programming with Quadratic Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9114489

Award Number: 9114489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pius J. Egbelu                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82909              (Estimated)
Investigator: Faiz A. Al-Khayyal faiz.alkhayyal@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Special cases of nonlinear programs with quadratic constraints            
              that arise in engineering applications are investigated.  These                
              applications include refinery blending problems in petrochemical               
              processes, component placement problems in circuit design, minimax             
              location problems in industrial engineering, and modular design                
              problems in production and manufacturing.  The primary focus is on             
              the development of a new algorithm for obtaining (approximate)                 
              global solutions for these problems.  A paramount issue in applying            
              an algorithm to a given problem is the question of existence of a              
              solution when the feasible region is not empty.  New conditions                
              will be derived for quadratically constrained applications and                 
              techniques for checking these conditions will be developed.  Two               
              general approaches will be explored in developing algorithms:                  
              outer approximation and branch and bound.  Outer approximation                 
              includes, but is not limited to cutting (plane) methods.  Bounding             
              will be accomplished by the use of convex envelopes and by                     
              nonlinear duality theory.                                                      
                   The results that are anticipated from this research effort                
              should contribute significantly to the efficient (real time)                   
              solution of a larger class of quadratically constrained problems               
              than currently possible.  Many of the ideas and constructions that             
              will be reported are not well known and have the potential to be               
              extended to problems beyond the scope of this study and, hence,                
              should contribute to a better understanding of the practicality of             
              solving real instances of nonlinearly                                          
              constrained optimization problems.
