Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences
               - Number Theory and Dynamical Systems;June 1-5, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1991   
File        : a9114427

Award Number: 9114427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolph M. Najar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Lagarias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno Fdn
	      4910 N. Chestnut Ave
	      Fresno, CA  93726    559/278-0840

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   It is known that there are connections between certain                    
              problems in diophantine approximation and problems in mechanics.               
              For example, asteroid orbits having certain rational periods of                
              the orbit of Jupiter are missing in the asteroid belt, while                   
              others are present.  Such connections occur both in Hamiltonian                
              systems and in "mode-locking" phenomena in dissipative systems.                
              In the last few years these connections have been made more                    
              precise using renormalization schemes for studying various routes              
              to chaos.  On the number theory side, "arithmetic fractals" with               
              exact self-similarity properties have recently been constructed.               
              In addition, diophantine approximations in both one and several                
              dimensions can be studied using dynamical systems.                             
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Number Theory and                   
              Dynamical Systems to be held June 1-5, 1992 at California State                
              University, Fresno.  Dr. Jeffrey Lagarias of AT&T Bell                         
              Laboratories will be the principal lecturer.  To stimulate                     
              interest and activity in mathematical research, the National                   
              Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS                     
              Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences.  Each              
              five-day conference features a distinguished lecturer who                      
              delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current research in              
              one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences.  The                    
              lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon              
              these lectures, which is normally published by the American                    
              Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and Applied                 
              Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association                
              and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.  Certain features                
              differentiate these conferences from typical research                          
              conferences.  These are: (1) Focus on a single important and                   
              timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued               
              effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel              
              review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published                 
              monographs for a wider audience.
