Title       : Mathematical Programming Under Uncertainty: Risk and Recourse Revisited
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9114352

Award Number: 9114352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald Gross                            
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suvrajeet Sen sen@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia L. Higle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   With increased competition in the marketplace, many sectors               
              of the American economy are acknowledging the need for improved                
              resource planning.  By way of example, note the growing acceptance             
              of the Just-In-Time philosophy in many manufacturing firms, the                
              move toward dynamic routing capabilities within the                            
              telecommunication industry and adaptive signal control in urban                
              traffic planning.  In each of these areas, resources (e.g.,                    
              productive capabilities and network capacities) are acquired well              
              in advance of their need, and utilization is improved by adaptive              
              allocation as precise system requirements are identified.  Since               
              precise information regarding system operation is not available at             
              the time of planning, the resource planning problem involves                   
              decision making under uncertainty.  This project focusses on                   
              modeling and solution of planning problems for systems that allow              
              adaptive resource allocation.  These methodologies are based on                
              stochastic decomposition.  Computational experience with stochastic            
              decomposition indicates that it is ideally suited to the solution              
              of large scale problems involving optimal planning under                       
              uncertainty.  It is particularly useful when the variability of                
              system requirements can only be assessed via simulated scenarios.              
                   The project involves three phases, involving the mathematical             
              development and verification of these methods, computer                        
              implementation of the resulting algorithms, and testing of these               
              algorithms on models based on case-studies which will be developed             
              in conjunction with industrial collaborators.
