Title       : SGER: Stimulated Raman Scattering in the Transient Limit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1991  
File        : a9114191

Award Number: 9114191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20239              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis R. Menyuk menyuk@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The equations which describe stimulated Raman                                  
              scattering in the transient limit are nonlinear and                            
              integrable.  However, the physical behavior of this                            
              system after propagating, long distances is quite                              
              different from other integrable systems such as light                          
              pulses in optical fibers.  In optical fibers, the light                        
              pulses break up into a number of solitons and a                                
              dispersive wave contribution, while in the transient                           
              regime of stimulated Raman scattering, the solutions                           
              tend toward a similarity solution which depends on                             
              (distance) x (time).  This last result, while inferrable                       
              from previous numerical results, was only recently                             
              proved, and many of its consequences remain to be                              
              elucidated.  The first issue of concern is the limitation                      
              which second Stokes generation and finite T2 impose                            
              on possible experimental observation of the self-                              
              similar solution.  We will investigate this                                    
              phenomenon.  We will also explore the impact of the                            
              transient Raman effect on limiting the conversion                              
              efficiency of Raman frequency downshifters which are                           
              used in conjunction with Ti:Sapphire lasers.  We will                          
              also explore the extent to which similar techniques                            
              can be applied to fiber gratings, two-level systems,                           
              photorefractive materials, and other systems which                             
              have either already been shown to exhibit self-                                
              similarity or are promising candidates because they                            
              have long-term memory.  Finally, on the                                        
              mathematical front, we will collaborate with Tom                               
              Seidman in studying the stability of these solutions                           
              and with other mathematicians in obtaining                                     
              asymptotic formulae for the self-similar case when the                         
              frequencies are detuned.
