Title       : Fundamental Studies of Controlled Microstructure Developmentby the
               Self-Propagating High-Temperature Synthesis Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9114253

Award Number: 9114253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory C. Stangle   (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. McCauley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Spriggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alfred U Col of Ceramics
	      2 Pine Street
	      Alfred, NY  148021296    607/871-2716

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1407,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A comprehensive investigation of the preparation of advanced                   
              materials by the Self-Propagating High-Temperature Synthesis                   
              (SHS) Process will be conducted. (The SHS process is a powder-                 
              based process, where at least one of the reactant materials is                 
              a finely-divided powder.  Two primary classes of SHS reactions                 
              are those involving two solids (S/S) and those involving a                     
              solid and a gas (G/S); the reactions in both cases are                         
              characteristically exothermic.  When the reactant mixture is                   
              "ignited" at one end, a self-sustaining or self-propagating                    
              "combustion wave" proceeds through the packed bed of material,                 
              leaving a condensed product or product mixture in its wake.)                   
              Enhanced and precise control of the product microstructure is                  
              a major goal of this program.  The study is expected to                        
              identify and quantify key micromechanistic processes which                     
              determine the type, size, and distribution of the product                      
              phases (as well as the porosity characteristics) in the                        
              synthesized material.  Activity in this program will focus on                  
              the intrinsic reaction kinetics in samples with a well-defined                 
              micro-structure.  The samples will consist of a metallic or                    
              bimetallic foil embedded in an SHS powder mixture.  The powder                 
              will be ignited in the usual fashion so that both the powder                   
              and the foil participate in the SHS reaction.  The diffusion,                  
              melting, and/or reaction at the foil interface will thus be                    
              driven on the same temperature and time scales as a                            
              conventional SHS reaction.  Thus, a "microstructure" which can                 
              be readily characterized will be created, and an idealized                     
              large, flat interface will be subjected to the same                            
              temperature history as material in a totally powder-based SHS                  
              reaction.  Diffusion coefficients, reaction kinetic                            
              parameters, and resulting phase distributions will all be                      
              obtained.  Both a solid-solid and a gas-solid system will be                   
              studied.  A relatively simple model of this idealized                          
              configuration will be developed to aid in the extraction of                    
              the fundamental kinetic parameters.  This study is expected to                 
              establish a strong processing-microstructure-material                          
              properties relationship; the enhanced fundamental                              
              understanding of the interrelationships involved in SHS                        
              processing will lead to development of standardized approaches                 
              for producing materials with a controlled/tailored                             
              microarchitecture. Emphasis in this particular program will be                 
              placed on experimental and theoretical studies of the                          
              intrinsic kinetics involved; additional tasks regarding other                  
              aspects of SHS processing, particularly as applied to                          
              production of "functionally gradient" materials will be                        
              carried out on a parallel program being funded concurrently by                 
              the Army Research Office.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Fundamental studies of the detailed mechanisms involved in SHS                 
              processing are needed for attainment of the full potential of                  
              this novel method for production of advanced materials with                    
              unique properties; without such understanding of these                         
              mechanisms, production of products with properties optimized                   
              for various end uses will remain very difficult and time                       
              consuming, with a long learning process having to be repeated                  
              for each new application.  Fine-tuning the SHS process to                      
              produce materials with well-defined (and controlled)                           
              composition gradients and/or pore structures will make major                   
              contributions to such widely varied applications as catalyst                   
              support materials, heat-engine components, porous preforms for                 
              composite materials fabrication, disk brakes, high-temperature                 
              filter media, high-surface area adsorption materials,                          
              piezoelectric devices, and shape-selective separation media.
