Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: "Biomechanical and Physiological Changes
               Associated with the Evolution of Non- feeding Development in Echinoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9114655

Award Number: 9114655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Emlet   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports visits over two years by                                   
              Dr. Richard Emlet of the University of Oregon                                  
              to the laboratory of Dr. Ove Hoegh-Guldberg of                                 
              the University of Sydney.  The research will                                   
              examine the fluid-mechanical and physiological                                 
              changes that are associated with modification                                  
              of development in the Australian echinoid genus                                
              Heliocidaris and other genera of sea urchins.                                  
              The research will compare larvae of the                                        
              congeners H. tuberculata and H. erythrogramma                                  
              which live in the same latitude and environment                                
              thus minimizing measurable differences between                                 
              related species for reasons unrelated to                                       
              developmental changes.  The research will                                      
              involve measurements of ciliary morphology and                                 
              kinematics, swimming behavior and metabolic                                    
              rates.  Results are expected to show whether                                   
              and how changes in morphology influence                                        
              swimming performance in the species with                                       
              modified development. The morphology of the                                    
              non-feeding larva will permit a determination                                  
              of the energetic cost of locomotion in a larval                                
              metagoan.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research combines the strengths of the                                    
              U.S.-Australian scientists to allow them to                                    
              investigate how changes in development are                                     
              manifested in morphological and physiological                                  
              performance.  Dr. Emlet has expertise in the                                   
              evolution of echinoid larval development and                                   
              fluid mechanics of microscopic organisms.  HIs                                 
              Australian colleague brings expertise in                                       
              metabolic physiology and has developed new                                     
              technology for measuring oxygen consumption in                                 
              growing planktonic organisms.  Seven of the                                    
              fourteen lineages of sea urchin larvae that                                    
              have evolved nonfeeding development are                                        
              represented along the coasts of Australia.
