Title       : Phased Array Doppler Current Profiler
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9114687

Award Number: 9114687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis Rowe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RD Instruments
	      9855 Businesspark Avenue
	      San Diego, CA  921311113    619/693-1178

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5414,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              RD Instruments will undertake an SBIR Phase II proposal to                     
              continue development and commercialization of a phased array                   
              acoustic Doppler current profiler (PAADCP).  This company                      
              has pioneered the use of acoustic Doppler techniques for a                     
              variety of ocean science and applied oceanographic                             
              applications.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The project will reduce the size and weight of presently                       
              available instruments and make them more versatile by                          
              developing a single phased array to replace the four                           
              independent piston transducers that are now required.  A 38                    
              kHz phased array transducer will have a significantly                          
              smaller diameter and be lighter in weight than the four 75                     
              kHz transducers now used.  A fifth beam can also be formed                     
              to add a new capability of measuring vertical velocities as                    
              well as lateral velocities.  Its smaller flat shape will                       
              make it easier to mount in ships and elsewhere.                                
              Additionally, it is anticipated that it will have nearly                       
              double the profiling range of present instruments.                             
                                                                                             
              To achieve the objectives, several tasks will be undertaken.                   
              These will include a design trade-off study to validate                        
              theoretical models developed during Phase I concerning the                     
              ceramic geometries of the transducer and their resulting                       
              beam patterns.  Broadband technology options will be                           
              examined for implementation.  The 38.5 kHz ceramic                             
              transducers will be designed and packaged along with the                       
              electronics and data management system.  Signal processing                     
              algorithms will be developed.  There will also be an                           
              extensive testing program in laboratory tanks and at sea in                    
              collaboration with academic ocean scientists.  If                              
              successful, this new PAADCP could be the next generation                       
              acoustic profiling system and will have broad applications                     
              on U.S. and foreign research vessels and in offshore                           
              commercial applications as well.
