Title       : Design and Operation of High Performance Chemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1993    
File        : a9114080

Award Number: 9114080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Seider seider@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues the principal investigator's                       
              experimentation with algorithmic methods for the design of complex             
              processes that are difficult to operate and control; that is,                  
              processes that are often overdesigned because process engineers are            
              reluctant to design near or within regimes of complex operation,               
              where these processes are often economically optimal.  To achieve              
              better designs, work will continue to investigate development of               
              design methodologies that involve the coordination of design,                  
              operations, and control optimizations.  The prototype software                 
              system, PRODOC, will be extended to permit experimentation with new            
              methodologies for eliminating overdesign in a broader class of                 
              chemical processes.  In these new methodologies, models for design             
              and control are refined in a coordinated fashion as the design                 
              evolves.  A Model Predictive Controller (MPC) developed previously,            
              enables the improved control needed to operate near or within                  
              complex nonlinear regimes.  MPC optimization is coordinated with               
              economic optimization to efficiently evaluate the controllability              
              of the most promising designs as the economic optimization                     
              proceeds.                                                                      
                   The project is concerned with two typical chemical processes              
              for experimentation with the new algorithms and design                         
              methodologies.  It extends and perfects the optimization                       
              techniques for locating all solutions, including the global                    
              optimum, of complex nonlinear programs, such as arise when                     
              implementing the new design methodologies.  The contributions,                 
              which can be expected to advance the state-of-the-art for all                  
              design engineers, are beginning to have an impact on chemical                  
              process engineers, who are gaining the ability to reliably design              
              more highly-integrated chemical processes that are more energy-                
              efficient and profitable.
