Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical
               Sciences--Uncertain Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1991  
File        : a9114455

Award Number: 9114455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26645              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lonny B. Winrich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Attempts to duplicate expert problem solving behavior and                 
              concomitantly to deal with uncertain and incomplete information                
              and knowledge have focused special attention on the mathematics                
              of uncertain reasoning.  Techniques for treating the                           
              uncertainties which arise in expert systems have come from a                   
              spectrum of mathematical theories ranging from classical                       
              probability to heuristic rules based on empirical observations of              
              expert behavior.                                                               
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Uncertain Reasoning to              
              be held June 1-5, 1992 at the University of North Dakota at Grand              
              Forks.  Professor Glenn Shafer of the University of Kansas will                
              be the principal lecturer.  To stimulate interest and activity in              
              mathematical research, the National Science Foundation each year               
              supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in                 
              the Mathematical Sciences.  Each five-day conference features a                
              distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of                 
              important current research in one sharply focused area of the                  
              mathematical sciences.  The lecturer subsequently prepares an                  
              expository monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally              
              published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for              
              Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American                 
              Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical                      
              Statistics.  Certain features differentiate these conferences                  
              from typical research conferences.  These are: (1) Focus on a                  
              single important and timely area of research by a leading                      
              practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through               
              regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and                  
              timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.
