Title       : Independent State Formation in Northern Mesopotamia: Excavation of the Uruk
               Period at Tell Brak, Syria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a0107251

Award Number: 0107251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoff Emberling geoffe@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Geoff Emberling and his colleagues
              will conduct one season of field research and a second of analysis at the
              archaeological site of Tell Brak, located in Northeastern Syria. The site
              consists of a 65 hectare mound about 45 m high and is surrounded by a ring of
              five or more small sites at a radius of 0.5-1.0 km. While first excavated
              almost 50 years ago, only recently have the lower levels which date to the
              fourth millennium BC been uncovered and the limited soundings have exposed a
              large building with niched and buttressed walls, a massive gateway with stone
              door sill and door socket still intact, and an enclosed courtyard with
              large-scale non-domestic cooking facilities. The single associated cylinder
              seal impression recovered suggests a developing system of administrative
              control. The most recent excavations in the same level in a different part of
              the site have revealed a ceramic production area with kilns and a large clay
              pit, suggesting not only specialization of production but spatial concentration
              of such activities. The significance of these findings lie in both their early
              date and their location in northern Mesopotamia. Archaeologists have
              traditionally believed that the Tigris and Euphrates region of southern
              Mesopotamia served as the cradle of Near Eastern civilization and that the more
              poorly watered northern periphery was of secondary importance. While
              agriculturally fertile, the southern region however lacks essential natural
              resources such as timber and copper and archaeologists have attributed
              development in the North to colonization by Southerners to gain these
              materials. It is, in fact, clear that such settlement did take place. Tell Brak
              however significantly changes this picture because the recent excavations
              appear to reveal an unexpectedly high level of scale and social complexity
              which predates southern expansion and exceeds comparable developments in the
              South. Dr. Emberling and his colleagues will continue excavation in this early
              level to expand exposure both in the central area as well as an outlying region
              to determine the degree of social differentiation. They will address three
              specific questions: 1. When did Tell Brak grow in size and complexity and a
              series of high precision radiocarbon determinations will aid in development of
              a ceramic chronology. 2.In what sequence did trade, administrative control and
              specialization of production increase? This will provide insight into the
              processes with led to development at the site. 3. What were the effects of
              later southern expansion into the site. Dr. Emberling postulates that control
              over trade in crucial and abundant raw materials such as copper ore and
              obsidian (used to make stone tools) play a crucial role in Tell Brak's
              rise.

     Scientists wish to understand how states developed from a simple
              egalitarian agricultural base and how elites arise. Because states by
              definition incorporate large geographic regions, the process can be understood
              only in broad areal context. Tell Brak, because of its unexpected degree of
              complexity and its location at the "edge" of Mesopotamia has the potential to
              provide significant insight. A number of graduate student will participant, and
              thus the project will also serve an important educational function.

