Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Modeling Sustainable Harvesting
               Regimes for Forest Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2002   
File        : a0107353

Award Number: 0107353
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48462              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland C. de Gouvenain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,de Gouvenain
	      
	      Coventry, CT  06238    860/742-1559

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107353
De Gouvenain

The International Research Fellow Awards Program
              enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide 11 months of support
              to Dr.Roland de Gouvenain to work with Professor Joelisoa Ratsirarson at the
              University of Antananarivo in Madagascar on the modeling of sustainable
              harvesting regimes for forest conservation.  Of the 11 month duration, five
              months will be spent back in the United States at the University of
              Connecticut, working with Dr. John Silander, analyzing the data and writing up
              his results. 

The objective of this project is to determine whether
              sustainable tree harvesting is compatible with forest biodiversity
              conservation.    The PI proposes to determine the sustainability of different
              tree harvesting 
regimes, and to analyze the possible causal relationship
              between harvesting and changes in forest structure, forest composition and site
              environmental variables from a "no-harvest" baseline forest condition.  He will
              use a regeneration probability model to simulate how different harvesting
              regimes may impact forest 
regeneration and how it affects long-term forest
              conservation.

The study forest of Tampolo is an ideal "field laboratory"
              with a range of harvesting "treatments" resulting from unequal protection at
              different sites.  
These harvesting regimes could be incorporated into future
              management and conservation plans for the study forest and other threatened
              forests.
***

