Title       : Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences: Reconstructing Unobserved
               Hypothalamic Neuroendocrine Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0107680

Award Number: 0107680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Keenan dmk7b@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Sundberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Interdisciplinary Grant in the Mathematical Sciences project is twofold:
              formal educational training in the biological sciences and the experience of
              immersion in a research laboratory environment.  The principal investigator
              will be a visiting faculty  member in the Division of Endocrinolgy, School of
              Medicine, University of Virginia.  The composition of the total effort will be
              75% coursework and 25% research and laboratory exposure.  The educational and
              experiential components of this award will allow the  PI to reach that
              understanding of the biological sciences, including practical laboratory
              aspects, which is
necessary for collaborative interactions at the frontier of
              neuroendocrinolgy.   As a simple example of the anticipated experience, a
              general understanding of how, and the precision by which, biomolecular (DNA,
              RNA, protein, steroid) concentrations  are calculated within a laboratory
              environment will be enormously  valuable.

Animal and human reproduction,
              bodily growth, and the response to stress are but three of the many critical
              processes, which are regulated and controlled by (neuro-)hormones produced in
              the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, and remote target glands.  
              Understanding the (mal)functioning  of such neuroendocrine systems is a
              fundamentally important problem in contemporary biology.   One of the most
              fascinating and challenging aspects is that the neurohormones produced in the
              hypothalamus, which ultimately control much of the resulting dynamics of these
              systems, are unobservable in most cases (for practical and ethical reasons). 
              Guiding the award activities  will be the  issue of how to reconstruct such
              unobserved hypothalamic signals, a key link in understanding animal and human
              reproduction, growth, and control of physiological stress.  This award will
              allow the PI to gain the knowledge necessary not only for collaboration at the
              frontier of neuroendocrinolgy, but also to design needed academic courses
              focusing on the important areas of computational biology, bioinformatics, and
              statistical genetics.  The success of this award can be measured by the quality
              and number of both published research papers  and Ph.D. theses directed in
              these interdisciplinary areas.  The benefits of the award will be disseminated
              by the presentation of conference and seminar talks, publications in both the
              applied mathematics and the physiology literature, and publication of a book on
              biological modeling in space and time.  This IGMS project is jointly supported
              by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
