Title       : Altering the Course of Quantum Dynamics Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0107803

Award Number: 0107803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herschel A. Rabitz hrabitz@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Herschel Rabitz of Princeton University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program for research that deals with development of new
              theoretical concepts relevant to the control of quantum phenomena and the
              extraction of mechanistic and other physical information from the control
              process.  The project has four components: (A) design and analysis of molecular
              controls, (B) exploration of special control objectives, (C) development of
              closed loop algorithms to guide laboratory learning control, and (D)
              development of closed loop algorithms for extracting molecular interactions
              from laboratory control experiments. Components (A) and (B) aim to attain
              physical insights into the control of quantum phenomena through theoretical and
              computational analysis. The emphasis in items (C) and (D) is on bolstering the
              emerging closed loop laboratory capabilities for controlling quantum processes
              by the introduction of new algorithms. Close connections exist among all of the
              proposed research categories, with some of the design and analysis studies
              serving as forerunners to the closed loop algorithm development. Although this
              research is theoretical and computational in nature, it aims for direct impact
              on emerging laboratory control experiments. Several collaborative laboratory
              ventures have therefore been established, with the objective of transferring
              the proposed concepts and algorithms into the laboratory for rapid
              implementation. Collectively, the research aims to advance the capabilities to
              manipulate molecular processes and more general quantum phenomena while
              simultaneously extracting as much physical information as possible from the
              efforts.

Since the invention of laser, chemists have dreamed of selectively
              exciting regions within a molecule and thus causing a controlled chemical
              reaction to occur.  Long ago it was realized, however, that energy
              redistributes in molecules so rapidly that it is it not possible to concentrate
              enough energy in a selected bond to cause it to break.  With the advent of
              laser pulse modulation techniques and the application of quantum control
              theory, it now appears that laser selective chemistry could potentially become
              a reality with ultimately practical applications.
