Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Power, Conflict and Collective
               Decision-Making: Water Resource Management and Watershed Committees in Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0107314

Award Number: 0107314
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca N. Abers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,Abers
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0512003   Collective Decision-Making              
Program Ref : 0000,5913,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107314
Abers
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide twenty-four months of support to
              Dr. Rebecca N. Abers to work with Dr. Luiz Pedone, at the University of
              Brasilia in Brazil on collective decision-making regarding water resource
              management and watershed committees in Brazil.
The PI will use case studies
              and a general examination of water policy reform to explore questions related
              to institutional change and collective action in studying the role of
              participatory watershed committees in resolving conflicts over water use in
              Brazil.  The study will examine the evolution of watershed committees in Brazil
              to date, focusing on some of the more consolidated experiences, in the effort
              to understand the extent to which this kind of decision-making forum can
              resolve conflicts related to water use and to develop a methodology for long
              term analysis.  This project is linked to a larger collaborative effort, the
              "Watermark Project", headed by Dr. Margaret Keck of Johns Hopkins University. 
              The Watermark Project brings together scholars in Brazil, the U.S., and Great
              Britain in the effort to carry out a comparative analysis of basin-level water
              management institutions.
Dr. Pedone is the chair of the Political Science
              Department and a founder of the Public Policy Research Center.  He has
              extensive experience studying Brazilian public-policy and institutional
              change.
***

