Title       : Collaborative Research:Processing Magma and Constructing Plutons in the Upper
               Crust:Insights on Magma Chambers from Top-to-Bottom Views of Plutons and
               Associated Volcanic Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0107094

Award Number: 0107094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Calvin F. Miller millercf@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Miller
EAR-0107094

Understanding how magma is processed on its journey from
              source to final rocky resting place is vital for understanding crustal
              evolution, the mechanics of magma ascent and emplacement and their relation to
              tectonics, and eruptive processes.  Storage in upper crustal magma chambers has
              been, and still is, central to most views of this journey.  However, concepts
              of the magma chamber, the processes that occur within it, and its relationship
              to plutons that are ultimately constructed have been intensely reevaluated in
              recent years.  Many widely held views (e.g. that magma chambers are mostly
              crystal-poor bodies of magma throughout most of their "lifespan") have been
              called into question.  We propose to investigate the evolution of exceptionally
              exposed plutons and probable equivalent volcanic sequences in the Eldorado
              Mountains and Highland Range, Nevada, and to test hypotheses about the
              mechanical and chemical processing of magma as it enters, resides in, and is
              extracted from magma chambers.

Existing data that include general mapping
              and a sizable data set of 40Ar/39Ar ages and whole-rock elemental and isotopic
              analyses provide a sound initial basis for this study.  We will add to the
              existing data base, but our main emphasis will be on a combination of updated
              traditional and new methods (very detailed mapping of internal pluton
              structures; detailed petrography using compositional imaging to emphasize
              zoning, reaction textures, and accessory mineral features; crystal size
              distribution analysis; in situ Pb and Sr isotope analysis of feldspars; ion
              probe dating of zircon).  This methodology will clarify the evolution of these
              magma chambers, including their filling and replenishment; disruption and
              rearrangement by internal and external processes such as convection, mass
              wasting, roof collapse, and eruption; and, ultimately, pluton construction.  It
              will also permit us to evaluate the filtering effect of magma chambers by
              comparing input magmas, outputs (erupted magmas), and retained materials
              (plutons), and to constrain eruptive triggers and controls of eruptive
              styles.


