Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: The Role of Indigenous Conflcit
               Resolution Strategies and Practices in Natural Resource Management:
               Implications for Theory and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0107273

Award Number: 0107273
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85525              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chudi H. Okafor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C,Okafor
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    515/382-6029

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
Program Ref : 0000,5993,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107273
Okafor

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral
              research fellowship for Dr. Chudi H. Okafor to work with Dr. Daniel Obikeze at
              the University of Nigeria, in Enugu State, Nigeria.

This study will examine
              the nature and role of indigenous conflict resolution strategies and practices
              concerning natural resource management in Nigerian society.  It will provide a
              framework for examining dimensions of land conflict.  Nigerians face numerous
              critical decisions that revolve around the distribution of limited resources
              and the development of appropriate methods for resolving disputes that emerge. 
              They must also decide how to ensure that limited resources are provided
              efficiently and equitably.  Within this context, Nigeria needs conflict
              resolution processes that commit parties to change, reduce resistance to
              change, and allow creative solutions to be implemented.  For this to happen,
              the parties involved must share ideas about who and what is responsible for the
              conflict, type of conflict, dimensions of conflict, and resources, values and
              experiences for resolution processes.  In this study, in-depth interviews,
              focus group discussions, and case studies will be used to assess strategies,
              practices and techniques used in indigenous land conflict resolution.  The
              study represents an effort to combine qualitative, comparative and quantitative
              research methodologies in understanding indigenous social conflict
              transformation in order to provide a knowledge base on which to design and
              implement programs for conflict transformation.

Dr. Dan Obikeze is the
              director of the Center for Indigenous Knowledge on Population Resources and
              Environmental Management (CIKPREM) at the University of Nigeria.  Dr. Obikeze
              and members of CIKPREM have been involved in multiplying the capacity for
              preventive efforts in conflict management/resolution.  CIKPREM's interest in
              agricultural programs in Africa has a special ability to contribute to food
              production, land, and natural resource management in Africa, as well as to
              foster conditions that prevent violence and destruction.

