Title       : RUI: Group Testing for Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0107179

Award Number: 0107179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60207              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Macula macula@geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The screening of data sets is essential to modern technology.  
Whenever the
              objective is to find "positive elements" in a 
data set, a test indicating
              whether at least one positive is 
an element of a specific part of the data
              set can greatly 
facilitate their isolation.  Such tests are called binary
              
group tests and the general mathematical method behind the 
identification
              of the positives using such tests is known as 
classical group testing.  In
              many applied settings, the use 
of classical group testing to isolate objects
              that are 
individually positive has become standard experimental 
procedure. 
              However, very little work has been done in 
applying group testing techniques
              to the identification of 
objects that are collectively positive.  Let C be an
              unknown 
collection of subsets or complexes in a population and let P 
be a
              pool taken from the population.  A pool P is said to be 
positive if and only
              if a member of C is also a subset of P.  
The identification of C by the
              application of these binary 
tests is called group testing for
              complexes.

The primary aim of this proposal is the development of efficient
              
group testing methods that lead to the identification of 
positive
              combinations of objects, namely the positive complexes.  
There are many
              scientific and technical areas where the 
identification of positive
              combinations of objects is important. 
Computationally feasible methods of
              finding combinations of 
entities that produce some measurable outcome or are
              measurably 
linked to some function or disfunction would have important
              
applications to medical genetics, computer security, software 
testing, data
              mining, communications, and marketing.


