Title       : RUI: The Early Evolution of the Pholidota and a Reexamination of the Monophyly
               of the Cohort Edentata (Mammalia)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0107922

Award Number: 0107922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126388             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Gaudin timothy-gaudin@utc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Chattanooga
	      615 Mccallie Avenue
	      Chattanooga, TN  374032504    423/425-4141

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The members of the mammalian orders Pholidota (the Old World pangolins, or scaly
              anteaters) and Xenarthra (the New World armadillos, anteaters and sloths and
              their extinct kin) are among the most unusual of all placental mammals. 
              Despite the differences in anatomy, ecology and geographic distribution
              presented by these mammals, previous studies have suggested that these two
              orders share a close common ancestry, as evidenced by the reduction or
              elimination of their teeth and a handful of other detailed anatomical
              similarities.  Unfortunately, the potential relationship of these two groups to
              one another or to other groups of placental mammals remains one of the least
              investigated portions of placental mammal phylogeny.  The goal of the proposed
              study is twofold: (a) to support research at the National Museum of Natural
              History in  Washington, D.C. including preparation, illustration and
              description of a complete skeleton of the fossil pangolin Patriomanis
              americanus.; and (b) to conduct an analysis of the phylogenetic relationships
              of the order Pholidota, including all seven living species as well as the three
              other well-known extinct pangolins, Eomanis and Necromanis, from the Eocene and
              Oligo-Miocene of Europe respectively, as well as an undescribed taxon from the
              Eocene of Mongolia.  The results from this new phylogenetic study will be
              combined with the results of previous studies on the systematic relationships
              within the order Xenarthra to form the foundation of a broader study on the
              phylogeny of the Cohort Edentata, a group that ostensibly includes the
              pholidotans, xenarthrans and an extinct early Tertiary group of burrowing
              mammals, the Palaeanodonta.  The proposed study will examine skeletal
              characteristics in representatives of each of the major extinct and living
              family level groupings within Pholidota, Xenarthra and Palaeanodonta.  These
              characters will then be compared to the condition in a range of living and
              extinct placental and marsupial ingroup and outgroup taxa.  
	This study will
              be the first comprehensive cladistic investigation of edentate relationships
              based on anatomical features.  It will also be the only such study to
              incorporate all the major edentate lineages, as well as a broad sampling of
              other placental orders, including representatives of each of the major
              placental supraordinal groups identified by previous studies. The results of
              the proposed study will serve as an important groundwork for understanding the
              evolution of the various unusual anatomical and ecological specializations that
              characterize pholidotan and xenarthran mammals, the prevalence of convergent
              adaptations in these groups, and the biogeographic history that underlies their
              diversification. Furthermore, some previous work has suggested that some or all
              of these edentate groups diverged from other placental mammals at or near the
              base of the placental radiation.  If this is indeed the case, an
              improved
understanding of edentate evolution may yield insight into the early
              biogeographic history and adaptive radiation of all placental mammals.  One or
              more undergraduate students will be trained in various aspects of
              paleontological and systematics research.


