Title       : Graphs and Patterns in Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0107455

Award Number: 0107455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Lyubich mlyubich@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Milnor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Detlef Gromoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon Takhtajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Blaine Lawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Award:  DMS-0107455
Principal Investigator:  Mikhail Lyubich

The
              International Conference on Graphs and Patterns in
Mathematics and Theoretical
              Physics at SUNY Stone Brook in 2001
will bring together researchers in several
              branches of
mathematics and theoretical physics in which graphs play
              a
central role, hoping to encourage fruitful interactions between
these
              fields.  This conference is a celebration of Dennis
Sullivan's sixtieth
              birthday and addresses some of the topics of
recent interest to Sullivan. 
              Themes to be emphasized include (1)
graphs and algebra, (2) graphs and
              discrete Riemannian geometry
and discrete gauge theory, (3) graphs and
              bifurcation patterns in
dynamical systems, (4) graphs and quantum field theory
              and
topology.  Minicourses on conference topics will be pointed
towards
              graduate students and junior researchers.

A graph in the sense used in the
              title of this conference is a
data structure consisting of some number of
              "vertices," usually
drawn as dots, joined by "edges," usually drawn as
              curves
beginning at one vertex and ending at another.  This kind of
graph is
              a common combinatorial structure, encountered every day
in problems of
              transportation and scheduling (consider a network
of roads or telephone lines,
              for example), but useful in many
less obvious ways.  Some of the recent uses
              of graphs in geometry
and physical theory grow out of Richard Feynman's
              celebrated idea
of describing parts of quantum theory with graphs that
              represent
possible lifetimes for a particle in space-time.  Feynman's
notion
              that a quantum theoretic quantity may represent a sum over
all possible
              histories is reduced from a large, continuous
calculation to a summation
              indexed by the different possible
Feynman graphs.  In a similar manner, modern
              geometers and
physicists are exploring ways to work with the very
              large
collections of all possible geometric structures on a particular
space
              by reducing to manipulations of a family of graphs.
