Title       : Organic Ion-Molecule Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0107797

Award Number: 0107797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Kass kass@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Organic ion/molecule reactions will be explored in the gas phase with a Fourier
              transfolm mass spectrometer and a variable temperature flowing afterglow-triple
              quadrupole apparatus (190 C to 400 C). The results will be contrasted to those
              in condensed media and supplemented with ab initio molecular orbital and
              density functional theory calculations. Particular attention will be focused on
              antiaromatic compounds, reactive intermediates, and zwitterionic ions.
              Previously, long-lived cyclopropenyl anions were generated in the gas phase and
              solution. These species in general are discussed in all introductory organic
              chemistry textbooks because they are of fundamental interest and may serve as
              potential sources of novel materials. During this grant period,
              spectroscopically characterizing cyclopropenyl anion derivatives and probing
              their reactivities and structures are planned. The energetics of a variety of
              antiaromatic and homoantiaromatic compounds (ions and neutrals) also will be
              obtained so that these long sought after but elusive species can be better
              understood. Reactive intermediates play a central role in understanding
              chemical reactions and considerable emphasis will be placed on studying their
              reactivity and energetics. Some technologically important intermediates will be
              examined in addition to a number of strained ring compounds. Much of this work
              will be facilitated by the recent development of a general and highly selective
              method for preparing radical anions in the gas phase. Finally, electrostatic
              effects will be examined. These interactions are extraordinarily important in a
              wealth of areas ranging from organic synthesis, material design and
              chromatography, to molecular recognition, enzyme structure, and drug
              development. Recently, the first zwitterionic ion and its neutral counterpart
              in the gas phase were prepared. This makes it possible to explore the
              structure, reactivity, and energetics of dipolar ions, develop models to
              explain zwitterionic species, and obtain a much better understanding of
              electrostatic effects.

With this Accomplishment-Based Renewal award the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the ongoing work of
              Professor Steven R. Kass at the University of Minnesota- Twin Cities. The
              research focuses on understanding the reactivities and thermodynamic properties
              of reactive organic intermediates. The work will be of interest to chemists
              trying to understand the fundamental factors which control several types of
              reactions in gases and liquids, and will provide valuable research training to
              both graduate and undergraduate students.
