Title       : Southeast Conference on Applied Mathematics to be held November 9-11, 2001 in
               Raleigh, North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0107812

Award Number: 0107812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre A. Gremaud gremaud@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hien T. Tran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107812
Gremaud

This award will support the Southeast Conference on Applied
              
Mathematics (SECAM). The conference will focus on four overlapping 
themes:
              i) Mathematical Methods for Multiscale Problems, ii) Industrial 
Mathematics,
              iii) Mathematical and Computational Biology, and iv) 
Material Science.
              Multiscaled models are found in a wide range of 
applications and pose
              difficulties for both mathematical and numerical 
analysis. What is, for
              instance, the effect of the fine scale behavior on the 
solutions? How well
              should the fine scales be resolved to obtain accurate 
information? etc.  The
              problems to be discussed in Industrial Mathematics 
come from areas such as
              microelectronic, chemical manufacturing and 
material processing, and will
              focus on the process of technology transfer. 
The extreme complexity of the
              problems studied in Mathematical Biology 
precludes a traditional "pencil and
              paper" approach and calls rather for an 
integrated approach between
              mathematical modeling and computer 
analyses. This trend has been accelerated
              by the development of 
productive partnerships between experimentalists,
              theoreticians and 
mathematicians with similar interests but very different
              areas of expertise. 
Successful examples will be discussed. The study of
              emerging 
applications in the Material Sciences such as granular flows, thin
              films or 
smart materials has led to the discovery of new kind of
              instabilities and 
interface propagation problems. This session will aim at
              facilitating the 
migration of the most successful analysis and computational
              techniques 
from specific areas of Material Science to other problems.

The
              conference aims at accomplishing three main goals: Interaction, 
Showcase, and
              New Activities. Interaction: The conference will provide a 
forum and
              gathering place for applied mathematicians in the Southeast. It 
will reach
              out to several groups that are underrepresented in traditional 
meetings.
              First, many successful collaborations have been established 
between applied
              mathematicians and scientists from local companies and 
governmental
              laboratories in technological parks such as Research 
Triangle Park, NC.
              Several industrial partners have been invited to give 
presentations. Second,
              there are emerging centers of excellence within the 
many local colleges and
              historically black institutions. Speakers and 
students from such institution
              have been invited to contribute to the 
success of the conference. Showcase:
              The high level of activity in Applied 
and Industrial Mathematics is not
              always accurately represented through 
the usual channels of communication.
              Indeed, by its very nature, a sizable 
part of the work done in Industrial
              Mathematics gets to be published in 
specialized engineering type journals,
              reaching only a small portion of the 
Applied Mathematics community.
              Conferences such as this one can play a 
fundamental role in unifying and
              improving approaches that may be 
similar in many aspects but are used in very
              distinct applications. Special 
care has been taken to provide younger
              scientists and graduate students 
with the opportunity to present their work
              and take an active part in the 
conference. New activities: The audience is
              expected to span a whole 
spectrum of expertise, experience and background,
              from recognized 
researchers in academia to engineers from the private sector
              and national 
research laboratories to students and people with limited
              research 
experience in Applied Mathematics. It is expected that not only will
              the 
conference give an accurate idea of significant ongoing and future trends
              
in Applied Mathematics, but also will lead to new collaborations and
              
applications.

