Title       : Metal-Catalyzed Olefin Polymerizations: Mechanistic Studies and Catalyst Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0107810

Award Number: 0107810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice S. Brookhart mbrookhart@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Maurice Brookhart, Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at
              Chapel Hill, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
              Chemistry Program for his continued work investigating olefin polymerization
              and copolymerization catalysts. These late metal catalysts offer functional
              group tolerance and novel polymer microstructures. Detailed mechanistic studies
              of these polymerizations and copolymerizations should yield insights for
              designing new catalysts. Particular foci include: (a) the reactivity of neutral
              Ni(II) catalysts with functionalized olefins such as methylacrylate and vinyl
              acetate; (b) the detailed mechanism of copolymerization of carbon monoxide with
              olefins using various Ni(II) catalysts; and (c) the mechanistic features of
              Ni(II) and Pd(II) diimine catalysts, their analogs and super-active iron and
              cobalt ethylene polymerization catalysts.  

Intensive research has been
              directed toward understanding fundamental aspects of metal-catalyzed olefin
              polymerization and the results ofthese studies have been used to develop new
              catalysts. These have been enormously important contributions since over thirty
              billion pounds of polyolefin are produced in the United States each year. Most
              of the commercial olefin polymerization catalysts are based on early transition
              or lanthanide metals. In this project a series of highly versatile late
              transition metal catalysts will be investigated. These studies will provide
              fundamental mechanistic information on how catalysts join olefins to one
              another during the polymerization process as well as guide developments of new
              catalyst systems with potential industrial applications.


