Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Phylogenetic Analysis of the
               Phaeophyceae (Brown Algae) Based on rbcL and LSU Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a0107297

Award Number: 0107297
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi E. Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N,Phillips
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    337/236-3438

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5977,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107297
Phillips

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide twenty-four months
              of support to Dr. Naomi E. Phillips to work with Dr. Gary W. Saunders at the
              University of New Brunswick in Fredericton, Canada.

This project will use
              the rbcL and LSU sequence information to elucidate the ordinal and some
              familial relationships among the Phaeophyceae (brown algae).  Brown algae are
              one of the most dominant and biologically diverse groups of primary producers
              in coastal marine environments.  They exhibit a wide range of morphological
              forms, from simple microscopic and macroscopic filaments to large and complex
              parenchymatous thalli.  Economically, brown algae are major sources of natural
              products and biomedical supplies.  Despite their importance, research is just
              beginning to examine objectively evolutionary relationships and a consensus in
              terms of a natural classification system that reflects phylogenetic
              relationships is missing.  It is critical to our conservation of these
              resources that we initiate comprehensive studies to understand them.  The
              results of this research will contribute no only to our understanding of this
              group of organisms, but will facilitate future research in other areas, such as
              ecology.

Dr. Gary Saunders is an established researcher in brown algal
              systematics with expertise in both traditional and molecular techniques.

