Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a0107583

Award Number: 0107583
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise S. Mead meadl@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L,Mead
	      3029 Cordley Hall
	      Corvallis, OR  97333    /   -

NSF Program : 1398      BIO INFOR POSTDOCT RSCH FELLOW
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
              Informatics for FY2001.  The fellowship supports research and training at the
              postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
              computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
              fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
              career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
              integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
              at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
              these fellowships will play important roles in training of the future
              workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "A
              new approach to modeling the evolution of sexual isolation."  This project
              explores the evolutionary dynamics of sexual isolation in salamanders and
              Drosophila.  Theoretical models are being used to simulate evolution of sexual
              isolation given a phylogeny.  Simulated data matrices will be compared to
              empirical data, providing the first tests of the roles of inheritance, drift,
              selection, and reinforcement in the evolution of sexual isolation across
              clades.  

