Title       : Two-Photon Structure/Property Relationships and Photochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0107105

Award Number: 0107105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth R. Marder smarder@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Perry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to University of Arizona is supported by the Advanced Materials
              Program in the Chemistry Division.The research by Professors Seth Marder and
              Joseph Perry will address structure-property relationships and applications of
              molecules and molecular ensembles that exhibit two-photon absorption. The goals
              of the research are to develop a detailed understanding of how to optimize the
              two-photon absorption cross section in centrosymmetric and noncentrosymmetric
              (dipolar,quadrupolar, octupolar and hexadecapolar) molecules and to design
              chromophores that utilize effectively the excited states to efficiently drive
              chemical reactions that create reactive radicals and Bronsted or Lewis acids
              and bases. The research will enhance the three dimensional spatially resolved
              patterning of materials. Processes enabled by either photoinduced electron or
              energy  transfer, will yield species that will microscopically photopolymerize
              reactive monomers, photodeposit metals and semiconductors,and photogenerate
              catalysts.

Highly efficient two-photon initiators allowing the patterning of
              a range of materials,will make three dimensional microfabrication a viable
              technology for the production of micro-optics, micro-mechanical components and
              microfluidic circuits. The scope of this  interdisciplinary research is broad,
              encompassing synthesis, materials, theory, characterization and fabrication.
              Students will be trained across the fields of chemistry, physics, materials and
              optical science.
