Title       : Peroxide Reaction Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0107697

Award Number: 0107697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned A. Porter n.porter@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Ned Porter, of the Department of Chemistry at Vanderbilt University, is
              studying the mechanism of peroxidation reactions of organic compounds and the
              chemistry of organic peroxides. New methods for the analysis of peroxides
              (silver coordination ion spray mass spectrometry coupled to HPLC), coupled with
              parallel computational analyses, have led to the investigation of dioxiranes,
              energetically accessible from peroxy acids and their conjugate bases. A new
              class of compounds, pyri(mi)dinols, will be prepared and studied for their
              antioxidant properties. New azo compounds that serve as radical initiators will
              permit the evaluation of these compounds as antioxidants in human low density
              liposomes. Theory and experiment will together be used to target the
              development of compounds which will convert a lipid soluble peroxyl radical
              into a water soluble superoxide radical, thereby acting as agents for the
              "export" of a free radical chain from an organic lipophilic aggregate into
              water.

Many organic compounds react with molecular oxygen to give peroxide
              products, a process that has both commercial importance and relevance to human
              health. Professor Ned Porter, of the Department of Chemistry at Vanderbilt
              University, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              for his study of the mechanism of the chemistry of this process, called
              autoxidation or peroxidation, and the chemistry of peroxide compounds. His
              studies also address the inhibition of autoxidation and the study of new
              antioxidants. Through a combination of calculational and experimental studies,
              Professor Porter is developing new compounds of potential activity as
              antioxidants and as agents for the transferral of oxidant activity from the
              cell membrane, where it causes cellular damage, to water, where the activity
              may be discharged without causing damage.
