Title       : Interior Point Methods for Nonconvex Nonlinear Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0107450

Award Number: 0107450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216700             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Shanno shanno@rutcor.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work will continue to develop the algorithm of the LOQO 
interior point
              code for general continuous mathematical 
programming problems, and expand the
              range of problems to 
which it can be applied. Areas of research include
              better
detection of infeasibility and unboundedness, better detection 
of
              linear dependence of the constraints, and better estimates 
of initial
              estimates to the optimum point. Work on higher 
order methods, which can
              greatly improve algorithmic efficiency, 
will be continued, with particular
              interest in applying filter 
methods. In an attempt to expand the scope of the
              types of 
problems that the algorithm can solve, the research will be
              
concerned with solving discrete problems using interior point 
methods. On
              type of problem considered will be mixed integer 
quadratic programming.
              Problems of this type commonly arise in 
finance. Mixed integer linear
              programming problems will also 
be studied, with an initial focus on quickly
              finding feasible 
solutions. Further work will be concerned with general
              
complementarity problems, especially those that arise in 
economics and
              engineering. In all cases, appropriate collections 
of problems arising from
              real applications will be modeled 
in AMPL. These will be made available via
              the internet, as will 
extensions to the LOQO program.

The LOQO code for
              solving a variety of types of mathematical 
programming problems has been
              under development for the past 
four years as a joint research effort of the
              principal investigator 
and Professor Robert Vanderbei of Princeton
              University. The code 
is made freely available via the internet, and to date
              has been 
downloaded several thousand times. It is used to solve problems 
as
              diverse as engineering design, portfolio optimization, airline 
scheduling
              problems, and is currently being adapted for various 
projects in medical
              research. The proposed research is 
concentrated both on improving the
              efficiency of the code and 
increasing the set of problems for which the code
              can be used. 
The new types of problems for which it is hoped the code can
              
be adapted efficiently are problems with variables that must be 
an integer,
              generally 0 or 1. These problems are extremely common, 
and of great practical
              value. For example, when assigning aircraft 
to routes, a whole plane must be
              assigned to a specific route, 
not some fraction of a plane. Including integer
              variables within 
the context an algorithm of this type is very new, and will
              be 
approached initially through important specific applications.
