Title       : Transport in Stable Boundary Layers and Thin Drainage Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0107617

Award Number: 0107617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $617212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry J. Mahrt mahrt@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to improve our understanding of the exchange of
              heat, moisture, momentum, and contaminants between the earth's surface and the
              lower atmosphere when the atmospheric layer near the ground is extremely
              stable.  In these conditions, the variation of the wind with height and time
              and the vertical transport of heat and other material by the atmosphere do not
              conform to the theories appropriate for ordinary daytime conditions.  During
              the day, surface heating causes the air next to the ground to become unstable,
              leading to convection, well-developed turbulence, predictable profiles of
              temperature, wind velocity, and humidity, and therefore predictable vertical
              fluxes of heat and water vapor.  But at night, the surface is cold, the air
              stable, and the turbulence often intermittent and caused by vertical wind shear
              associated with terrain-induced drainage flows.  The recent CASES-99 field
              program (Kansas, October 1999) showed that drainage winds often form over
              ground that is only gently sloping, and may be confined to only the lowest few
              meters of the atmosphere.  The vertical flux of heat and other properties is
              determined by the shear and turbulence in the drainage flow, but these
              characteristics are not well known because measurements are ordinarily too
              widely separated in the vertical to give a good representation of the true
              structure.  Two approaches are pursued in this project.  One is to analyze
              existing data from past field programs (especially CASES-99).  The analysis
              focuses on understanding the intermittent bursts of turbulence that account for
              much of the eddy transport of heat and momentum in stable conditions.  The
              CASES data make it possible to distinguish between the turbulence generated
              locally by shear at the top of the drainage flow and that which is created
              elsewhere and advected over the observing site.  The second approach is to
              conduct a small field program focussed on thin drainage flows employing new
              instruments to enable measurements with high resolution in space and time. 
              These instruments include hot-film anemometers, sonic anemometers with short
              path lengths and miniaturized transducers, and laser-Doppler anemometry.  The
              result of the research will be an improved formulation of transport processes
              in the very stable boundary layer for use in large-scale numerical models for
              weather forecasting and climate prediction.
