Title       : Chiefdom to Manor: An archaeological settlement survey of Viking Age and
               Medieval Skagafjordur, Iceland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0107413

Award Number: 0107413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99984              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Steinberg Jmstein@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. John Steinberg and his
              colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological fieldwork in the
              Skagafjordur region of Northern Iceland.  The goal of the fieldwork is to
              survey 26 farms in five areas of this important Icelandic fjord valley to
              understand the changes in the settlement pattern from the Viking Age through
              Early Danish Rule (AD 874-1800).  Over this period, Iceland was transformed
              from a system of chiefdoms to a manorial organization incorporated into the
              larger Norwegian State.  The research seeks to outline the factors and timing
              involved in this transition.  Specifically, the Skagafjordur Archaeological
              Settlement Survey (SASS) will track the selected farms over 900 years to assess
              the variation in building construction and the economic potential of each farm.
               The result of this work will be an archaeological characterization of the
              household economy, which can then be related to the larger, documented,
              political economy described in the written sources.
	The Medieval sagas,
              written down in the 13th century, describe the events of the Settlement of
              Iceland (AD 874-930) and of the Commonwealth (AD 930-1264).  For the Late
              Medieval (1264-1500) and Danish periods (1500-1800) a series of tax records
              tell much about the manorial organization.  During the Settlement and
              Commonwealth periods, Icelandic social structure changed from a collection of
              autonomous farmers who each held large territories, to a nationwide assembly of
              chieftains, and finally to state.  Over this period, the climate became more
              variable and cooler.  At the same time, overgrazing and forest clearance
              destroyed a substantial percentage of the productive land.  The Medieval and
              Danish periods saw the rise and fall of the manorial system.   In our study
              area, the Bishopric of H-lar and other church organizations owned upwards of
              65% of the farms.  The independent farmer, wooed by the local chieftains of the
              first period, ended up a serf on the land.  While the sources tell us who was
              successful and who failed, they do not tell us why.
	Most buildings from these
              periods were constructed of turf and are now buried in deep wind-blown
              deposits, thereby making them almost impossible to identify systematically.  In
              1999, Dr. Steinberg's NSF-funded "High Risk Experimental Research" addressed
              these archaeological problems with electro-magnetic remote sensing techniques. 
              The research showed that specific electrical conductivity signatures signaled
              deeply buried and sometimes well preserved Viking Age houses.   Once these
              buried structures are located, dating their construction with the sequence of
              volcanic tephra layers is routine.  
	If the sagas are correct, Settlement Age
              Iceland is one of the relatively few examples of the formation of property
              rights without the presence of a strong central government.  The other notable
              example is that of 1849-1852 California (before it became a state) when miners
              formed districts.  Solving the buried-turf-structure problem opens up Iceland
              to the examination of the demographic changes that took place from the initial
              formation of property rights, through the development of chiefdoms, and to the
              incorporation into the Norwegian State.  The archaeological data gathered by
              the SASS project will allow scholars to better understand the advantages of
              being the first to settle a landscape, the importance of farm economic
              potential for political success, and the changing ratio of land and labor to
              the fall of the chiefly and manorial systems.



