Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0107544

Award Number: 0107544
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Harrington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S,Harrington
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    212/875-1266

NSF Program : 1398      BIO INFOR POSTDOCT RSCH FELLOW
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
              Informatics for FY2001.  The fellowship supports research and training at the
              postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
              computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
              fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
              career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
              integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
              at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
              these fellowships will play important roles in training of the future
              workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled
              "Exploring phylogenetic trends of gene sequence, protein form and function to
              comprehend processes of molecular evolution."  The photosynthetic gene rbcL and
              a large phylogeny are being used to link molecular selection linking gene
              sequence to protein form and function.  Evolutionary trends are being used to
              reveal patterns of molecular selection that are otherwise invisible and are
              helping to generate viable theories about gene-protein relationships. The
              research is focused on developing generally applicable models of gene and
              protein evolution and providing informatic tools to question processes of
              molecular selection in other genes and systems.

