Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Mechanisms of Auditory Scene Analysis
               in the European Starling (Sturnus vulgaris)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0107304

Award Number: 0107304
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Bee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M,Bee
	      280 Apple Tree Ct. Apt. C
	      Columbia, MO  65203    573/449-0481

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107304
Bee
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide twenty-four months of support to
              Dr. Mark A. Bee to work with Dr. Georg M. Klump at the University of Oldenburg
              in Bremen, Germany on the mechanisms of auditory scene analysis in the European
              Starling.
The purpose of this research is to gain a greater understanding of
              the underlying neural mechanisms of auditory scene analysis, which is the
              organization of sounds into perceptual representations of the events that
              produced the sounds.  The PI will study the neural basis of auditory scene
              analysis in the starling, a songbird that is an excellent model system of
              behavioral and neurobiological studies of auditory perception.  He will use a
              methodological approach in which microelectrodes are chronically implanted into
              the starling's auditory cortex and neural responses to acoustic stimuli are
              recorded from awake, unrestrained birds via radiotelemetry.  These experiments
              will identify areas of the auditory forebrain where different forms of auditory
              scene analysis occur and how these areas accomplish this complex task.  The
              results will increase our understanding of the mechanisms of auditory scene
              analysis, contribute to a better understanding of human language acquisition
              and the evolution of hearing and potentially lead to the development of better
              hearing aids and voice-recognition-based computer-user interfaces.
Dr. Klump,
              formerly of the University of Technische Universitat Munchen, is a leading
              expert in the study of comparative audition and hearing in birds, and is the PI
              on a grant held by eight research groups in the Munich area focussing on the
              mechanisms of auditory scene analysis.


