Title       : Floral Adaptations to Pollinators: Evolution of Bat Flowers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0107907

Award Number: 0107907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle L. Zjhra mzjhra@keene.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keene State College
	      229 Main
	      Keene, NH  034350001    603/352-1909

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Plants have repeatedly evolved flowers that attract bats as pollinators. 
              Although New World and Old World bats differ in their foraging behavior (using
              echolocation versus vision and olfaction, respectively), flowers pollinated by
              bats are considered a single "bat flower syndrome."  This research aims to
              identify the various aspects of what makes a flower attractive to bats by
              comparing bat-pollinated plant species in a single family (Bignoniaceae).  The
              plant family Bignoniaceae has repeatedly evolved bat flowers in separate
              lineages that are restricted to different continents.  The bat flowers of these
              species found on Africa versus South America, for example, are likely to use
              different means of attracting (e.g., floral scents vs. flower shape) the
              species of bats found on these two continents.  

In order to identify what
              makes a flower attractive to bats and to determine how bat flowers evolve, bat
              flowers will be examined in an evolutionary framework.  Bat flowers restricted
              to Old vs. New World will be compared and their morphology, ecology and floral
              odor will be contrasted.  The evolutionary framework is determined by
              sequencing the DNA of seventeen species of Bignoniaceae that are putatively
              pollinated by bats and adding these sequences to an already established
              sequence-based set of relationships for this plant family.  Furthermore,
              different means of analyzing the (morphological, ecological, and odor) data
              using an evolutionary framework will be compared by utilizing and contrasting
              various current approaches.  This study contributes to the practical
              understanding of the various analytical approaches of using evolutionary
              relationships to explore broader questions of evolution of particular traits,
              such as flower types (e.g., bat flowers).  Moreover, this study adds greatly to
              an understanding of a group of plants that is a good model for looking at
              questions involving ecology and evolution of rainforest trees.  Finally, this
              study adds to the body of knowledge of how plants and animals interact and
              evolve in relationship to one another.

