Title       : Remote Sensing, Ancient Footpaths, and Regional Integration in the Arenal Area,
               Costa Rica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0107943

Award Number: 0107943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Payson Sheets sheetsp@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Payson Sheets and his colleagues
              will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research in the Arenal area of
              northwestern Costa Rica.  His project extensively utilizes remote sensing
              imagery, image processing, and data analysis is assisted by Dr. Tom Sever and
              his colleagues at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville.  Sheets
              and Sever have discovered that they can detect something that was previously
              not believed to be possible: small footpaths created by people walking from
              their ancient villages to a cemetery on the continental divide, and from the
              cemetery to a spring and to sources of stone used for tomb construction. 
              Satellite technology has recently progressed to a level that it should provide
              imagery that can detect the continuation of these footpaths to a village or
              villages that was using the cemetery.  Excavations of linear anomalies will
              provide data to verify or negate anomalies as footpaths.  Previous research by
              Dr. Sheets has found evidence of extensive post-interment ritual and feasting
              in the cemetery, that date to about 1200 years ago.  If the rituals and
              feasting were conducted by only one village, then they functioned to reinforce
              community or lineage/household solidarity.  However, if more than one village
              was conducting feasting, then the rituals could have functioned as a regional
              integrative mechanism.  If the latter is true, with communities on both sides
              of the continental divide participating, then this could explain the
              extraordinary cultural resilience of eastern villages to massive explosive
              eruptions of Arenal volcano.  Previous research by Sheets and colleagues has
              documented ten great explosive eruptions of Arenal volcano over the past 4000
              years, and discovered a cultural resilience during reoccupation greater than
              any other ancient Latin American culture studied to date.  
The research team
              includes natural scientists and social scientists from the US and Costa Rica.  
              Publications will first appear in Spanish in Vinculos, the anthropological
              journal from the Costa Rican Museo Nacional, prior to publications appearing in
              English in US journals.  A bilingual website will present all relevant imagery,
              trenching profiles and photography, artifacts, and literature for scholars and
              interested others.   



