Title       : Very High-Spin Polyradicals and Chiral Pi-Conjugated Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0107241

Award Number: 0107241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $571000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Rajca arajca1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research comprises two research projects directed at the design, synthesis
              and characterization of very high-spin polyradicals and chiral pi-conjugated
              systems The objectives of the first project, the characterization of high-spin
              polyradicals, are (1) to prepare organic polyradicals with the highest possible
              spin quantum numbers and minimum spin polydispersity, (2) to synthesis and
              study high-spin and/or switchable polyradicals with stability at ambient
              conditions. Modern synthetic methodologies will be employed to obtain the
              proposed polyradicals. For nanometer-sized molecules (polyradicals and its
              derivatives), molecular sizes and shapes will be determined by small angle
              neutron scattering, in conjunction with the Monte Carlo conformational
              searches. Magnetic properties will be characterized using SQUID magnetometry.
              For stable polyradicals, X-ray crystallography, ESR spectroscopy, and SQUID
              magnetometry will be the primary characterization techniques. The objectives of
              the second project, characterization of chiral pi-conjugated systems, are (1)
              to develop new approaches to optimize interactions between pi-conjugated
              systems in three-dimensions, using tetra-o-phenylenes and thiophene-based
              chiral carbon-sulfur mixed allotropes and (2) to develop asymmetric synthesis
              and/or optical resolutions for pi-conjugated helices (and double helices) and
              to characterize their redox states, including barriers for racemization. This
              project will rely on the development of new synthetic methods. The primary
              characterization for chiral molecules (their radical ions and polyions) in
              solution will be circular dichroism (CD); a CD spectropolarimeter will be setup
              with its sample compartment accessible from an inert atmosphere glovebox. The
              solid state characterization will include X-ray crystallography and electrical
              conductivity measurements.

Graduate and postdoctoral students carrying out
              the experiments will be trained in the synthesis of molecules of mesoscopic
              dimensions, and the experimental and theoretical characterization of their
              electronic properties. With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program support the educational and research activities of Dr.
              Andrzej Rajca of the Chemistry Department at the University of Nebraska. His
              work promises advances in the production and understanding of two kinds of
              materials: organic magnets and chiral conjugated oligomers. The research should
              be significant in a number of fields: chemical synthesis, the physics of
              magnetic materials, and the physics of conductors.
