Title       : Fundamental Studies of Novel Inorganic Fullerenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0107429

Award Number: 0107429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $587831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Parkinson bruce.parkinson@colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is to study a recently discovered class of inorganic
              closed shell nanostructures, composed of nested octahedra of layered-structure
              transition metal dichalcogenides that are expected to have discrete
              stoichiometries.  The synthesis and properties of the molybdenum disulfide and
              -diselinide nano-octahedra as well as other layered materials such as tantalum
              disulfide, niobium diselinide, tungsten disulfide, molybdenum diselinide, and
              molybdenum diteluride, produced by laser ablation of the bulk material will be
              investigated.  The currently used laser ablation method for "inorganic
              fullerenes" (IF) production will be optimized, and other methods for producing
              these novel structures such as are discharge will be explored.  The structural
              and electronic properties of the novel IF phases will be investigated with
              scanning probe microscopies.  Individual IF particles will be imaged and their
              electronic properties measured via tunneling spectroscopy, both under ambient
              conditions and as a function of temperature in an ultrahigh vacuum environment.
               The electronic density of states, measured by tunneling spectroscopy, will
              determine if these new materials are semiconducting or metallic.  Additionally
              these properties will be studied as a function of size, shape and composition
              of the IF structures.  The IF materials are potentially useful as lubricants
              due to a combination of low rolling and sliding friction.  The intrinsically
              monodisperse semiconducting IFs will be useful for quantum dot
              applications.
%%%
Both graduate and undergraduate students working on this
              project will be exposed to the excitement of discovery associated with opening
              a new area of solid state chemistry and materials science.  They will get
              experience with many different synthesis, separation and characterization
              techniques and learn to communicate their results to each other and the
              scientific community.  The resulting interdisciplinary training will make them
              well prepared for future positions in academia, industry and government
              laboratories in areas of chemistry, materials science and nanotechnology.

