Title       : Mixed Matrix Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0107488

Award Number: 0107488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva Marand emarand@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richey M. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Tsapatsis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0107488
Eva Marand
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University
The Development of Mixed-Matrix
              Membranes


Abstract


Membrane separations represent a growing
              technological area with potentially high economic reward due to low energy
              requirements and facile scale-up of membrane modular design. Advances in
              membrane technology, especially in novel membrane materials, will make this
              technology even more competitive with traditional, highly energy-intensive, and
              costly processes such as low-temperature distillation and adsorption. In
              particular, there is need for large-scale gas-separation-membrane systems that
              can accomplish processes such as nitrogen and oxygen enrichment, hydrogen
              recovery, acid gas (CO2, H2S) removal from natural gas,  and capture of
              greenhouse gases as well as separation of various hydrocarbon mixtures.
              Materials employed in these applications must offer durability, productivity,
              and highly selective separation performance if they are to be economically
              viable. Currently, polymers and certain inorganic membranes are the only
              candidates, and each of these two classes has limitations.

The goal of this
              research is to develop structured composite zeolite/polyimide thin-film
              membranes that will exhibit gas-separation performance superior to that of
              existing polymer-based membranes and which will retain their processing
              versatility and ruggedness compared to inorganic membranes. This work
              incorporates anisotropic ETS-4, ZSM-2, LTL and MFI plate-like molecular sieves
              in mixed-matrix membranes.  These zeolites can be produced with controlled
              nanometer-scale size distribution and surface functionalization.  The success
              of the mixed-matrix materials lies in the elimination of defects at the
              molecular sieve/polymer interface and in the control of the film's
              microstructure at the sub-nanometer level. This can be achieved by employing
              zeolite nanoparticles with functionalized surfaces to promote bonding with the
              polymer matrix. A series of new, well-characterized polyimides has been
              developed with pendant carboxylic functional groups to serve as the membrane
              matrix. These polyimides already have excellent separation properties for
              various gas mixtures and are thermally stable above 400oC in air. A defect-free
              polymer-zeolite interface is achieved by forming hydrogen bonds or direct
              covalent linkages between the polyimide chains and the functionalized zeolite
              nano-particles. 
	


