Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: A Paleocene/Eocene Boundary Golden Spike:
               Stratigraphic Studies in the Nile Valley (Egypt)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0107898

Award Number: 0107898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie-Pierre J. Aubry wberggren@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis V. Kent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin S. Cramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Berggren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0107898
Aubry

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between a US team headed by Dr. Marie-Pierre Aubry, Department of Geological
              Sciences at Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey and an Egyptian team
              headed by Dr. Khaled Ouda, Geology Department, Assiut University, Assiut,
              Egypt.  They plan to conduct research in the central Nile Valley (Upper Egypt)
              designed to recover a complete upper Paleocene-lower Eocene marine sedimentary
              stratigraphic section.  The main thrust is the recovery of a complete
              stratigraphic record of the major biotic and stable isotope events that have
              characterized the Paleocene-Eocene boundary interval that spans the
              2.55-m.y.-long Chron C24r, and, in particular, the Late Paleocene Thermal
              maximum (LPTM).  They plan to conduct a series of analyses (integrated
              bio-magneto-cyclo-stable isotope stratigraphy and sedimentology) on outcrop
              (and corehole) material which will provide an integrated high-resolution
              chronologic framework for this critical interval in earth history. 
              Reconstructions of conditions on Earth during the LPTM may unravel the general
              dynamics of a sudden warming and serve as the framework for a predictive model
              for the greenhouse world of the decades/centuries ahead.

Scope: The project
              supports collaboration between two experienced teams of investigators. The site
              for the fieldwork is best suited for the purpose of delineating the P/E
              boundary.  The US team members, including staff from Woods Hole Oceanographic
              Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts.  The research will provide for
              training of graduate students at Assiut University in various topics in geology
              and paleontology in particular, and will provide baseline studies and data in
              lower paleogene stratigraphy of the upper Nile Valley of Egypt, which are of
              interest to Egyptian and US academic geologists.  One US graduate student also
              will participate in this research and gain experience in international research
              projects.  The proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative
              research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under
              the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
              engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities. 

