Title       : The Barrett Lectures May, 2001 "New Directions and Developments in Computational
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0107159

Award Number: 0107159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine Mavriplis                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9320               (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaobing Feng xfeng@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ohannes Karakashian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues organize the 2001 John H. Barrett 
Memorial
              Lectures in the University of Tennessee at Knoxville from 
May 10-12, 2001.
              The Barrett Lectures have been held annually since 1972. 
Each year a
              different topic is chosen, representing the research interests 
of the
              mathematics faculty of the University of Tennessee. 
Since 1993, the lectures
              have consisted of three
one-hour survey talks by each of three leading
              researchers
representing different themes/directions in a single field. The
              topic of 
the 2001 Barrett Lectures is: ``New Directions and Developments in
              
Computational Mathematics". The focus of the lectures is parallel 
numerical
              algorithms for partial differential equations and their 
implementations and
              applications. The main speakers of the 2001 Barrett 
Lectures are Jinchao Xu
              of Penn State University, David Keyes of 
Old Dominion University and ICASE,
              and Mary Wheeler of University of 
Texas at Austin. Each of them will deliver
              three one-hour survey lectures 
on recent developments on parallel numerical
              algorithms with three 
different emphases: theory (Xu), computer
              implementation (Keyes), 
and application (Wheeler). In addition to the main
              speakers, six
speakers are also invited to give one-hour talks on topics
              related 
to one of the main lectures.

The Barrett Lectures are partly
              funded by a grant from Tennessee Science 
Alliance, and have often received
              additional support from the National 
Science Foundation. They attract wide
              interest, with an audience of between 
40 and 50 participants from the whole
              country, in addition to faculty and 
students from Knoxville and the Oak Ridge
              National Laboratory. They represent 
one of the few long standing lecture
              series in mathematics in the southeastern 
United States. The main objective
              of the 2001 Barrett Lectures is to provide 
the participants with an
              exposition of parallel numerical algorithms for 
partial differential
              equations arising from various 
scientific/engineering/industrial
              applications, through in-depth survey
lectures and informal discussions with
              the above three leading researchers 
in the field. Additional goals are to
              foster interdisciplinary collaboration, 
particularly with researchers in the
              Computer Science Department and in the 
College of Engineering at the
              University of Tennessee and several other 
southeastern institutions, and to
              generate a set of written surveys in the 
subject, which the organizing
              committee will endeavor to have published 
in book form. The fund being
              requested from the NSF will be spent
providing partial support towards travel
              and accommodation for $20$ graduate
students and recent Ph.D.'s who do not
              have research grants. 


