Title       : Perturbation and Recovery of an Old-field Food Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0107780

Award Number: 0107780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oswald J. Schmitz oswald.schmitz@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A central goal in ecology is to develop a set of sound scientific principles
              that help to explain the effects of natural or human-induced disturbances on
              biodiversity and the functioning of natural ecosystems.  This endeavor is
              motivated from a desire to:  (1) forecast the fate of ecosystems, and the
              biodiversity contained within them, especially when native species are lost or
              exotic species invade as a consequence of the disturbances, and (2) restore the
              natural function of those systems through sound management. The proposed
              research aims to help develop the scientific principles needed to conduct sound
              environmental management by studying how top-predator species in New England
              meadow ecosystems control the diversity of plant species within those meadows
              and how disturbances alter that control.   Past research on this system has
              revealed that, within a summer season, top predators such as spiders are
              important because they control the amount of damage that leaf-chewing
              herbivores such as grasshoppers and beetles inflict on plant species.  It is
              unknown how environmental disturbances alter the ability of top-predators to
              control the herbivore damage.  

The proposed research will cause
              disturbances to the ecosystem by experimentally excluding spider predators from
              2 m x 2m field plots for periods of 1 to 4 years.  Subsequently, we will
              monitor how plant damage by herbivores and plant species composition of the
              field plots change as a consequence of short- and long-term predator exclusion.
               As part of this experiment, we will also reintroduce spider predators to plots
              after they have been excluded for 1 to 3 years.  The aim is to determine
              whether the system can be restored to its original plant species composition
              and functioning following fixed periods of disturbance.  Currently, ecologists
              believe that altering the presence of top predators in natural ecosystems
              should have lasting consequences for ecosystem function.  Few studies, however,
              have evaluated the long-term responses of ecosystems when top-predators are
              removed and later reintroduced.  The proposed work will offer key insight into
              the long-term consequences of disturbing the natural integrity of ecosystems on
              ecosystem function.  

