Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Self-Assembly of Coated Colloidal
               Particles for Optical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0107357

Award Number: 0107357
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Z. Yates myates@che.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107357
Yates

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will support a six-month postdoctoral research
              fellowship by Dr. Matthew Z. Yates of the University of Rochester, to work with
              Dr. Frank Caruso at Max Planck Institute for Colloids and Interfaces in
              Potsdam, Germany.

Photonic crystals are materials that are opaque to certain
              wavelengths of light while allowing the transmission of other wavelengths.  The
              wavelength region where these materials are opaque is referred to as the
              photonic band gap.  Photonic crystals offer promise for use in the next
              generation of communications and computing technology in which light is used
              instead of electrons for information transmission and processing.  The unique
              optical properties of photonic crystals arise from the periodic variation in
              the refractive index of the material on a length scale near the wavelength of
              light.  One promising route for the synthesis of photonic crystals is the
              ordered stacking of colloidal particles.  When monodisperse sized colloidal
              particles are allowed to sediment slowly, they will form a hexagonally stacked
              structure referred to as a "colloidal crystal".  It is the goal of this
              research project to form colloidal crystals from polymer particles coated with
              a thin layer of nanoparticles to modify optical properties of the colloidal
              crystal.  Both high refractive index nanoparticles such as titanium dioxide or
              lead sulfide, and luminescent nanoparticles such as CdS and CdTe will be used
              to modify the optical properties of the photonic crystals.  Caruso and
              coworkers have recently formed colloidal crystals of polystyrene coated with
              luminescent nanoparticles.  The presence of the luminescent nanoparticles
              enhanced the photonic band gap of the polystyrene photonic crystal, as shown
              with UV-Vis spectroscopy.  The optical properties of coated colloidal crystals
              remain to be investigated in detail.  Key questions to answer are how the
              photonic band gap varies with the thickness of the coating layer, overall
              particle size, and optical properties of the nanoparticles in the coating
              layer.

