Title       : RUI: A Phylogenetic analysis of subfamily Gesnerioideae (Gesneriaceae) and
               sequence divergence in a cycloidea homolog.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0107763

Award Number: 0107763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271492             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Smith jfsmith@boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. James Smith at Boise State University is investigating the evolutionary
              history of a large tropical plant group, the African violet family Gesneriaceae
              (a major portion of which occurs in the Americas and not in Africa). The
              evolutionary history will be studied with comparative gene sequencing, a
              process that examines genes directly to trace the evolutionary history of the
              whole organism.  Once an evolutionary tree is produced from these data, the
              history of the organisms will be used for several objectives. 1) Because
              different forms of floral symmetry occur in this group of plants, the
              phylogenetic tree will provide a means of determining how often switches from
              one form of symmetry to another have occurred. 2) Floral symmetry is known to
              be controlled by a few genes in related plants and the tree will provide a
              means of examining the evolution of one of these genes in a plant family that
              has different types of symmetry. 3) The tree will provide a framework for all
              future investigations among this group of plants, especially evolution of
              pollination biology and chromosomes.
	One of the greatest problems facing
              systematics is determining homology (where traits have a common evolutionary
              origin).  Phenotypes (physical appearance of an organism) are the result of
              genes viewed through complex developmental mechanisms operating during the
              growth of the organism.  Similar developmental pathways may result in similar
              phenotypes across non-related organisms.  This uncoupling of developmental
              homology (identical developmental processes) from phylogenetic homology
              (identical history) can result in misinterpreting relationships among
              organisms.  Few opportunities have allowed systematists to investigate the
              genetic mechanisms that underlie phenotypes and the changes in these mechanisms
              that result in patterns of diversity.  The evolutionary history of selected
              groups of Gesneriaceae will allow an opportunity to examine the changes in
              floral phenotypes and changes in the genes that regulate these phenotypes to
              see if they share developmental and phylogenetic homology.


