Title       : Molecular Solvation Phenomena in Nanoscale Superfluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0107541

Award Number: 0107541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Birgitta Whaley whaley@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Birgitta Whaley of the University of California, Berkeley, is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to carry out microscopic
              theoretical analysis of two classes of novel quantum solvation phenomena that
              have been revealed by recent spectroscopic experiments, which remain
              theoretically unexplained.  The aim is to uncover the role played by the
              underlying quantum structure and dynamics in the spectroscopic observables. 
              The first phenomenon to be explored concerns the effect of "wrapping" a
              molecule with the solvation layer of molecular para-hydrogen and then embedding
              this in a helium cluster at ultra-low temperatures.  The extent of
              nanosuperfluidity possible in the hydrogen and solvation wrap will be analyzed,
              along with the relation between the quantum statistics of this and the
              molecular spectroscopic constants.  Secondly, helium solvent-induced
              modifications of structure and excitations of embedded molecules and complexes
              will be addressed, focusing on intramolecular tunneling, structures of
              heterocomplexes, and on the nature of the local solvation environment and
              associated solvent excitations around planar organic molecules.  This research
              involves application of large-scale quantum simulation methodology, algorithmic
              advances in some cases, and a combination of simulations with theoretical
              analysis using dynamical models. 

Small liquid clusters of helium that are
              produced in molecular beam expansions are becoming an increasingly popular new
              medium in which atoms and molecules can be embedded and studied experimentally.
               The clusters act as novel environments in which to examine ultra-low
              temperature properties of molecules, chemical reactions, and the energies of
              solvation.  The outcomes of this project are expected to lead to new insights
              into the fundamental understanding of chemical and physical behavior in cold
              quantum mechanical solvents.
