Title       : ROLE: Video Cases Online: Cognitive Studies of Preservice Teacher Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0107032

Award Number: 0107032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1245766            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon J. Derry sharond@wcer.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Researchers, professional developers, educational institutions, funding
              agencies, and commercial enterprises currently make huge investments in online
              systems to support teacher learning with video cases of classroom instruction.
              However, there is little scientific knowledge about how teachers learn from
              such cases, how case design affects learning, and how online systems are best
              designed to support that learning. Specific design features of case-based
              teacher learning environments, such as design of instructional activities and
              how the cases themselves are structured for presentation, probably
              significantly impact teacher thinking and learning from case analysis. Given
              the substantial expenditure in both human and nonhuman capital, scientific
              knowledge is needed to guide this enterprise. 

This program of experimental
              research, grounded in cognitive science theory about case-based learning and
              reasoning, aims to develop a pedagogy and theory of online video case study for
              teacher education. The research will be conducted in the context of two
              innovative psychological foundations courses taught for teacher education
              majors at two major universities. Both programs use STEP Web, a professional
              development web site being developed by the PIs for use in preservice secondary
              teacher education. STEP Web represents a hypermedia network of instructional
              resources designed to support teacher learning with video cases. The goal of
              instruction with STEP Web is to help teachers acquire instructionally relevant
              scientific knowledge about student learning and development. The STEP Web
              design is based on Cognitive Flexibility Theory. This theory of knowledge
              representation and instructional design focuses on case-based learning in
              multimedia environments, with the goal of promoting flexible transfer in fields
              of professional practice, such as medicine and teaching. 

Using STEP Web as
              a test bed, the researchers will create and test alternative theoretically
              motivated designs for online learning environments supporting video case study
              for preservice teachers. They will conduct controlled studies examining how
              different learning-environment designs affect the individual and group learning
              processes of preservice teachers, as well as the form and duration of teacher
              education students' case knowledge, and their abilities to combine and use that
              knowledge in reasoning about professional practice. 

The project will
              advance two integrated programs of research:

1. How to design video-based
              teaching cases, which consist of various components and can vary in terms of
              which components are included and how they are organized, segmented, and
              connected to learning material.  
2. How to facilitate group case-based
              learning on line, which focuses on study and training of group facilitators, as
              well as design of online discussion environments. 

This project is expected
              to develop a more exact picture of what undergraduate education majors learn
              from video case study and to shed light on how to design good cases and online
              multimedia environments to support such study. 

