Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Study of Duetting in the New Zealand
               Kokako
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0107347

Award Number: 0107347
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura E. Molles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L,Molles
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    562/431-8378

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5941,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107347
Molles

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral
              research fellowship for Dr. Laura E. Molles to work with Dr. Joseph Waas at the
              University of Waikato in Hamilton, New Zealand.
This project will involve the
              examination of duetting in an endemic New Zealand bird, the kokako, to explore
              the advantages of duetting over the far better-known songbird strategy of solo
              singing.  Hypotheses regarding the mate-guarding, pair-bond maintenance, and
              territory defense functions of duets will be tested using recordings,
              observations, and playback experiments.  Kokako have been decimated by
              deforestation and the introduction of mammalian predators to New Zealand.  The
              islands of New Zealand are inhabited by some of the most unique and endangered
              bird species in the world, including the Kokako.  Scientific efforts have
              focused intensively on issues related to preservation of threatened species. 
              Little is known about these species' social behavior and communication systems.
              Understanding their behavior can lead to improvements in management of
              endangered populations.  In this study, examination of male-male and
              male-female duets may provide a means to identify same-sex pairs without the
              disturbance of capture and cost of genetic analysis.

Dr. Waas has begun
              in-depth studies of kokako songbirds and his lab has produced the first
              description of their duets, documented the genetic diversity within mainland
              populations, and explored ranging in male-male and male-female pairs.

