Title       : Dissertation Research: Evaluation of a Hypothetical Model of Local Community
               Assembly in a Temporally Dynamic, Species Rich Neotropical River
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0107456

Award Number: 0107456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6005               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk O. Winemiller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Evaluation of a hypothetical model of local community assembly in a temporally
              dynamic, species rich neotropical river 

DEB 0107456; PI: Kirk O.
              Winemiller, Co-PI: D. Albrey Arrington

Abstract

Results from this study
              will further our understanding of biological community structure and formation.
               Natural communities are affected by characteristics of the environment and
              interactions among constituent organisms.  Understanding the relative
              importance of these factors and their interactions is highly relevant to the
              preservation of healthy communities and restoration of damaged communities. 

              
Our study investigates the temporal and spatial dynamics of community
              assembly in a tropical floodplain river with very high biodiversity.  Our
              previous work has demonstrated consistent patterns in local fish and
              invertebrate communities that depend on physical habitat complexity and
              seasonal dynamics.  In this study, we will conduct field experiments that
              manipulate habitat patches with variable physical complexity to evaluate the
              relative importance of physical and biological factors for species
              colonization.  Our experimental design also will allow us to determine the
              relative importance of stochastic and deterministic processes in the formation
              of local communities.  In other words, we hope to determine whether or not
              local biological communities are simply collections of individuals and species
              that happened to find an available habitat patch, or if community membership
              results from species interactions such as competition and predation.  Based on
              previous descriptive research, we hypothesize that nonrandom processes result
              in highly patterned fish and invertebrate communities during the low-water
              period, and that colonization of local habitats becomes more random during the
              annual flood period.  

