Title       : Studies in Organic Synthesis and Conformational Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0107745

Award Number: 0107745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. O'Leary doleary@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With this Research at Undergraduate Institutions award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program provides renewed support for the research of
              Professor Daniel J. O'Leary, of the Department of Chemistry at Pomona College.
              Professor O'Leary will carry out a number of synthetic and conformational
              studies, addressing issues of hydrogen bonding and polypeptide conformation.
              Isotopic perturbation techniques for hydrogen bond detection by NMR will be
              applied to the analysis of arrays of hydrogen bonds involving hydroxyl groups,
              and the utility of tritium NMR for detecting OH/OH hydrogen bonds will be
              assayed. The possibility of using hydrogen bond-mediated scalar couplings to
              assign the relative stereochemistry of acyclic 1,3-diols will be explored, and
              analysis of isotopic perturbation of the rotameric distribution of methyl
              groups in compounds supporting N--DH2C interactions may lead to direct NMR
              techniques for the configurational assignment of chiral methyl groups (R-CHDT).
              Solution conformations of conformationally constrained polypeptides and their
              unconstrained analogs will be analyzed for cross-linked 3/10 helical peptides
              synthesized via an olefin metathesis approach.

With the support of a
              Research at Undergraduate Institutions award from the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Daniel J. O'Leary, of the
              Department of Chemistry at Pomona College, is carrying out a program of
              synthesis and analytical methods to study hydrogen bonds and other novel weak
              inter- and intramolecular interactions. Water is the fundamental biological
              solvent, and proteins, nucleic acids, and sugars are the three fundamental
              biopolymers. All three rely on hydrogen bonds and directed non-covalent
              interactions to attain their optimal structures. Understanding the nature of
              the interactions that control their structures is of fundamental importance,
              and forms the basis of Professor O'Leary's studies, which are carried out with
              undergraduate students under this Research at Undergraduate Institutions award.
