Title       : Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0107233

Award Number: 0107233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine Mavriplis                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas N. Arnold dna@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will devise, improve, and analyze methods for the numerical
              simulation of complex physical phenomena modeled by partial differential
              equations, emphasizing three main areas: mixed methods for elasticity
              equations, discontinuous Galerkin methods, and computational general
              relativity.  For elasticity, the investigator will build on a recent
              breakthrough that enabled the construction of the first stable mixed finite
              element methods for the displacement-stress formulations with polynomial trial
              functions, and also work towards the development of simpler nonconforming mixed
              finite element methods and extensions to three dimensional elasticity problems.
               Concerning discontinuous Galerkin methods--finite element methods in which the
              approximating piecewise polynomial functions are discontinuous, with
              modifications incorporated into the variational formulation to achieve
              consistency--the investigator will work with his collaborators to build on
              recent work on the unification and classification of such methods to develop a
              unified approach to the analysis of and discrimination among a wide class of
              discontinuous Galerkin methods for elliptic equations.  Application will also
              be made to the numerical simulation of elastic plates incorporating shear.  The
              third and largest effort concerns the numerical solution of Einstein's field
              equations relating mass and the curvature of space-time.  The emphasis here
              will be on understanding the fundamental properties of the Einstein equations
              most relevant to their numerical solution and the basic difficulties that have
              beset previous attempts at numerical simulations of them.  The work will be
              guided by the goal of simulating the coalescence of inspiralling pairs of black
              holes and the resulting emission of gravitational radiation, which is a problem
              of fundamental importance to gravitational physics and also because such
              simulations will be essential to realization of a new generation of
              observatories based on gravitational wave detectors.

Computer simulation is
              a key tool for the design and testing of complex engineering structures.  In
              recent decades computer simulation has also joined experiment and theory as one
              of the main paradigms of scientific investigation.  In both areas, many of the
              most complex systems are first modeled by systems of partial differential
              equations--in which the language of calculus is used to express the variations
              of the relevant physical quantities in space and time--and then these systems
              of differential equations must be approximated by numerical algorithms, which
              harness the power of modern computers to perform billions of arithmetical
              operations a seconds to extract the solutions to the equations to the required
              degree of accuracy. In recent decades the principles for the design and
              validation of such algorithms have been developed for many of the basic systems
              of differential equations encountered in science in technology, but many more
              complex systems have so far resisted effective computation, and that is the
              thrust of this research.  A particular emphasis will be on numerical algorithms
              for accurate determination of the stresses internal to elastic structures,
              which is essential to building safe and economic engineering structures.  A
              second emphasis will be on developing methods to simulate Einstein's equations
              of general relativity, especially for predicting the output of gravitational
              radiation--minute ripples that propagate on the curved surface of
              space-time--from massive cosmological events such as black hole collisions. 
              Computer codes capable of making such predictions are needed to realize the
              effectiveness of a new type of observatory based on gravitational radiation
              currently being constructed, which will provide mankind with its first window
              on the dark matter that makes up 90% of the universe. 

