Title       : Pore Formation during the Crystallization of Crosslinked Polymers which are
               Swollen in Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a0107156

Award Number: 0107156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217779             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Henning Winter winter@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0107156
Winter, H. Henning
U of Massachusetts - Amherst

This research
              explores the creation of open-pore morphology by crystallizing polymers from a
              gel state. The gels used are chemically crosslinked polymers which were highly
              swollen in a supercritical fluid (SCF) at elevated temperature and pressure.
              Upon cooling below their crystallization temperature, polymer molecules begin
              to assemble into a three-dimensional, semicrystalline superstructure of high
              specific surface area and with narrow, open pores filled with SCF which then
              gets released. Pore sizes are in the order of 10nm to 10mm, depending on
              polymer and processing conditions; pore volumes might be anywhere between 0 and
              90% of the entire sample. The new strategy differs from the classical foaming
              process (no bubble growth is needed) and from the commercial TIPS process (no
              polymer solution involved), but it integrates aspects of established processing
              methods to provide crosslinked precursors of desired shape.  
SCFs are used
              here for several reasons. SCF can be removed from the polymer without
              collapsing the pores. Subsequently, SCFs are recoverable, self-cleaning, and
              reusable; for repeated use, cleaning of the supercritical fluid comes naturally
              since the supercritical alkane (which we use) transforms into a poor solvent by
              depressurizing at the end of each processing cycle. The resulting porous
              polymers are exceptionally clean (free of residues), and retain shape and
              structural integrity. SCFs also lower surface tension and increase molecular
              mobility during crystallization; these are properties which could potentially
              have an affect on crystallization kinetics and pore formation. These are open
              questions which need to be pursued.

Solvent character, molecular parameters
              of the polymer, crosslinking method, crosslink density and homogeneity,
              crystallization temperature, and swelling conditions are expected to be the
              controlling parameters for pore volume and size distribution, and for
              crystallinity. The research is aimed at elucidating these relationships with
              the objective of achieving tunable pore size and size distributions. Model
              polymer systems in this study are various crosslinked polyethylenes (xHDPE,
              xLDPE, xLLDPE) swollen in supercritical propane.

The fundamental findings on
              polyethylenes are expected to apply to a wide range of semicrystalline polymers
              in catalysis separations, high performance materials and biomedical
              applications. 
Environmental Impact: Increasingly strict environmental
              legislation has forced many industries to re-evaluate their use of hazardous
              solvents. The novel process offers a process-wide design alternative for making
              porous polymers. It will reduce waste generation by:

(a)  supercritical
              fluids substitution of organic solvents during production.

(b)  complete
              elimination of a final cleaning step which otherwise is typical for porous
              materials (in comparison, cleaning of porous polymers from traditional
              processing is currently performed with special cleaning fluids which often are
              hazardous).

(c)  recovery and repeated use of the supercritical fluid.

