Title       : Computational Methods for Most-Energetic Traveltimes of Seismic Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0107210

Award Number: 0107210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seongjai Kim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work is concerned with the development of computational methods for the
              most-energetic traveltimes (METTs) of seismic waves and their applications to
              various physical problems.  The METT corresponds to the highest energy level in
              data and has been recognized as one of most important components for
              image/inversion processes in highly heterogeneous media.  However, METTs often
              develop discontinuities in wavefronts.  Thus, computational principles that
              have been utilized for the computation of continuous first-arrival traveltimes
              can hardly be adopted.  The upwind direction of the METT is determined by the
              energy level (amplitudes) of wavefronts and, therefore, the amplitude accuracy
              is very crucial for a successful METT simulation.  Since the transport
              equation, which solves the amplitude, incorporates the traveltime Laplacian,
              the traveltime should be solved by a non-oscillatory high-order numerical
              algorithm which can provide a mechanism for an accurate traveltime Laplacian
              near the discontinuities.  The investigator proposes the development of
              accurate and efficient algorithms for the METT and the corresponding amplitude
              in 3D heterogeneous media, incorporating second- and third-order ENO schemes
              and their local extensions for intersecting wavefronts near discontinuities.  A
              full wavefield solver of negligible numerical dissipation is to be developed
              and implemented for a numerical verification of the conjecture: the METT can be
              computed in such a way that the corresponding amplitude is continuous over the
              whole domain.  Applications are planned for the anisotropic METT and realistic
              geophysical problems such as tomography in oil exploration, earthquake
              analysis, and shallow seismic reflection.  The proposed research subjects are
              vitally important to energy, economic, and environmental concerns.  In
              particular, the theoretical understanding and numerical algorithms for the METT
              and the corresponding amplitude will open other promising research
              areas.

For various applications of sound waves traveling through a
              substance, it is necessary to compute the traveltime of the sound waves.  Since
              the acquired data are dominated by the highest energy levels of the waves, the
              most reliable results can be obtained by incorporating information from the
              most-energetic traveltime (METT).  The proposal is concerned with the
              development of accurate and efficient computational algorithms for the METT and
              applications to important geophysical image processing problems.  Image
              processing methods allow geoscientists to find interesting underground
              features.  In oil exploration, for example, geophysicists first compute images
              of rock/soil structures and then detect the spots where oil reservoirs are. 
              Thus the oil reservoir detection can be successful only with accurate and
              well-focused images, for which the newly developed algorithms provide the most
              useful information.  The same arguments can be applied to the shallow sound
              wave reflection, the image processing techniques for the subsurface not deeper
              than 100 meters.  These techniques have been developed for detailed images;
              examples can be found in waste-disposal site characterization, archaeological
              search, and ground security analysis.  Many cracks and break-downs on buildings
              or roads are due to an ignorance or under-estimation of the importance of
              ground security analysis.  The proposed work is also applicable to earthquake
              analysis.  Since a horrible destruction happens with a close relation to the
              most-energetic components of the earthquake wave, the computation of the METT
              is necessary for a deeper understanding of the earthquake.  The new algorithms
              are expected to provide an effective mechanism that helps geoscientists
              simulate seismic ground motion and helps geologists predict earthquake
              destruction areas, with high accuracy and efficiency.  The above mentioned
              problems are vitally important to energy, economic, and environmental concerns
              and can be solved more reliably by the proposed work.
