Title       : The Chanka Archaeological Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0107074

Award Number: 0107074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian S. Bauer bsb@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Chanka Archaeology Project under the direction of Dr. Brian Bauer is
              dedicated to documenting and interpreting the development of 
complex
              societies in the Andahuaylas region of the Peruvian Andes from AD 500 
to AD
              1532.  The Chanka who once lived in the region are of special interest 
to
              archaeologists and historians since they once rivaled and fought against 
the
              Inca State for control of the central Andes.

The topic of early state
              development is a major theoretical issue of current 
anthropological research.
              The Chanka have been excluded from these discussions 
since very little
              original archeological research has been conducted in their 
core region. What
              theories have been presented concerning the development of 
the Chanka are
              largely derived from readings of the Spanish chronicles.  Until 
these models
              are tested against archaeological data they will remain 
hypothetical and
              untested and the study of the pre-Hispanic social 
organization of the Chanka
              can not advance.

The project, which will run for three field seasons,
              includes a systematic 
archaeological survey of the Chanka heartland and an
              extensive review of 
archival materials located in Peru and Spain.  The survey
              will cover an area 
of approximately 200 square kilometers and provide a
              comprehensive data base 
on the location, size and age of archaeological sites
              in the Andahuaylas 
Valley.  The results of the survey will be used to address
              a series of 
questions concerning the development of complex societies in the
              region.  For 
example: What effect did the conquest of the region by the Wari
              Empire (AD 
550-1000) have on the indigenous populations?, Is there evidence
              of early 
state development in the valley during the Late Intermediate Period
              (AD 1000 - 
1400)? and, What was the social organization of the Andahuaylas
              area during 
the period of Inca rule?

The archival research will take place
              in Cuzco, Andahuaylas, and Lima (Peru) 
as well as in Seville (Spain).  The
              historical research will support, 
complement, and extend the archaeological
              field work by providing concise data 
on specific sites and by procuring
              additional information on the land 
holdings, populations, and social
              organization of Chanka kin groups.

In sum, the Chanka Archaeological Project
              will provide a regional context to 
study the development of the Chanka and it
              will enable scholars to address 
questions concerning the development of
              Chanka society before and after Inca 
expansionism.  The project will also
              enable researchers to make comparisons 
between the development of the Chanka
              and that of other important groups, both 
in the Andes and elsewhere in the
              ancient New World.



