Title       : IGMS: Optimizing Supply Networks and Re-Entrant Manufacturing Systems in the
               Semiconductor Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0107666

Award Number: 0107666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Kawski kawski@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter E. Crouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will perform research on supply networks and scheduling of re-entrant
              manufacturing systems while in residence in the Technology and Manufacturing
              Group at INTEL Corporation.  While transferring theoretical results and
              paradigms of nonlinear control into large scale industrial applications, a
              major objective is to develop in-depth knowledge of the practical needs,
              constraints, and objectives of industrial operations, sufficient for effective
              future collaborations with representatives from industry, business, and
              industrial engineering faculty, and to optimally prepare future undergraduate
              and graduate students.

The technical focus is on problems of immediate
              interest to the semi-conductor industry. As a roughly $100B business in the US
              alone, this industry is characterized by capital intensive manufacturing plants
              and
short product life-cycles. Together with rapidly changing demands and
              prices, this framework promises a particularly high return on investments to
              optimize operations. The first problem is to optimize the management of the
              global supply networks of the semiconductor industry. This includes phasing
              in/out changing products, using facilities that are distributed around the
              globe, avoiding overproduction and hedging against fluctuations in demand and
              production.  A key objective is to connect commonly used financial with optimal
              control. The second problem is to optimize the scheduling of re-entrant
              manufacturing systems. A major theoretical problem is to formulate an analogue
              of the dynamic programming paradigm for such systems without a distinguished
              direction of signal flow.

This project will immediately impact the many
              courses taught and seminar series organized by the PI. He will also quickly
              communicate his insights to the larger communities in mathematical control and
              undergraduate
education.  This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS
              Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
