Title       : Physical Knots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0107209

Award Number: 0107209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan K. Simon jsimon@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues study "Physical Knots," bridging the gap
              between purely topological properties of knots and links, and physically
              realistic systems in which properties such as thickness, curvature, repelling
              forces, and randomness are evident.  Focus areas include: understanding how
              random tangling increases with filament length in different kinds of systems;
              determining existence, uniqueness, and geometric properties of optimal
              conformations of knots; modeling gel electrophoresis of knotted DNA loops;
              understanding how the "symmetric energy" of knots models physical behavior such
              as accessibility of molecules to enzymes and self-irradiation of filaments that
              emit; determining relationships between various knot energies; understanding
              how knots, such as folding proteins, form in filaments with free ends.

This
              project contributes to the understanding of one of the fundamental ways that
              matter behaves: a solid object occupies space; a sheet of material separates
              one part of space from another; and a string tangles with itself or other
              strings.  There is growing scientific awareness that knotting and tangling
              happen, and are physically important, at every scale of size, from molecules
              such as DNA and other polymers, to magnetic field lines in the sun.  But there
              are many basic questions that are not yet answered:  How are knots and tangles
              created, or destroyed, in various settings?  What happens when one pulls a knot
              tight?  Why do mathematically different kinds of knots behave the way they do
              in physical situations?  How can we model knots on the computer, and how well
              do the computer simulations reflect actual behavior?  The combination of
              importance of the phenomenon, together with substantial open questions, makes
              this area fascinating and valuable for research.  In particular, the project
              seeks to contribute to areas of national interest, including increasing
              understanding of the behavior of DNA molecules, and helping to elucidate the
              process of protein folding.

