Title       : SGER: Power Transmission From Space Using Radio Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0107740

Award Number: 0107740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Steer m.b.steer@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will  investigate the
              propagation of power over distance using electromagnetic waves. Transmission of
              power from space using microwaves (a particular form of electromagnetic
              radiation) and lasers has been discussed for more than thirty years. It is
              proposed to update the discussion, review current capabilities and relevant
              issues, hold a workshop of interested parties, and to develop a report on the
              topic. This proposal presents a possible outline of the report and describes
              the process to be followed in developing the research report.

All
              electromagnetic, or radio waves, contain power. The most familiar topical
              reference is the propagation of power in cellular radio systems. A basestation
              transmits power in the direction of a user. This power spreads out as the radio
              wave beam diverges over distance. The transmission of significant amounts of
              power from one point to another on earth has been demonstrated. However the
              main interest in microwave transmission of power is to collect power in space
              (where solar radiation is available 24 hours a day) and transmit it efficiently
              to anywhere on earth using a narrow, controlled, beam. Transmitting power as a
              laser beam is an alternative. Finally the microwave power is converted to power
              for use as mains electricity. The recent decade has seen considerable
              developments that would assist this process. Power could be beamed to remote
              locations, be used in other space-born applications, provide emergency power,
              or be used as top-up power as needed. A study is required to determine the
              current feasibility eif his means of power transmission, briefly determine the
              environmental impact of high power transmission, and briefly outline the
              economic issues. Experiments are to be proposed that will enable the issues to
              be explored further.

