Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Single Molecule Protein
               Conformational Dynamics with Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a0107315

Award Number: 0107315
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna E. Rhoades   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : A,Rhoades
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    734/665-1945

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5905,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107315
Rhoades

The International Research Fellowship Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide twelve months of
              support to Dr. Anna E. Rhoades to work with Dr. Gilad Haran at the Weizmann
              Institute in Rehovot, Israel.  Co-funding for this project comes from the Math
              and Physical Science Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.

The goal of this project is to characterize the folding and
              conformational dynamics of a single cytochrome c molecule with surface enhanced
              Raman spectroscopy.  Experiments will focus on developing this technique for
              measuring conformational fluctuations and using it for studies in varying
              equilibrium conditions, to obtain both equilibrium and kinetic information. 
              The PI will develop a model that explains how a protein folds from a linear
              chain of amino acids through a series of conformational intermediates, to its
              functional three-dimensional structure.  The protein-folding problem is
              sometimes referred to as the "second half of the genetic code" and is one of
              the major unresolved problems in contemporary biophysics.  The impact of this
              research will be in areas such as the determination of the structure of a
              protein based on its gene sequence, understanding the misfolding and
              aggregation of particular proteins involved in some diseases.

The laboratory
              of the Weizmann Institute has all the necessary equipment required to
              accomplish the goals described in this proposal.

