Title       : A-Posteriori-Error-Estimates-Based Numerical Methods for Shallow Water and
               Hamilton-Jacobi Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0107609

Award Number: 0107609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Bernardo Cockburn cockburn@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dominik Schoetzau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is devoted to devising and studying, theoretically as well as
              computationally, efficient methods for numerically solving problems in which
              convection plays a significant role. A wide range of situations falls into this
              category and, although what we propose to develop can be easily applied to most
              of them, we are going to focus our efforts into two of them. The first, modeled
              by the shallow water equations, is the study of hurricane forecasting and of
              environmental studies in ports, and the second, modeled by the Hamilton-Jacobi
              equations, is the study of terrain navigation (computation of minimum time
              transit paths) of robotic vehicles and material etching in integrated circuit
              fabrication. The main focus of the project is the devising of the so-called a
              posteriori error estimates that are the basis for mathematically sound
              hp-adaptive algorithms.

We consider the problem of how to efficiently obtain
              highly accurate computer simulations of several physical phenomena of practical
              interest, namely, hurricane forecasting in the Gulf of Mexico and environmental
              studies in ports, and the computation of minimum time transit paths of robotic
              vehicles and material etching in integrated circuit fabrication. Since the
              exact solution of these complex problems is not known, in order to guarantee a
              given accuracy of the simulation, special techniques have to be suitably
              devised in order to assess its quality. Moreover, these techniques can be
              employed to automatically let the computer know when and where to increase or
              decrease the computational effort to obtain the simulation; in this way, the
              efficiency of its computation can be significantly enhanced. 

