Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Early and Middle Formative Floodplain
               Settlement, Subsistence, and Household Adaptations at San Lorenzo, Veracruz,
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0107750

Award Number: 0107750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9488               (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Grove d-grove@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. David Grove, Mr. Anthony Vega will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. Combining both archaeological fieldwork and
              laboratory analysis he will examine a series of small mound sites located near
              the major Olmec center of San Lorenzo in southeastern Veracruz, Mexico. The
              Olmec civilization is the earliest in Mesoamerica and although considerable
              attention has been focused on impressive centers such as San Lorenzo,
              relatively little is known either about the surrounding hinterland or the
              processes responsible for this development. In preliminary work, Mr. Vega
              located and conducted test excavations into a series of small mounds which dot
              the floodplain around San Lorenzo. The results suggest that these were
              housemounds, perhaps occupied by single family groups and, based on comparisons
              with people who inhabit the region today, it is quite likely that these early
              Olmec pursued a mixed subsistence strategy which incorporated significant
              amounts of fish, shrimp and other floodplain items into an agricultural diet.
              While many researchers focus on the relationship between agriculture and the
              emergence of complex society Mr. Vega, among others, believes that the
              situation in fact may be more complex and that control over a wider variety of
              resources played an important role in this process. 

Mr. Vega will conduct
              stratigraphic excavation to develop a detailed chronological sequence. He will
              also completely expose living surfaces within several mounds to gain insight
              into subsistence practices and social organization. Comparison across mounds
              will permit him to determine whether social stratification - a hallmark of
              complex societies - existed. More limited testing between mounds may,
              hopefully, provide information on agricultural practices. By placing Olmec
              development in a chronological context it will also be possible to address the
              contested issue of whether Olmec culture developed from a local base or traces
              its roots to other regions within Middle America.

This research is important
              for several reasons. It will shed light on alternative routes which may lead to
              the emergence of civilization and provide insight into one of the earliest
              Middle American complex societies. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and contribute to training a promising young scientist.

