Title       : Twenty First Fungal Genetics Conference, being held in Pacific Grove, CA on
               March 13-18, 2001.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0107235

Award Number: 0107235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc J. Orbach orbachmj@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Twenty First Fungal Genetics Conference is being held at the Asilomar
              Conference Center at Asilomar, California on March 13-18, 2001. Approximately
              650 scientists and students from around the world are expected to  attend. The
              conference focuses on the molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry and cell
              biology of filamentous fungi. This meeting consists of four plenary sessions,
              four sessions devoted to concurrent workshops in specialized areas, three
              poster sessions and time set aside for informal discussions. Topics covered in
              the plenary sessions are: Comparative and Functional Genomics, Fungal-Host
              Interactions, Cell Biology, and Genome Structure and Maintenance.  Specialized
              sessions cover  Signal Transduction in Growth, Adaptation and Development;
              Comparative and Evolutionary Genomics; Mating and Heterokaryosis; Fungal
              Photobiology and Clocks; Mutation, DNA Repair/Genome Stability; Plant
              Pathogenesis: Mycotoxins, Secondary Metabolism and Gene Clusters;  Accessory
              Genetic Elements: Introns, Plasmids Prions and Transposons; Horizontal Gene
              Transfer; New Tools: Microarrays, Transcriptome, Knockouts and Transposon
              Tagging; and Fungi in Teaching. In this meeting, strong emphasis is placed on
              the participation of young scientists and students, particularly those from
              underrepresented groups. The meeting actively promotes the interaction of these
              junior scientists with more senior scientists in the field to allow them
              opportunities to develop collaborations. Funds are to help defray the travel
              and participation costs of students, postdoctorals and others who would
              otherwise be financially unable to attend.
