Title       : Collaborative Research: Tectonic Geomorphology of Grand Canyon--Testing a
               Hypothesis for Differential Incision Due to Quaternary Slip on the
               Hurricane-Toroweap Fault System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0107117

Award Number: 0107117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl E. Karlstrom kek1@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107117
Karlstrom
0107065
Pederson
Excavation of Grand Canyon by the
              Colorado River, previously thought to have happened between 6.0 and 1.2 Ma, is
              actually relatively young, ongoing, and happening at variable rates along the
              length of the Grand Canyon.  Information from middle-late Quaternary stream
              terraces in eastern Grand Canyon indicates that strong side-stream and
              mainstream responses to glacial/interglacial climate changes have been
              superimposed on an overall incision rate of 0.2 to 0.6 mm/yr.  This suggests
              that up to half of the present-day relief in eastern Grand Canyon has been
              generated in the Quaternary Period.  In contrast, new data from western Grand
              Canyon indicate up to an order of magnitude lower incision rate over the same
              time period.  This discrepancy is interpreted to be due to west down Quaternary
              slip on the Toroweap-Hurricane fault system modulating the incision of crustal
              blocks in the region.  Recently recognized slip rates of ~0.25 mm/yr on this
              fault system are approximately equal to the difference between greater upstream
              rates (eastern Grand Canyon) and smaller downstream rates obtained within and
              immediately below the fault zone.  A new picture is emerging of a younger,
              segmented Grand Canyon, which contains a sensitive record of the denudational
              history of the Colorado Plateau. 

This project is a focused test of this
              hypothesis using detailed geomorphic and structural field studies combined with
              U-Series dating of travertine within alluvial terraces and Ar-Ar dating of
              basalts.  These data provide an improved understanding of the age of the Grand
              Canyon and the forces that drive and modulate the incision of this and other
              high plateau regions.  This work also has a broad educational and outreach
              impact; we are working closely with the Interpretive Division of Grand Canyon
              National Park to design the "Trail of Time" to communicate geologic
              understanding to the 5 million visitors that come to the Park annually. 
              Additionally, we continue to train a host of graduate and undergraduate
              students in the context of a multi-university collaboration that deals with
              numerous aspects of the tectonic and landscape evolution of the southwestern
              U.S.A.

