Title       : Numerical Modeling for Liquid Crystal Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0107761

Award Number: 0107761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene C. Gartland gartland@math.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Numerical modeling tools have been used in the liquid crystal arena for
              several years.  They are typically used interactively to explore effects and to
              optimize the performance of devices with respect to controllable material and
              device parameters.  Until recently, satisfactory results could be achieved by
              using one-dimensional (1-D) models, which treat the transverse dimensions of
              the structures as infinite and uniform.  Current developments (smaller feature
              sizes, new technologies) are forcing more realistic 2-D and 3-D modeling. The
              numerical algorithms utilized in current modeling tools require several minutes
              on contemporary platforms to analyze a 2-D device; for 3-D, they take several
              hours.  Significant improvements in the numerical approaches are needed to
              produce acceptable performance in these higher dimensional settings. The
              principal investigator will work with device-modeling physicists and experts in
              the applied mathematics and numerical analysis communities to adapt and develop
              the advanced numerical methods necessary to model realistic optical devices
              based upon liquid crystal materials.  Modern numerical algorithms hold the
              promise of enabling 3-D modeling in times that are comparable to the current
              generation of 1-D tools (seconds).  These tools are expected to have a
              significant impact on the development of liquid crystal optics
              technologies.

This project is concerned with the development and analysis of
              numerical modeling tools for devices based on liquid crystal materials.  Liquid
              crystals are important in technology because they can be used to control light.
               Numerous applications exist (e.g., lap-top and flat-panel displays), and new
              ones are being developed, including tablet document readers (e-books,
              electronic newspapers) and beam-steering devices (for soft, programmable,
              non-mechanical applications in communications and switching). Modern numerical
              algorithms hold the promise of enabling full modeling of liquid crystal devices
              in a matter of seconds.  Such tools will be of immense practical utility and
              can be expected to have a big impact in the development of technologies in this
              and related areas.

