Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: The Evoluton of Reproductive Skew in
               A Communally Breeding Insect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a0107355

Award Number: 0107355
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Loeb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M,Loeb
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    919/969-6737

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5977,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107355
Loeb

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral
              research fellowship by Dr. Michael Loeb to work with Dr. Bernard J. Crespi at
              Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, Canada.  Funding for this project is from
              the Americas Program of the Division of International Programs.

A major goal
              of evolutionary biology is to develop a unified theory predicting the
              conditions under which natural selection favors cooperative group living over
              solitary existence.  Central to this goal is to explain why some individuals
              within groups often limit their own production of offspring and instead assist
              others in reproduction.  Thus, cooperation has costs and the key is to explain
              how cooperation evolves despite costs.  Reproductive skew theory, an extension
              of kin selection theory, predicts the circumstances under which reproduction is
              unevenly shared (high-skew societies) or when reproduction is more equitably
              shared (low-skew societies).  In spite of skew theory's potential to unify the
              study of social evolution, few manipulative field studies have tested its major
              predictions.  The objective of this project is to test two skew theory's
              predictions using a communally breeding insect as a model system.  Dr. Loeb
              will use populations of the lace bug Leptobyrsa decora introduced to Hawaii. 
              Leptobyrsa decora is an ideal system to test skew theory because kinship among
              cooperatively breeding females can be manipulated while holding other factors
              constant.  He will test the theoretical expectations that (a) highly related
              groups show high reproductive skew, and (b) populations with relatively poor
              conditions for solitary breeding should show higher skew.

Dr. Crespi is an
              authority on insect social systems and he has incorporated reproductive skew
              theory into his own research program.


