Title       : Numerical Methods for Layered Models of Ocean Circulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0107495

Award Number: 0107495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Higdon higdon@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop numerical methods for layered (isopycnal)
              models of the general ocean circulation.  In such models, the vertical
              coordinate is not linear distance, but instead is potential density or some
              other related quantity.  When an isopycnal model is discretized in the
              vertical, the effect is to represent the ocean as a stack of layers that are
              approximately immiscible.  This corresponds to the observation that the upper
              and lower regions of the ocean are approximately isolated thermodynamically
              from each other.  However, this isolation is not complete, and in an isopycnal
              model the exchanges that do occur are under the control of the modeler.  This
              type of model shows great promise for representing the long-term behavior of
              ocean dynamics.  In the present project, the principal investigator will
              develop and incorporate methods for solving the momentum equation in a flux
              form for which momentum, not velocity, is the dependent variable.  It appears
              that the momentum formulation may give more reliable results, such as in
              situations where layer thicknesses tend to zero because of layer interfaces
              intersecting the top or bottom of the fluid domain.  This approach may also be
              valuable in modeling vertical transport in the ocean.  Non-oscillatory or
              nearly non-oscillatory advection algorithms will be used to solve the momentum
              equation.  Such methods will be analyzed and incorporated into a two-level
              time-stepping algorithm that the investigator has recently developed for
              formulations of the governing equations in which the fast and slow time scales
              are split into separate subsystems.  The resulting algorithms will be tested on
              model problems for which the solution behavior is known.  As time permits, the
              PI will then pursue the implementation and testing of these methods in
              existing, operational models of ocean circulation.  During this project the PI
              will be in regular contact with ocean modelers at Oregon State University and
              at Los Alamos National Laboratory.

The long-term objective of this work is
              to contribute to an understanding of the global climate system.  An important
              tool towards understanding this system consists of computer simulations
              involving coupled models of the atmosphere, ocean, sea ice, and terrestrial
              effects.  With such simulations one can test the response of the earth's
              climate to changes in external forcing, such as increased emissions of
              greenhouse gases.  The world's oceans store and transport tremendous amounts of
              heat energy, so the oceans play a crucial role in our climate system.  When the
              circulation of the ocean is simulated on a computer, one is using the computer
              to obtain approximate solutions to mathematical equations that describe the
              evolution of fluid flows.  The goal of the present project is to improve the
              methods that are used to solve those equations.  
