Title       : Critical Threshold Phenomena in Nonlinear Balance Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0107917

Award Number: 0107917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eitan Tadmor tadmor@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hailiang Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We plan to study the so-called critical threshold phenomena associated with
              different nonlinear balance laws, in which the persistence of global features
              of the solutions hinges on a delicate balance between nonlinear convection and
              a variety of forcing mechanisms. Thus, for example, solutions for nonlinear
              hyperbolic conservation laws will develop generic singularities in finite time,
              whereas the existence of balancing forces in other time-dependent problems,
              e.g., the 2-D incompressible Euler equations, retain global smoothness for all
              time. This project proposes to analyze those borderline cases, where the
              persistence of features such as smoothness and finite-time breakdown vs. time
              decay etc., does not fall into any one particular category. Instead, global
              features depend on crossing critical threshold associated with the intrinsic
              configurations of our problems. The presence of various forcing mechanisms in
              nonlinear convection-dominated PDEs changes the physical situation, and is
              responsible for the complexity of the underlying problem. Our proposed research
              falls into four major sub-categories, all tied to the central issue of critical
              threshold phenomena in nonlinear balance laws: (i) The question of global
              smoothness/finite-time breakdown for Euler-Poisson equations. We also plan to
              study the critical threshold phenomena for solutions of Euler-Poisson
              equations, its relation to semi-classical limits of nonlinear Schrodinger
              equations and to augment these studies by high-resolution numerical
              simulations; (ii) Lack of L2-concentrations (-- and hence global existence) of
              weak solution for Euler equations, depending on the initial configuration in
              appropriate borderline regularity spaces; (iii) Questions of global vs. local
              existence for restricted Euler and Navier-Stokes dynamics; and finally, (iv)
              The issue of crossing the critical sub-characteristic threshold condition in
              hyperbolic relaxation problems, where there is a balance between different
              orders of nonlinear convective waves.

The breakdown of waves on the beach is
              a familiar phenomenon. This breakdown phenomenon depends on whether the waves
              accumulate sufficient strength, height etc. and in general, they depend on
              whether the initial configuration crosses intrinsic critical thresholds which
              distinguish between finite time breakdown and long term persistence of the
              smooth wave patterns. The goal of this project is to study a variety of
              critical threshold phenomena in problems governed by time-dependent problems.
              While many such problems develop finite-time singularities and other problems
              retain global smooth solutions, we focus on borderline cases, where intrinsic
              features of the solutions like smoothness vs. generic finite time breakdown,
              boundedness, time decay, etc, hinge on the delicate balance between the
              nonlinear convection and the (possibly nonlinear) forcing terms. In particular,
              the persistence of such global features does not fall to any particular
              category, but instead, these features depend on crossing critical threshold
              associated with the general configurations of our problems, very much like the
              conditional breakdown of waves on the beach. These are precisely the kind of
              problems that are of great research interest in various applications. The
              critical threshold phenomenon in nonlinear balance laws is not well understood,
              and the available techniques to study such phenomena need to be further
              investigated. In this context, there are many issues to be clarified, inter
              connections to be analyzed -- even in simplified settings, and general
              understanding of the critical threshold phenomena in realistic situations is
              sought in terms of both analytical and numerical studies. Professors E. Tadmor
              and H. Liu will continue their ongoing cooperative and individual research on
              the critical threshold phenomena in the context of Euler-Poisson equations,
              incompressible Euler equations, long time existence and finite time breakdown
              of restricted Euler and Navier-Stokes dynamics, and hyperbolic relaxation
              systems. 

