Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0107595

Award Number: 0107595
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Peterson ron@pauling.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,Peterson
	      975 Edgewood
	      Springfield, PA  19064    610/690-4999

NSF Program : 1398      BIO INFOR POSTDOCT RSCH FELLOW
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
              Informatics for FY2001.  The fellowship supports research and training at the
              postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
              computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
              fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
              career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
              integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
              at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
              these fellowships will play important roles in training of the future
              workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled
              "Development of strategies for designing novel catalytic enzymes." This work
              includes an informational approach followed by experimental application of the
              results.  The informatics portion includes parameterization of a whole protein
              energy function based on mutant to wild-type redesigns of proteins from various
              structural databases.  Second, a comprehensive cataloging of specific
              interactions in natural cytochromes is being conducted, noting the
              conformational positioning of the reactive centers of these molecules.  The
              strategies developed from these sections will be applied experimentally to
              design a novel synthetic cytochome with heme binding and reactivity approaching
              that of its naturally occurring counterparts.

