Title       : Adaptive multinumeric finite element methods for shallow water flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0107247

Award Number: 0107247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton N. Dawson clint@ticam.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent progress in coastal ocean modeling has emphasized two main themes: 1) the
              use of relatively large computational domains which encompass much larger areas
              than the region of specific interest, the main concept being to place the open
              ocean boundaries far away in deep water non-resonant ocean basins, and 2)
              strategically providing computational resolution using unstructured grids in
              order to maintain an approximately constant level of localized error throughout
              the domain.  This large domain/local grid refinement strategy has led to
              certain computational difficulties.  First, the range of flow regimes varies
              dramatically from the deep ocean to the shallow near shore and inland regions
              which include inlets, rivers, and flood plains with surrounding levee systems. 
              Not only are the depths dramatically different, but the force balances in the
              descriptive equations vary dramatically as well.  Various algorithms perform
              very differently within these widely disparate flow regimes in terms of
              stability, accuracy and localized mass conservation properties. Second, the
              high level of grid resolution provided in localized high flow gradient and/or
              very shallow water depth regions actually degrades the stability properties of
              many algorithms that worked quite well with coarser discretizations, and work
              very well in regions with smoother solutions.  The main focus of this project
              is to overcome these difficulties through the use of suitably coupled, finite
              element hp-adaptive algorithms, which are based on mathematically sound error
              estimates.  The investigators have an extensive history in developing
              continuous Galerkin finite element methods for shallow water problems, and have
              recently investigated the use of discontinuous Galerkin methods for these
              problems.  By exploiting the strengths of these two approaches, they plan to
              develop simulation tools for solving shallow water problems which can model
              large domains with locally refined, unstructured grids, can accurately resolve
              high gradient flow regions, can locally adapt to changes in flow
              characteristics, and which honor local mass conservation principles where
              necessary.  Specifically, under this project, the investigators will (1)
              further develop and analyze discontinuous Galerkin methods for shallow water
              flows in two and three dimensions (2) thoroughly compare continuous and
              discontinuous Galerkin methods for some model problems, and (3) investigate
              novel multi-algorithmic approaches based on coupling the two methodologies for
              shallow water equations and related mathematical models.

Accurate
              mathematical and computer modeling of coastal ocean circulation and transport
              of chemical species in shallow waters has significant implications from an
              economic, environmental and public health perspective.  Major inter-related
              issues include coastal inundation, navigation, sediment movement, pollutant
              transport and fisheries.  Accurate prediction of hurricane storm surges can
              help save lives and property in many low lying regions throughout the United
              States and the world.  The prediction of coastal currents and water levels is
              also of major significance in commercial and military navigation, e.g. in the
              design of harbors and navigation channels.  Current computer simulation tools
              are lacking in their ability to reliably and efficiently model these complex
              flow regimes.  The investigators on this project, through the use of advanced
              mathematical modeling, numerical algorithms and distributed computing
              technology, will develop state-of-the-art simulation tools for these
              applications.
