Title       : Systematics of Guyana and Brazilian Shield Endemic Loricariid Catfishes of the
               Tribe Ancistrini and Biogeography of the Shield Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0107751

Award Number: 0107751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan W. Armbruster armbrjw@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With 646 species, the Loricariidae (suckermouth armored catfishes) is one of the
              largest families of fishes in the world. Loricariids are distributed throughout
              much of South America and part of Central America where they fill significant
              ecological roles as algivores, detritivores, and lignivores (wood-eaters).
              Particularly speciose among the Loricariidae is the tribe Ancistrini of the
              subfamily Hypostominae. Amongst the Ancistrini, the major taxonomic and
              systematic problems revolve around a group of genera with ranges centered upon
              the Brazilian and Guyana Shields, two areas of ancient mountain ranges. In this
              study, the shield endemic groups of the Ancistrini will be examined to
              determine what species exist in the shield region and numerous undescribed taxa
              will be described.  Once this is completed, the relationships of the species
              will be determined by various aspects of their morphology (such as bones) in
              order to reconstruct the biogeographical history of the shield region.  By
              analyzing several groups with similar life histories, the way in which the
              shield regions have been invaded by fishes can be explored in detail. 
              Particular emphasis will be placed on the Guyana Shield.

From a conservation
              standpoint, although much of the Guyana Shield remains sparsely populated, some
              rivers have been incredibly impacted by gold and diamond mining. By studying
              the Guyana Shield Ancistrini now, we will have a better understanding of the
              diversity of fishes in the area before the area becomes irreversibly impacted.
              On a recent trip I took to the Potaro River in Guyana, several loricariids that
              should have been present were not captured suggesting that the extensive mining
              in the area has had a detrimental effect on them. Mining practices may have a
              particularly detrimental effect on loricariid catfishes because loricariids
              feed on biofilm that may become laced with pollutants from the mining industry
              and which may be harmed by the increased turbidity caused by dredging. It is
              imperative that studies into the shield fauna be accomplished soon so that we
              can have a better understanding of what we need to conserve and how it needs to
              be conserved before it is lost. This study will also provide the means to
              collect in poorly studied areas of South America. Many undescribed species of
              fishes will likely be collected in this study. In addition, tissues of all
              species collected will be taken for future genetic analyses and would allow for
              future toxicological analyses.


