Title       : Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences: Modeling Microbial
               Populations, Biofilms and Competition Dynamics in a General Gradostat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0107439

Award Number: 0107439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hristo V. Kojouharov hristo@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Grover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal J. Smatresk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports an interdisciplinary research project in applied mathematics
              and aquatic ecology. Specifically, the principal investigator will spend an
              academic year visiting the Department of Biology at
the University of
              Texas-Arlington to substantially broaden his background in aquatic ecology and
              expand his skills and knowledge in mathematical modeling of population
              dynamics, microbial competition, and transport
processes in heterogeneous
              media. The main research effort in this project is to compare experimental
              gradostat results to those predicted by existing theoretical models of resource
              competition, and to develop and implement new, important mathematical and
              computational methods for accurate modeling of the bacteria-algae-nutrients
              interactions in a general gradostat.

The goals of the principal investigator
              in the proposed research project
are:
(1) to participate in and assist with
              the modeling of ongoing experiments on microbial competition along spatial
              gradients of resource supply;
(2) to develop a better understanding of aquatic
              microbial ecology and the skills necessary for continued research in this area;
              and 
(3) to create curriculum guides and supplemental materials for new
              graduate and undergraduate courses in the principal investigator's home
              department as well as in the Department of Biology at the University
              of
Texas-Arlington.

This interdisciplinary project will be the foundation
              for a continuing collaboration between the two departments aimed at developing
              a combined experimental and theoretical research program addressing microbial
              interactions in heterogeneous systems for application to problems in aquatic
              ecology and environmental engineering.  This IGMS project is jointly supported
              by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
