Title       : Physical Knots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0107747

Award Number: 0107747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Buck gbuck@anselm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Anselm College
	      
	      Manchester, NH  03102    603/669-1030

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9141,9229,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Knots are self-entangled filaments.  In mathematics, they have been most
              commonly studied as purely topological objects.  But physical knots are knots
              made of real physical stuff, from rope to DNA or other large flexible
              molecules; or purely mathematical knots endowed with physical-like properties
              such as energy or thickness.  The goals of physical knot theory are to
              mathematically model and help understand real physical systems, and to use
              physically inspired measures of knot complexity to develop novel methods for
              knot recognition/classification and gain deeper understanding of configuration
              spaces of knots.  The investigator also casts a wider net, looking for
              connections between physical knot theory and polymer theory, as well as
              analogies between physical knot theory and other important optimization and
              configuration problems such as protein folding.

Modern laboratory technology
              lets scientists see the tiniest structures of life.  Modern computers let
              researchers visualize and simulate how the structures interact.  This combined
              technology has helped make geometry and topology an essential tool in medicine,
              polymers, and other areas of chemistry, physics, and biology.  Knotting, or
              other tangling of filaments, is one of the fundamental ways that matter
              behaves, and is a key phenomenon in this scientific interaction.  Knotting and
              tangling happen at every scale studied by science, from microscopic DNA loops
              to everyday rope to tangled magnetic field loops in the solar corona.  The
              investigator, collaborators, and students study fundamental problems that arise
              in all these physical systems:  How are knots and tangles created?  What
              properties of the various systems cause essentially different kinds of knots
              and tangles?  Can the structure be simplified or completely untangled?  If so,
              how?  How do the mathematical properties of different kinds of knots or tangles
              influence physical behavior?  The project contributes to the effort of finding
              good data structures and good manipulation and visualization tools for
              topological and geometric objects -- essential tools for work in the realm of
              the very small.  These efforts are at the interface of information technology,
              nanotechnology, and biotechnology.  In materials and manufacturing, as well as
              in biotechnology, the work could have considerable impact by providing
              effective models of the topological and geometric behavior of polymers in
              general, and DNA in the specific.

