Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Statistical Dynamics of Biopolymers
               and Biopolymer Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0107284

Award Number: 0107284
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris H. Wiggins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C,Wiggins
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5936,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0107284
Wiggins
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide three months of support to Dr.
              Chris H. Wiggins to work with Dr. Erwin Frey at the Hahn-Meitner Institute in
              Berlin, Germany to study the statistical dynamics of biopolymers and biopolymer
              gels.
The primary focus of this research is on the dynamics of elastic
              materials in Stokes flow (the fluid dynamics of the very small or the very
              slow).  Specifically, this will involve the study of the finite-temperature
              dynamics of semi-flexible biopolymers both to explain existing experiments and
              to suggest new experiments in diverse fields from polymer physics to genomics. 
              He will also study the interrelation between single-molecule dynamics and
              rheological properties of naturally-occurring biopolymer gels.
Professor Frey
              will have a joint appointment at the Freie Universitat Berlin and the
              Hahn-Meitner Institute.  Besides working with Professor Frey, the PI will have
              the opportunity to interact with other researchers in Berlin, such as
              Professors Reinhard Lipowsky and Udo Seifert.

