Title       : Secondary Symbiotic Origin of Algal Plastids and the Phylogeny of the
               Bangiophycidae (Rhodophyta)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0107754

Award Number: 0107754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301443             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debashish Bhattacharya dbhattac@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Sheath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirsten M. Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0107754
Debashish Bhattacharya

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Debashish
              Bhattacharya at the University of Iowa to determine the phylogeny, or
              evolutionary tree, of the red algae (Rhodophyta). The red algae are important
              primary producers and key players in the genesis of a multitude of other
              photosynthetic cells though a process termed secondary endosymbiosis. In
              secondary endosymbiosis, existing algae are engulfed by other single-celled
              protists and maintained indefinitely as photosynthetic machines (plastids) in
              the cell. Genes encoded in the plastid genomes of red algae and other algae
              containing red algal secondary endosymbionts (e.g., brown and cryptophyte
              algae) will be studied to determine how often secondary endosymbiosis has
              occurred, and which red alga was the donor of the plastid in the different
              algal groups. The red algal phylogeny will also be the basis for a much-needed
              taxonomic revision of the Rhodophyta.

The biodiversity of the algae is an
              infinite reservoir of organisms for fundamental biological research, and a
              resource for commercially important products. Furthermore, the algae are
              important suppliers of oxygen as well as consumers of carbon dioxide, a gas
              that contributes to the green-house effect. Although problems in algal biology
              have been studied to a much lesser extent than efforts devoted to "model"
              systems, the advent of modern molecular biology has enabled scientists to
              broaden their scope of investigation to all life forms. The red algal project
              touches on two cornerstones of modern biological research, determining the
              biodiversity on our planet, and using taxa in nature to address fundamental
              questions about the origin and diversification of individual species and whole
              lineages. The red algal phylogeny will provide a firm basis for addressing
              issues in systematics and biodiversity, whereas the plastid gene tree will help
              us understand when and how often novel photosynthetic lineages have been
              created through secondary endosymbiosis. 

