Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Depth Profile Variability in the
               Stable Carbon Isotopic Composition of Organic Matter from Australian Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0107264

Award Number: 0107264
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan G. Wynn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : J,Wynn
	      1990 Agate St.
	      Eugene, OR  97403    541/686-4240

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
Program Ref : 1389,5912,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0107264
Wynn
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide eighteen months of support to Dr.
              Jonathan G. Wynn to work with Dr. Michael I. Bird at the Australian National
              University's Research School of Earth Sciences on the depth profile variability
              in the stable carbon isotopic composition of organic matter from Australian
              soils.
The project involves the study of carbon isotopes from modern savanna
              soil of Australia.  It will provide better constraints on variability in these
              ecosystems, which can be used to address issues of global change and
              paleoecology.  Detailed depth-specific measurements will be taken of stable
              carbon isotope ratios in organic matter from diverse soil types of the tropical
              savanna biome in Australia.  This research will expand the analytical tools
              which are currently being applied to studies of paleoenvironmental records
              derived from carbon isotope measurements of ancient soils, and contribute to
              studies of the processes controlling carbon sequestration and cycling in the
              terrestrial biosphere.
Dr. Bird is currently active in a wide range of stable
              carbon isotopic research, which has centered around the study of natural and
              anthropogenic influences on the global carbon cycle.  In addition to the high
              caliber research facilities, Australia has an environment which provides a wide
              diversity of savanna ecosystems and soil types within an accessible region
              ideal for this study.

