Title       : Collaborative Research on Quadrature and Orthogonal Polynomials in Large-Scale
               Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0107858

Award Number: 0107858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lothar Reichel reichel@mcs.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The inexpensive computation of upper and lower bounds for functionals of large,
              possibly sparse, symmetric matrices has received a lot of attention in the last
              few years. This proposal is concerned with new methods and new applications,
              and discusses extensions that allow the matrices to be nonsymmetric. The
              computation of upper and lower bounds for matrix functionals is based on the
              evaluation of pairs of Gauss-type quadrature rules. The outlined work proposes
              to study new quadrature rules of Gauss-type with properties which make them
              suitable for estimating matrix functional of nonsymmetric matrices. The measure
              associated with these quadrature rules may be indefinite or complex valued.
              Applications of these quadrature rules to the estimation of the norm of the
              error in the approximate solutions determined by iterative methods for linear
              systems of equations with nonsymmetric matrices will be pursued. Furthermore,
              applications to the iterative solutions of nonlinear problems will also be
              studied.

 An important aspect of scientific computations addresses the
              reliability of the results. In particular, it is important to know the
              accuracy, measured by the error, of a computed result. One class of problems
              ubiquitous in scientific computing is the solution of large systems of
              algebraic equations. Since the solution of these kinds are equations is so
              widespread, they represent a class of problems for which knowledge of the
              numerical accuracy of the results is of great importance. This project
              addresses the issue by developing theory for computing the upper and lower
              bounds for certain measures of a system of equations. One particular
              application is to get the upper and lower bounds on the accuracy of approximate
              solutions of large systems of equations.
