Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Evolution, Biogeography, and
               Conservation of Frogs in Sulawesi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0107294

Award Number: 0107294
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben J. Evans evans@cubsps.bio.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5927,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107294
Evans

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will provide 24 months of support to Dr. Ben
              J. Evans to forge a research collaboration with Dr. Jatna Supriatna at the
              Center for Biodiversity and Conservation at the University of Indonesia in
              Depok, Indonesia.  Of this 24 months, 12 months will be spent in Indonesia
              working with Dr. Supriatna, eight months working with Dr. Don Melnick at
              Columbia University in New York, and four months in Austin, Texas working with
              Dr. David Cannatella at the University of Texas.

This project will work to
              increase our understanding of how frogs dispersed to and on Sulawesi and how
              natural selection influences evolution of different adaptations.  This research
              will also delineate regions of high priority for conservation management based
              on geographic differentiation of frogs.  It is expected that dispersal to
              Sulawesi is rare and that when it does occur, it is followed by explosive
              diversification.  It is also expected that fragmentation of Sulawesi played an
              important role in partitioning variation in frog adaptations and that existing
              conservation areas to not adequately protect Sulawesi's biological heritage. 
              This study will include fieldwork on Sulawesi and surrounding islands to sample
              genetic specimens for analysis, molecular analysis to generate DNA sequence
              data from genetic specimen, and evolutionary, biogeographical, and conservation
              genetic analysis of molecular data.

Dr. Supriatna is head of Conservation
              International Indonesia and a professor of biology at the University of
              Indonesia.  As the main site for this work, Sulawesi was chosen because of its
              unusual amphibian fauna, complex geology, and critical conservation value.  Dr.
              Melnick is a specialist in molecular evolution and biogeography of Southeast
              Asian vertebrates.  Dr. Cannatella specializes in evolution and systematics of
              frogs and frog vocalization.

