Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Charge Transport Processes in Novel
               High Quality Organic Molecular Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0107376

Award Number: 0107376
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20465              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Hillhouse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H,Hillhouse
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    311/526-1696

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5948,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107376
Hillhouse

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a six month
              postdoctoral research fellowship by Dr. Hugh W. Hillhouse to work with Dr. Teun
              M. Klapwijk at Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands.

This
              project will study organic based materials that can be used in the development
              of semiconductors and superconductors.  Recently there was an important
              breakthrough in the synthesis of organic molecular crystals.  This resulted in
              high quality crystals that are insulating, but may be converted to a
              semiconductor, metallic, or superconducting state by simply turning a knob. 
              This unique property provides experimenters with an extra degree of freedom to
              study the fundamental physics of the solid state.  However, still little is
              known about the synthesis of these crystals.  The objective of this project is
              to first study the growth of these crystals with particular emphasis on
              correlating structural order, defects, and purity to the measured electronic
              structure.  The crystals will then be used as model systems to study the
              fundamentals of charge transport, the nature of the metal-insulator transition,
              and the origin of superconductivity.

Dr. Klapwijk is an expert on
              superconductivity, nanoscopic phenomena, and charge transport in organic
              materials. He also has strong collaborative ties to Philips Research
              Laboratories where there is an active program to develop electronic devices
              based on organic transistors.

