Title       : Collaborative SGER: Dispersal and Local Population Dynamics Following
               Large-Scale Fire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a0107406

Award Number: 0107406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27846              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica Gurevitch jgurvtch@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9196,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Gurevitch
0107406

Data from population responses to recent Florida wildfires
              offer the possibility of extending and
testing demographic models we have been
              developing for pitch pines in a new system. The investigators propose to
              acquire these data, parameterize and test models on the interaction between
              dispersal and local population dynamics in longleaf and slash pine in Florida
              flatwoods. A similar opportunity is not expected to be available until, at
              least, the next major La Nina event. 

The terrestrial ecosystems of Florida
              and adjacent regions of the Southeastern US are strongly fire-dependent. Fire
              in Florida occurs frequently because rainfall is strongly seasonal.  The
              intensity and extent of these fires varies greatly among years, largely as a
              result of the El Nino - Southern Oscillation. During La Nina years, Florida
              often experiences unusually strong spring droughts. Fires can thus be more
              intense and of greater spatial extent. The drought of Spring 2000 was the most
              extreme ever recorded, and consequently the fire season involved fires of very
              great spatial extent and intensity.   The 1999-2000 La Nina, which caused the
              severe spring drought, appears to be over; all climate models are now
              predicting normal rainfall for the ensuing years. Thus, there is a time
              -critical aspect to data acquisition.

In particular, a number of large-scale
              fires occurred in pine flatwoods. In much of this type of habitat - which
              covers much of peninsular Florida -- pine stands are naturally fragmented. What
              motivates this proposal as an SGER is the spatial extent of the Spring 2000
              fires and this natural fragmentation. Jointly, these factors permit study the
              spatial component of recruitment with unusually high resolution. Because fires
              of this kind will not recur for many years, there is a time-critical component
              to this request.

This research involves demography in disturbance-prone
              populations. The models and data have been developed in the context of pitch
              pines in the pine barrens of Long Island, NY.  One question of particular
              importance is how much spatial data is needed? A principal result is that
              populations are expected to undergo substantial shifts from dynamics dominated
              by local demography to dynamics dominated by inter-stand dispersal, as the
              scale of disturbance increases.


