Title       : Systematic Determination of Complex Reaction Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0107927

Award Number: 0107927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Ross john.ross@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Ross of Stanford University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop further approaches to the
              determination of reaction pathways and mechanisms of complex reaction systems. 
              The effort emphasizes the need for methods with small numbers of measurements,
              possibly of limited accuracy.  Four new methods will be explored.  In the
              first, a pulse perturbation approach will be examined using theory, model
              reaction calculations, and experiments, in order to elucidate the causal
              connectivities of species in the reaction pathways.  A variant of this
              approach, a delayed response method, will be studied using theory and
              calculations with the goal of providing information on the number of chemical
              species in the reaction pathways, on rate coefficients, and on the reaction
              mechanism.  Genetic algorithm methods will be used on a model system to study
              the possibility that oscillatory chemical reactions may have evolved in
              biological systems as a result of regular periodic perturbations, focusing on
              evolutionary changes in a reaction mechanism due to external effects.  Finally,
              the reaction mechanism and stochastic analysis of memory effects and
              oscillations in single-molecule reactions will be investigated. 
              

Establishing how chemical reactions occur is an important goal in all
              fields of chemistry, including biological chemistry.  This task has been
              approached, for nearly the last hundred years, by determining the chemical
              species present, studying separately the rates of various elementary chemical
              reactions in the entire reaction system, and then guessing the reaction
              mechanism, which is the proper combination of elementary reaction steps that
              lead from reactions to products that reproduce observations.  For complex
              chemical reaction systems, this is an arduous and often controversial task,
              since many different proposed reaction mechanisms frequently fit the available
              data. The research that will be carried out in this project approaches the
              solution of chemical reaction mechanism problems from an alternative viewpoint,
              and the outcomes may have substantial impact on the determination of the
              mechanisms of complex chemical and biochemical systems in vitro, and ultimately
              in vivo.
