Title       : Adsorption Studies on Carbon Nanotubes Using NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0107710

Award Number: 0107710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tanja Pietrass tanja@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9162,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Experimental
              Program to Stimulate Competitive Research in the Office of EPSCoR make this
              award to New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology.  With the award,
              Professor Tanja Pietrass will study the adsorption of hydrogen, oxygen, nitrous
              oxide and ammonia by carbon nanotubes using in situ solid-state NMR
              spectroscopy, exploiting the full complement of dipolar and quadrupolar
              coupling studies, chemical shifts and relaxation time measurements. Gas
              dynamics will be probed using two-dimensional exchange spectroscopy under
              variable temperature and gas density conditions.  Results from these studies
              will be beneficial to understand the storage capacity, electronic structure and
              binding kinetics of different gases by carbon nanotubes.  New Mexico Institute
              of Mining and Technology has a large underrepresented minority student body,
              mainly Hispanics and Native Americans, and this award will help in their
              research training and education.  

Absorption kinetics of different gases by
              carbon nanotubes will be studied using solid-state NMR spectroscopy, exploiting
              the full complement of dipolar and quadrupolar coupling studies, chemical
              shifts and relaxation time measurements. These studies will provide fundamental
              information about storage capacity, electronic structure and binding kinetics
              of carbon nanotubes. Results from this research could find applications in gas
              storage, e.g. hydrogen gas for fuel cells, gas separations, and as gas sensor
              materials. In addition, the research program will provide multidisciplinary
              education and training opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students in
              material and surface chemistries, and large number of under represented
              minorities attending the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology will
              benefit from these research activities.
