Title       : Mechanism(s)and Conditions(s) of Growth of Metamorphic Diamonds from Ultra-High
               Pressure Felsic Gneisses in Kazakhstan and Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a0107118

Award Number: 0107118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larissa Dobrzhinetskaya larissa@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krassimir N. Bozhilov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dobrizhinetskaya
EAR-0107118

Microdiamonds of the Kokchetav massif in
              Kazakhstan grew under conditions of "ultra-high-pressure"(UHP) metamorphism of
              quartzofeldspathic sediments in a subduction zone. The recognition of this
              phenomenon a decade ago initiated a revolution in the understanding of
              continental collision terranes.  Similar diamond-bearing rocks have now been
              discovered in the Saxony region of Germany, in the Erzgebirge of Variscan age.
              Erzgebirge and Kokchetav diamonds are strikingly similar. However, Erzgebirge
              diamonds appear to have suffered greater back-reaction to graphite and/or
              dissolution at lower pressures.  The study of diamonds in situ in garnet and
              zircon shows that in both terranes, diamond inclusions are very frequently
              accompanied by a hydrous phase and cavities indicative of a free fluid. This
              pilot project will pursue two studies relating to the genesis of microdiamonds.
              The first will be a study of inclusions in recently discovered diamonds from
              Saxonian Erzgebirge, Germany by TEM utilizing techniques similar to those we
              recently successfully developed for Kokchetav diamonds. Determinations of the
              composition and structure of inclusions in Erzgebirge diamonds coupled with our
              previous research on similar diamond formation from Kasakhstan will provide
              constraints for the evaluation of pressure conditions of diamond
              crystallization and an understanding of the depth to which crustal
              quartzofeldspathic rocks have been taken by tectonic processes. Such techniques
              could later be used in many other studies in both Earth and material sciences
              dealing with TEM research on the nanometric sized natural and synthetic
              minerals. The second study will be an experimental test of the diamond growth
              hypotheses suggested by De Corte et al. (1999) and Dobrzhinetskaya et al.
              (2001) to put constraints on the process(es) which may be responsible for
              preferential growth of hopper/hollow, skeletal, cuboidal and cube-octahedral
              diamonds in fluid-rich subduction-zone environments. Traditionally,
              experimental attempts to replicate natural diamond formation within the diamond
              stability field have been based on syntheses in metal-carbon systems in a
              highly reduced environment.  Only recently has experimental modeling of natural
              diamonds at high P and T conditions been extended to the carbonate-carbon
              system in presence of H2O.  The latter ideas have been corroborated by results
              of fluid-inclusion studies in natural diamonds.  It is now believed that C-O-H
              fluids can be very effective in diamond formation. Our focus will be on
              experimental syntheses of microdiamonds in the diamond stability field to test
              current models of growth.  We will conduct several pilot experiments using a
              starting material composed of natural mineral mix of composition similar to the
              natural diamond-bearing felsic gneiss from Kokchetav upon which we reported in
              Dobrzhenitskaya et al. (2001).  We will explore the effects of presence and
              absence of a C-O-H fluid phase, although we expect little results under
              fluid-absent conditions.  Oxygen fugacity will be controlled by buffering with
              metal-oxide pairs.  This pilot study will allow us to develop initial
              understanding of some aspects of graphite-diamond kinetics in presence of H2O
              as well as technical aspects of such experimentation to enable subsequent
              pursuit. Our experimental program will be the first study of diamond growth
              under such conditions. Specifically, we will synthesize diamonds under
              relatively oxidizing conditions (conditions under which diamonds and carbonates
              coexist stably) using C-O-H fluid in starting material whose bulk composition
              is close to Kokchetav and Erzgebirge diamond-bearing quatzofeldspathic rocks.
              

