Title       : Conference:13th International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation held July 2-7,
               2001in Hamilton, Ontario Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0107923

Award Number: 0107923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Stacey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,1158,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the 13th International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation (to be held
              July 2-7, 2001 in Hamilton, Ontario) is to bring together scientists from
              throughout the world to discuss current research needs and fundamental research
              findings related to all aspects of biological nitrogen fixation. Subject areas
              to be discussed include: genetics of microsymbiont and host plant, ecology
              (competition, chemotaxis, survival, etc.), agricultural implications of
              biological nitrogen fixation, chemistry of nitrogenase and metal complexes,
              international programs, physiology of nitrogen fixing microorganisms,
              regulation of nitrogen fixing genes, genome structure of nitrogen fixing
              microorganisms, physiology of nitrogen fixing symbiotic partners, etc.  The
              objectives of the meeting are: 1:To identify factors that limit nitrogen
              fixation and design research approaches that will help overcome these
              limitations. 2:To review the status of current research efforts relating to
              biological nitrogen fixation.  3:To foster collaborative research efforts on
              common subjects. 4:To characterize the genomic structure of nitrogen-fixing
              species. 5:To provide a convenient arena for graduate student and postdoctoral
              participation in meetings. 6:To identify research goals for the first decade of
              the 21st century. And 7:To identify and discuss recent advances in the
              chemistry of nitrogen fixation and the potential for these discoveries for
              practical use. Funds are requested to partially support the participation of US
              scientists, postdoctoral associates and graduate students in the Congress.
              Scientists designated as plenary speakers and workshop leaders were selected
              based upon several criteria; including evidence of current, high quality
              research, evidence of success as an effective communicator, broad knowledge
              related to the subject matter, and geographical distribution. Postdoctoral and
              graduate student participants will be chosen based on need and evidence that
              they will present a poster presentation at the meeting. A meeting proceedings
              will be published that will contain review, original research contributions and
              poster abstracts for all presentations. The organizers, along with other
              members of the local organizing committee, will edit the proceedings for
              publication.
