Title       : Symmetry Tests and Vortex Imaging in Unconventional Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0107253

Award Number: 0107253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale J. Van Harlingen dvh@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will provide support to a professor for a
              project that will address the role of the phase and phase coherence in
              superconductor systems.  One objective of the project will be to determine the
              symmetry of the order parameter in a series of exotic superconducting
              materials.  Josephson interferometry experiments, instrumental in establishing
              the symmetry of the high temperature cuprates, will be applied to several other
              systems suspected to exhibit unconventional symmetry, including heavy fermion
              superconductors, which exhibit two distinct superconducting phases transitions,
              organic superconductors, believed to be d-wave, and certain ruthenate
              superconductors, thought to be p-wave with a complex order parameter that
              corresponds to a state with broken time-reversal symmetry.  Supplementing these
              are measurements of the low temperature penetration depth in these materials,
              the most sensitive test of nodes in the superconducting order parameter.  These
              experiments are crucial to identifying the pairing symmetry, thereby allowing
              characterization of the thermodynamic, electromagnetic, and transport
              properties of complex superconductors, and pointing the way to discovery of the
              microscopic mechanism responsible for the superconductivity.  A second set of
              experiments will apply Scanning SQUID Microscopy to study the distribution and
              motion of magnetic vortices in superconducting films and crystals.  Key
              problems to be addressed are the geometry of the vortex lattice and structure
              of the vortex core in unconventional superconductors, the pinning of vortices
              and flux creep at low temperatures, and the motion of vortices in patterned
              films including asymmetries in vortex flow in step and ratchet structures.  In
              connection with this project, several significant advances of the Scanning
              SQUID Microscopy technique will be developed:  enhancement of the spatial
              resolution into the submicron regime, implementation of imaging at ultralow
              temperatures in a dilution refrigerator, and development of schemes for moving
              and positioning individual vortices in superconductor systems that will enable
              direct tests of vortex interactions and pinning.  Associated with this project
              will be the presentation of an established graduate level course in
              Superconductor Device Physics and the development of a new course in Nanoscale
              Devices and Probes.  
%%%
This individual investigator award will provide
              support to a professor for a project that will address the role of the phase
              and phase coherence in superconductor systems.  Superconducting materials are
              characterized by a quantity, the order parameter, which largely determines
              their electronic properties.  More than any single quantity, it is the phase of
              this order parameter that is responsible for the fascinating properties of
              superconductors and leads to the unique potential and capabilities of
              superconductor electronic devices.  Two of the most significant advances have
              been the identification of unconventional pairing in the cuprates
              superconductors that is characterized by a strong phase anisotropy (in contrast
              to the isotropic order parameter observed in ordinary superconductors), and the
              development of novel magnetic field detection instruments that make possible
              direct imaging of magnetic domains and vortices.  This project will build on
              these advances in two directions: (1) Experiments will be carried out to
              determine the order parameter symmetry of several exotic superconducting
              materials that are suspected to be unconventional, including heavy fermion
              superconductors, organic superconductors, and ruthenate superconductors.  Two
              complementary approaches will be used: phase-sensitive interferometry
              experiments which directly probe the anisotropy of the phase of the order
              parameter, the most definitive test of the pairing symmetry, and measurements
              of the low-temperature magnetic penetration depth, which is perhaps the most
              sensitive of the probe of the magnitude of the order parameter.  (2)  Scanning
              SQUID Microscopy will be used to study the distribution and motion of magnetic
              vortices in superconducting films and crystals.  This instrument scans a
              sensitive dc SQUID detector over the surface of a sample to map out the
              magnetic field distribution with high magnetic field and spatial resolution. 
              This project will provide training for a number of graduate research students
              in the field of superconducting phase electronics, an topic of current interest
              for quantum information processing and computing.  Associated with this project
              will be the presentation of an established graduate level course in
              Superconductor Device Physics and the development of a new course in Nanoscale
              Devices and Probes.  
***

