Title       : Physical Modeling of Nutrient Upwelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a0107707

Award Number: 0107707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge F. Willemsen jorge@maya.rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Otis B. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Phytoplankton receive energy from the sun (from above), and nutrients from the
              water column (from below). Molecular diffusion proceeds so slowly that primary
              producers in the euphotic zone would deplete their nutrient resources over a
              time scale which is well below what is observed through experiments.  They
              must, therefore, depend sensitively on the replenishment of nutrients through
              upwelling processes. There are large nutrient stocks at depth due to the
              constant death and decomposition of organisms that populate the euphotic zone. 
              Thus a reliable model of phytoplankton population dynamics must incorporate an
              accurate physical model for the upwelling process. While work on this physical
              component has been undertaken by a small number of researchers, the general
              consensus among ocean biologists is that considerable work remains to be done.
              For instance, Bleck et al (1988) have shown the importance of fronts to the
              upwelling process using the MYCOM isopyncnal vertical grid model. For coastal
              upwelling, a "hybrid" version may be more suitable.  However, the physics
              component must be supplemented by a suite of biological considerations such as
              the adaptivity of diatoms to variations in light; the role of zooplankton in
              limiting the phytoplankton populations; and the mobilities of nutrients,
              phytoplankton, and zooplankton. This biological component is currently beyond
              the PI's realm of expertise, and it is through collaboration with Dr. Gary
              Hitchock at the Rosenstiel School that useful predictive models will be forged.
               This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
