Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: In Vivo Study of Turbulence in the
               Leakage Jets of Bileaflet Mechanical Heart Valves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0107348

Award Number: 0107348
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brandon R. Travis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : B,Travis
	      8 Independence Place NW
	      Atlanta, GA  30318    404/352-5532

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107348
Travis
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide twenty-four months of support to
              Dr. Brandon R. Travis to do research with Dr. Hans Nygaard at the University of
              Aarhus in Denmark on an in vivo study of turbulence in the leakage jets of
              bileaflet mechanical heart valves.
This project will quantify the velocity
              field and turbulence of the leakage of prosthetic heart valves after removing
              sources of error due to estimations in chamber geometry, assumptions of
              constant viscosity, and failure to remove cyclic variation from calculations of
              the turbulent stresses.  Bileaflet prostheses will be implanted in the mitral
              position of 90 kg pigs.  A high resolution ultrasound transducer positioned on
              the outer wall of the atrium will be used to measure the turbulent
              characteristics of the leakage jets immediately proximal to the valve pivots. 
              These measurements will accurately quantify the turbulence created by the
              leakage of prostheses in vivo.  The effects of pivot design, gap width, and
              exercise on leakage turbulence will be evaluated in the proposed experiments. 
              Observations from these studies may be used to focus the efforts of valve
              designers on specific aspects of valve geometry, and the protocols developed in
              the proposed experiments may be used to predict the clinical success of
              prototype valve designs.
The University of Aarhus has all the necessary
              facilities to carry out this work, as well as a staff experienced in the
              implantation of heart valve prostheses.  

