Title       : Systematics and Evolution of Body Size in Feather Lice (Phthiraptera:
               Columbicola)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0107947

Award Number: 0107947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale H. Clayton clayton@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                              This project will explore co-speciation in a host-parasite
              system consisting of birds and their host-specific feather lice.  Co-speciation
              takes place when parasite speciation (formation of new species) occurs in
              concert with host speciation.  Repeated bouts of co-speciation result in host
              and parasite evolutionary  trees that are mirror images of one another. The
              comparison of co-speciated evolutionary trees allows one to identify
              host-switching events, in which parasites "jump" from one ancestral host group
              to a new one.  The bird-louse system provides a model in which it is possible
              to: 1) identify host-switching events by comparing evolutionary trees that have
              been reconstructed on the basis of DNA sequence data; and 2) determine under
              what conditions host switches are likely to occur.  Specifically, are parasites
              more likely to "jump" between closely related species of hosts, or between
              species of hosts that are similar in body size or some other
              attribute?

	Host switching is an important evolutionary phenomenon with
              broad relevance to human health.  For example, the HIV virus appears to have
              evolved as a result of a host switch from non-human primates to humans. 
              Similarly, human malaria may have evolved from avian malaria. Birds and lice
              are a model system in which it is possible to uncover cases of host-switching
              (see above) in conjuntion with experimental simulations of switching that
              involve moving host-specific parasites among different species of hosts.  Such
              experiments cannot be done with humans and must therefore be studied using
              animal model systems.  This project has an important training component.  A
              Ph.D. student will participate in all aspects of the work and several
              undergraduate  research assistants will also receive training .



