Title       : Segmental Dynamics in Ultra-thin Polymer layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0107670

Award Number: 0107670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank D. Blum fblum@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds for continuation of studies of the segmental motion
              of polymers at solid interfaces.  Since the interfacial regions are quite thin,
              spectroscopic techniques are required for their characterization.  In this
              case, the technique to be used is primarily nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).
              The NMR studies will be done with deuterium and specifically labeled polymers. 
              Deuterium NMR has several advantages and the polymers will be studied with line
              shape, two-dimensional exchange, and relaxation time studies.  These will give
              a picture of the motion of the polymer molecules at the interface.  Of
              particular interest is the quantification of the molecular motion with the
              deuterium exchange experiment.  The use of the deuterium label can also provide
              contrast so that the interface can be studied even in the presence of an
              overlayer of unlabeled polymers.  The result of the successful completion of
              this work will be that knowledge of the structure and dynamics of interfacial
              materials will help researchers to design interfacial systems with enhanced
              properties for advance applications such as advanced composite structures,
              electronic devices, and particle stabilization.
%%%
Thin films made from
              polymers are important in a variety of applications including structural
              composites, sensors, and electronics.  In these systems, the properties of the
              thin films are critical to the success of the devices that use them. 
              Characterization of the properties of the polymers is crucial to an
              understanding of how the devices work.  Ultimately, the properties of devices
              with polymers can be improved if the behavior and their roles are understood. 
              These determinations become even more crucial as the size of the devices, and
              hence the thickness of the polymer films become smaller.  For example, in
              electronic devices, some of the properties of the polymer layers change with
              the thickness of the polymer layer.

