Title       : Fundamental Evaluation of Tracer Techniques for Characterizatiion of Non-Aqueous
               Phase Liquids (NAPLs) Retention Volumes in Heterogeneous Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0107095

Award Number: 0107095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tissa H. Illangasekare tillanga@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dongping Dai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0107095
Illangasekare

Difficulties associated with the detection and
              quantification of non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPLs) in the subsurface have
              prompted the development of innovative, less-intrusive site characterization
              methods that utilize partitioning and interfacial tracers.  Although these
              techniques have been utilized at many field sites in USA and Europe, current
              application is limited to NAPLs that are at or near residual saturation.  It is
              hypothesized that the combined use of these tracers may also be useful for
              identifying occurrences that diverge from cases of residual saturation such as
              isolated pools and macro-entrapment zones that occur in naturally heterogeneous
              subsurface formations.  The goal of this research is to evaluate the behavior
              of partitioning, interfacial, and conservative tracers in water-saturated
              subsurface systems where NAPLs are entrapped under conditions of natural
              heterogeneity. The following research issues will be addressed:

 The
              influence of subsurface heterogeneity on the distribution of NAPL will result
              in tracer behavior that is not necessarily controlled by local equilibrium, an
              assumption that is frequently used in analyzing tracer data.  However, NAPL
              entrapment under natural heterogeneity may have unique, identifiable tracer
              signatures, even under non-equilibrium conditions.  These unique signatures may
              be distinguishable for resolving and characterizing complex NAPL occurrences.

              The up-scaled field behavior of NAPLs differs considerably from what is
              observed in one-dimensional column experiments, particularly when media
              heterogeneity is introduced.  The ability to resolve the behavior of tracers at
              larger spatial scales and added dimensionality may lead to refinements in
              theoretical constructs and improvements in computational methods for
              characterizing complex NAPL distribution in the field. 

The approach
              consists of both experimental studies conducted in columns, cells and
              intermediate-scale soil tanks and development of methods for tracer data
              analysis using improved numerical models. This research has both intrinsic
              scientific merit in terms of the measurement and evaluation of fundamental
              parameters as well as practical implication for NAPL detection, remediation,
              and risk assessment.

