Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Determinants of Interspecific
               Diversity in Tropical Carnivora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0107293

Award Number: 0107293
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shyamala Ratnayeke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S,Ratnayeke
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    678/309-0563

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5989,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107293
Ratnayeke

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide twenty-four months
              of support to Dr. Shyamala Ratnayeke of Spelman College to work with Dr.
              Kalinga Padmalal of Open University of Sri Lanka in Nugegoda, Sri Lanka on the
              determinants of interspecific diversity of tropical carnivora.

This study
              will examine questions underlying variations in animal diversity and the local
              processes limiting the coexistence of species within an area.  The findings
              will have direct implications for the allocation and management of protected
              areas in tropical regions and contributes to an increased understanding of
              global patterns of biodiversity.  Specifically, Dr. Ratnayeke will measure
              species diversity in a group of animals occupying a higher trophic level and
              sharing a common phylogenetic ancestry, namely the mammalian Carnivora. 
              Species diversity in this taxon will be compared in 2 tropical habitats that
              show marked contracts in primary productivity.  Mammalian carnivores as a group
              occupy the highest position in the food chain, are highly mobile, and
              demonstrate tremendous inter- and intraspecific variation and flexibility in
              behavior and ecology.

Dr. Padmalal is the Head of the Environmental Studies
              Unite at the Open University and is currently involved in avian diversity and
              cervid research.

