Title       : Collaborative Research: Late Pleistocene and Earliest Holocene Evolution of the
               Lower Mississippi Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0107028

Award Number: 0107028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Blum mblum1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0107028
Blum

The Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV) has the potential of
              understanding the linkages of upstream climate/glacial vs. downstream sea level
              controls of a large stream system.  In addition a stratigraphic and
              geochronologic framework for the alluvial landforms of the valley will aid in
              the study of tectonic activity within the New Madrid seismic zone, within the
              northern valley. 

This proposed research seeks to develop a chronologic and
              genetic model for evolution of the LMV during the Late Pleistocene full glacial
              (late Wisconsin stage) to the earliest Holocene, a period when rapid
              large-scale rearrangements of the North American hydrological system occurred. 
              These rearrangements included changes in the Laurentide ice-sheet margin,
              drainage of pro-glacial lakes, and se level rise.  This proposal focuses on a)
              the role of fluctuations in discharge and sediment load from the former ice
              margin, b) downstream effects  of sea level discharge, and c) the impact of
              these forcing mechanisms on landscape evolution in the LMV.  We hope to address
              the following questions:
o How do landforms and deposits of the LMV correlate
              to ice margin changes, floods from pro-glacial lakes, and/or specific meltwater
              and sediment spikes identified in the Gulf of Mexico?
o How do landforms and
              deposits of the LMV correlate to the landforms and deposits of the upper
              Mississippi valley where climate/glacail impacts were fundamental, but sea
              level played no role?
o  Does the LMV respond rapidly to high-frequency
              changes in discharge and sediment load during deglaciation, or are there lag
              times?  Does the signal decay downstream or is it present to the Gulf of
              Mexico?
o What is the influence of sea level and how far upstream does it
              extend?

