Title       : Multiblock numerical methods for multiphase flow and transport in porous media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0107389

Award Number: 0107389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan Yotov yotov@math.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this research is to develop accurate, efficient, and
              robust numerical methods for modeling subsurface flow and transport.  The
              research approach is based on a recently developed multiblock domain
              decomposition methodology.  The equations hold with their usual meaning on the
              subdomains, with physically meaningful boundary conditions imposed on the
              interfaces via mortar finite elements.  The formulation provides great
              flexibility for multiphysics and multinumerics couplings and treatment of
              irregular geometries and internal boundaries. It is very suitable for efficient
              parallel implementations.  This research will study discretization issues -
              multiblock schemes for advection dominated problems and multilevel adaptive
              techniques, efficient solvers - parallel domain
              decomposition-Newton-Krylov-multigrid methods, and modeling issues -
              multiphysics couplings.

Computer modeling of fluid flow and transport in the
              subsurface has a major economic impact on environmental and energy industries. 
              It can provide dependable and cost-effective solutions to global problems like
              contaminant groundwater remediation and enhanced oil recovery.  Groundwater
              supplies are often contaminated by organic, inorganic, and radioactive sources
              due to improper disposal. Remediation costs at U.S. government sites alone
              range into the hundreds of billions of dollars.  Hydrocarbons contribute almost
              two-thirds of the nation's energy supply.  Moreover, recoverable reserves are
              being increased twice as fast by enhanced oil recovery techniques as by
              exploration.  Current computer simulators are limited in their ability to
              incorporate fine scale geological data and to resolve the physical processes
              occurring on a wide range of spatial (microns to kilometers) and temporal
              (microseconds to thousands of years) scales.  The goal of this research is to
              develop new and efficient computational methods for modeling multiphase flow
              and transport in porous media on multiprocessor computers.  These new methods
              will allow for more accurate resolution of the underlying multiscale phenomena
              and thus improve the dependability of the computer simulators.
