Title       : Collaborative Research: Host-Associated Genetic Differentiation in the Goldenrod
               Elliptical-Gall Moth Gnorimoschema Gallaesolidaginis - Parallel Host Race
               Formation?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0107752

Award Number: 0107752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Heard sheard@unb.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0107752
Heard

The astounding diversity of herbivorous insects (1-5 million
              species) is poorly understood, but one possible mechanism for their
              diversification is sympatric speciation via host race formation - that is,
              adaptation to and speciation on different host plants in the absence of
              geographic barriers to gene exchange.  While a few cases of host race formation
              in sympatry are known, it remains un-known whether this process is rare and
              special or frequent and predictable. A promising avenue toward answering this
              question is provided by the diverse group of insects attacking the goldenrods
              Solidago altissima and S. gigantea. 

Focussing on one of these insects, the
              goldenrod elliptical-gall moth, Gnorimoschema gallaesolidaginis, we will use
              genetic data to document the geographic extent and structure of genetic
              differentiation, reconstruct the history of host shifting, and identify
              evolutionary forces driving differentiation.  At the same time, we will use lab
              and field experiments to identify ecological mechanisms maintaining host plant
              affiliation and reproductive isolation (e.g. mate choice, adult and larval host
              choice, and/or host-associated tradeoffs in larval performance).  Our studies
              of differentiation in G. gallaesolidaginis will complement ongoing studies of
              differentiation in other Solidago herbivores. Together, these studies will tell
              us much about how (and how often) host race formation might have contributed to
              the spectacular diversification of herbivorous insects.  

