Title       : Multicomponent Drying of Semicrystalline Polymer Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0107168

Award Number: 0107168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Surya K. Mallapragada suryakm@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0107168
S. K. Mallapragada, Iowa State University

This
              proposal represents a tri-national collaborative effort between the
              principal
investigator Dr. Surya Mallapragada at Iowa State University (USA),
              Dr. Sacide Alsoy at
Izmir Institute of Technology (Turkey) and Dr. Joseph
              Miltz at Technion (Israel), devoted to
investigating the multicomponent drying
              mechanism of semicrystalline polymer packaging
materials. This collaborative
              effort was initiated during the US-Israel-Turkey tripartite workshop
sponsored
              by the National Science Foundation and held in Haifa, Israel in March 1999.
              Solvent removal is a key processing step in the production of a plethora of
              products such as packaging materials, adhesive tapes, photographic films and
              various functional coatings, many of which are made from semicrystalline
              polymers. The aim of this collaborative project is to investigate the mechanism
              of multicomponent solvent removal and the changes in the degree of
              crystallinity and the microstructure of semicrystalline polymers during drying.
              This, in turn, has a strong effect on the final properties of the polymer for
              various applications such as packaging. One of the important packaging
              materials used is cellulose acetate (CA) which will be the model system. A two
              pronged approach involving experimental investigations and mathematical
              modeling will be used to deal with the problem of multicomponent drying of
              semicrystalline polymers in the context of food packaging applications to
              enable optimization of drying conditions and dryer designs. The specific
              research objectives are to: 

1. Develop a multicomponent model for solvent
              removal from semicrystalline polymer films.
2. Experimentally investigate the
              solvent induced crystallization kinetics of CA films and
their effect on the
              drying kinetics. Use these to investigate the drying mechanism of CA films
and
              validate the model.
3. Investigate the influence of drying conditions of CA
              films on their characteristics as
packaging materials. Evaluate the
              permeability of the films to gases and their mechanical
properties as a
              function of drying conditions.  

This work also represents the first model
              developed to predict non-isothermal multi-component drying kinetics of
              semicrystalline polymers. The model will be applicable to any polymer-solvent
              system by using suitable parameter values. The synergy between molecular
              understanding and application-based experimentation proposed in this work will
              enable accurate predictions of industrial drying processes.

