Title       : Evaluation of Coastal Response to Sea-Level Rise from Holocene Stratigraphic
               Records: A Step Towards Coastal Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0107650

Award Number: 0107650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio B. Rodriguez arodriguez@wgs.geo.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Evaluation of Coastal Response to Sea-Level Rise from Holocene
              Stratigraphic Records: A Step Towards Coastal Forecasting

Antonio Rodriguez
              and John B. Anderson


	The consensus of the Intergovernmental Panel on
              Climate Change was that the rate of sea-level rise will increase in the future
              as a result of global warming.  An increased rate of sea-level rise will have a
              number of adverse impacts on world coasts, such as wetlands loss and
              accelerated coastal erosion, but the magnitude of these changes remains
              unpredictable.  Predictions of coastal response to future sea-level rise rates
              should be improved by examining the geological record of coastal change during
              the Holocene, when sea level was rising at rates similar to future predictions.
               The best records of coastal response to rising sea level are found in incised
              fluvial valleys.  Incised valley fill from three Gulf of Mexico bays,
              specifically Mobile Bay, Galveston Bay, and Corpus Christi Bay will be examined
              and compared.  These bays are located within differing climatic belts, and are
              fed by morphologically distinct fluvial systems.  Preliminary data from all
              three bays has identified an episode of rapid shoreline retreat that occurred
              during the Holocene.  In Galveston Bay, this event resulted in the estuarine
              environment being shifted tens of kilometers landward and the barrier shoreline
              being submerged and stranded on the continental shelf as a bank (Heald Bank). 
              The hypothesis is that variations in the rate of coastal subsidence and river
              discharge were not the cause of the observed coastal backstepping events.  The
              hypothesis will by tested by collecting high-resolution seismic, sediment core
              (up to 30 m-long cores), and paleontologic  data from each bay to identify
              flooding surfaces.  Radiocarbon age dates obtained from plant fragments and
              articulated mollusks sampled at numerous locations above and below the entire
              dip axis of flooding surfaces within each bay will constrain the timing of the
              events and the rates of coastal change.  Correlation of flooding surfaces
              between the bays, together with calculations of sedimentation and compaction
              rates and the generation of sea-level curves from basal peat deposits, will aid
              in distinguishing variations in climate and subsidence from sea-level events. 
              This work will help quantify coastal response to forcing mechanisms, and will
              create data sets appropriate for testing coastal forecasting models by
              hindcasting.

