Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Linking Large-scale Tree Inventory
               Efforts in the World's Richest Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0107368

Award Number: 0107368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel C. Pitman ncp@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5977,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107368
Pitman

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will provide twelve months of support to Dr.
              Nigel C. Pitman to work with Dr. Eduardo E. Ceron at the Universidad Central
              del Ecuador in Quito, Ecuador on a study of the linking of large-scale tree
              inventory efforts in the world's richest forests
.
In the past, plant
              ecologists had to use data from just one or two vegetation samples, datasets
              often comprised of fewer individual plants than the number of species in the
              flora of the area they were studying.  Today, there are large networks with
              dozens of hectares of tree plots scattered over hundreds of square kilometers. 
              This project will link two of these large-scale datasets via a transect of new
              plots joining Ecuador and Iquitos, and a web-based standardization program in
              Ecuadorean and Peruvian herbaria.  The project will provide specific answers to
              questions about how and why forest composition and diversity vary on a regional
              scale across Amazonia, and it will permit careful comparisons of patterns of
              habitat preferences, dominance and rarity between these two well-studied sites.
               Finally, the project will bring together Ecuadorean and Peruvian botanists and
              institutions, until recently separated by a 45-year border conflict, and
              provide a first demonstration of how to link other Amazonian networks in the
              future
.
Dr. Ceron has carried out quantitative inventories of Ecuadorean
              vegetation and has long-term experience in identifying tree species in the
              Amazonian lowlands.

