Title       : EcoSim: A Proposal for Null Models Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0107403

Award Number: 0107403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Gotelli ngotelli@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ecologists often rely on computer-intensive Monte Carlo simulations to quantify
              patterns of population and community structure. These models are called null
              models, because they are null with respect to a certain process, such as
              interspecific competition. EcoSim is a Windows-based interactive simulation
              software application that allows for a variety of null model analyses. The
              program currently contains modules for the analysis of species diversity,
              species co-occurrence, niche overlap, body size overlap, and macroecology. The
              current proposal will allow for the development of new EcoSim modules for the
              analysis of spatial and temporal patterns at the population and community
              level. Community modules include tests of concordance, spatial co-occurrence,
              biogeographic overlap, and Markovian succession.  Population modules include
              analyses of density-dependence, population viability, spatial pattern, and
              distance covariance.  EcoSim is widely used by the academic and educational
              community, as both a research and a teaching tool. It frees researchers and
              educators from the time-consuming chores of programming, testing, and debugging
              ecologically relevant programs.  The program contains extensive documentation,
              sample data sets, a tutorial, and an html-based help system. The program is
              available at no cost to the public and scientific community from the EcoSim
              website.
