Title       : Temporally Uniform Grid Convergence of Discrete Approximations and Numerical
               Simulations in the Problems of Wave Propagation over Unbounded Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0107146

Award Number: 0107146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Semyon V. Tsynkov tsynkov@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two major well-recognized difficulties in numerical simulation of
              waves
propagating over unbounded domains are the accumulation of error during
              
long time intervals and necessity to truncate the domain and subsequently
              
set the artificial boundary conditions (ABCs) at the external
              artificial
boundary. These two issues turn out to be closely related. In the
              previous
work of the PI with collaborators that has been done in the framework
              of
the scalar wave equation, we have used the inherently three-dimensional
              
phenomenon of lacunae and developed a methodology that modifies any
              
appropriate discrete scheme so that the long-term error buildup is fully
              
eliminated while all of the original properties of the scheme (e.g., order
              
of accuracy) are preserved. Moreover, the procedure allows one to replace
              
the original infinite domain by a finite computational domain, which leads
              
to obtaining highly accurate non-local unsteady ABCs. These ABCs are built
              
directly for the discrete formulation of the problem, their temporal
              non-
locality is fixed and limited, and they possess full geometric
              universality. 
The key objective of the proposed project is to extend the
              aforementioned 
methodology to wave-type models of practical interest, in
              particular, the 
Maxwell's equations (electromagnetic waves) and the
              linearized Euler's and 
full-potential equations (acoustic waves). The
              attainability of this goal 
is accounted for by the fact that the solutions to
              these equations have 
sharp aft fronts of the waves (manifestation of
              lacunae), which is the 
exact same behavior as displayed by the solutions to
              the wave equation.

Numerical simulation of waves on unbounded domains has
              numerous applications 
that range from scattering of electromagnetic waves
              from aircraft and ground 
vehicles (radar technology) to antenna design to
              calculation of the acoustic
fields produced by the airframe and airplane's jet
              engines for the purpose of 
reducing the noise levels around airports, as well
              as inside the passenger 
compartments. The results that we expect to obtain
              are going to benefit the 
foregoing applied areas. Indeed, we anticipate the
              creation of a universal 
framework that would allow one to modify a wide class
              of already existing and 
proven methods so that to enable two additional
              crucial capabilities -- long-
term integration and accurate computation of
              infinite-domain wave fields on 
truncated domains. Besides, as the proposed
              research unfolds, it will 
necessarily include communication and collaboration
              with physicists and 
engineers, as well as preparation of course materials and
              training young 
researchers.

