Title       : An Aerosol Climatology for Western Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0107607

Award Number: 0107607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen C. Power power@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1324,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dust particles suspended in the atmosphere, known as aerosols, affect the
              earth's climate in two ways.  They absorb and scatter solar radiation, and they
              affect the physical properties of clouds.  Aerosols are thought to have a net
              cooling effect and thus they may mask the potential warming effects of
              anthropogenic increases in greenhouse gases.  Despite their importance,
              aerosol-climate interactions represent a large source of uncertainty in
              understanding the climate system.  A key reason for this uncertainty is that
              aerosols demonstrate high variability, both spatially and temporally, yet the
              extent of their variability has not been fully investigated.  Constraints
              associated with conventional approaches to measuring total column
              aerosol-including the requirements for clear skies and costly equipment-have
              contributed to a paucity of aerosol data. Although the majority of
              anthropogenic aerosols (i.e. pollution) are emitted in the Northern Hemisphere,
              there are very few reliable long-term records of total column aerosol in the
              northern half of the globe.  This research will employ a radiation-based model,
              together with satellite and climate data, to evaluate seasonal, interannual,
              and spatial variability of aerosols in Western Europe, regardless of cloud
              cover.  A key product will be a more complete documentation of the amount and
              variability of aerosols than is currently available.  Time series and spatial
              analyses will also be used to investigate the degree to which pollution may be
              augmenting the background aerosol load, and will permit detection of possible
              volcanic influences on the aerosol signal.

The results of this research will
              help explain climate change and variability in Western Europe reported by other
              investigators, and will also help elucidate the relative roles of aerosols and
              greenhouse gases in the climate system.  This will permit improvements in how
              aerosols are represented in regional and global climate models.  This research
              will therefore enhance our understanding of climate and climate change, and
              will help policy makers prepare informed climate change policies.  
