Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Graptolite Macroevolution: Phylogenetic Analysis and
               Testing Hypotheses of Directional Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0107056

Award Number: 0107056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Mitchell cem@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "Collaborative Research. Graptolite Macroevolution: Phylogenetic Analysis
and
              Testing Hypotheses of Directional Change".
Charles E. Mitchell and Daniel
              Goldman.

	One of the most contentious issues in evolutionary theory is the
              notion of progress. Some scientists have argued for a qualified expectation of
              progress in the evolution of major groups while others have argued that we
              should expect evolutionary histories that are dominantly non-progressive.
              Efforts to quantify evolutionary patterns have produced conflicting results.
              Thus, the question of whether natural selection leads to long-term progressive
              trends remains controversial and frustrating.
	The central goal of the
              proposed research is to determine if there were significant progressive
              evolutionary trends within a group of fossils called graptolites. Graptolites
              are a group of extinct marine organisms that flourished from approximately 505
              to 310 million years ago. The graptolite fossil record offers an outstanding
              opportunity to make a rigorous test of directional evolution for two reasons.
              First, graptolite evolutionary patterns have long been used as textbook
              examples of progressive evolution. Secondly, the fossil record of graptolites
              is exceptionally good, and their temporal and biogeographic distributions have
              been intensively studied. 
	The work proposed here is expected to contribute
              substantially to an increased understanding of the mechanisms of graptolite
              evolution and their pathways of descent. It is also expected that it will lead
              to improvements in the methods paleobiologists employ to study evolutionary
              pattern and process. Both of these outcomes are likely, it is thought, to
              positively effect the broader issue of testing the fossil record for evidence
              of progress in evolution and the means by which it might occur. 

