Title       : Experimental Deformation of Dolomite and Mechanisms of Flow in the
               Calcium-Magnesium Carbonate System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a0107078

Award Number: 0107078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145430             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Newman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas K. Kronenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107078
Newman
Carbonates are common lithologic units in mountain belts, and
              their deformation plays an important role in the development of large-scale
              structures.  Field and experimental studies show that fracture strengths of
              carbonates at near-surface conditions are comparable to those of siliciclastic
              rocks; however, flow strengths of carbonates deformed at depth are relatively
              low and penetrative strains are localized within them.  Deformed limestones and
              marbles made up primarily of calcite exhibit abundant evidence of internal
              strain by mechanical twinning, microcracking, solution transfer, dislocation
              glide, dislocation creep, and diffusional creep.  Evidence of recovery and
              dynamic recrystallization at elevated temperatures is ubiquitous.  These
              processes also occur in experimentally deformed calcite, carried out at known
              temperatures, pressures and strain rates.  The measured mechanical properties
              from these experiments provide constraints on the environmental conditions
              required for deformation, and the rheologies needed to model the tectonics and
              structural development of continental collisions.

Carbonate units made up
              primarily of dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) have significantly different mechanical
              properties from those made up of calcite (CaCO3).  Field and experimental
              observations of dolomite and calcite indicate that the strength of dolomite
              exceeds that of calcite significantly, yet dolomites deformed at high
              temperatures also exhibit evidence of twinning, dislocation creep, and dynamic
              recrystallization.  Most experimental studies of dolomite deformation bear on
              fracture properties and only a few, exceptional studies, have been done that
              provide flow strengths and mechanisms of penetrative deformation. Early high
              temperature experiments on dolomites provide information on crystal plastic
              deformation mechanisms, but systematic measurements of flow strengths that can
              be used to determine the high temperature rheology of this carbonate are
              lacking.  This research addresses the high temperature deformation of dolomite
              through controlled deformation experiments; the objectives include determining
              the flow law for dolomite, determining the deformation processes associated
              with this rheology, and evaluating the conditions required for its deformation
              in orogenic belts. Experiments are being conducted on natural fine-grained
              dolomite and hot pressed synthetic dolomite in triaxial compression at
              confining pressure of 400 MPa, temperatures of 400 degree to 900 degree, strain
              rates of 10-4 to 10-7 s-1. Optical microscopy, SEM, and TEM are being used to
              characterize microstructures and document deformation mechanisms.

In
              addition to the tectonic and structural problems this research addresses, the
              comparison of the mechanical properties of rhombohedral carbonates of differing
              composition addresses fundamental questions involving the mineral physics and
              chemistry of deformation.  The high strength of dolomite relative to that of
              calcite raises a number of interesting questions, including: (1) How does
              substitution of one cation, Mg, for another, Ca, affect the deformation
              process?; (2) How do bond strengths affect the strengths and thermal activation
              barriers to deformation processes?;  (3) How does cation ordering affect
              deformation?; (4) How do microstructures associated with order/disorder and
              lamellar compositional variations affect deformation and
              strength?

Comparison of results for specimens made up of the magnesium
              end-member carbonate, magnesite (MgCO3), as well as a few samples of end-member
              calcite, deformed at comparable conditions to those of the dolomite
              experiments, may elucidate how deformation depends on crystal chemistry and
              structure.  This research compares the strengths of these three carbonates at a
              common set of conditions, the deformation mechanisms that are activated in
              each, and the activation energies that presumably tell us about the
              rate-controlling processes.

