Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: The Ecological and Physiological
               Significance of Thermal Stress: Characterization of the Heat-Shock Response in
               Marine Snails
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a0107327

Award Number: 0107327
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85043              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Burnaford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107327
Burnaford

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month
              postdoctoral research fellowship  by Dr. Jennifer Burnaford to work with Dr.
              Peggy Turk-Boyer at CEDO Intercultural Center for the Study of Deserts and
              Oceans in Puerto Penasco, Sonora, Mexico (twelve months) and with Dr. Gretchen
              Hofmann at Arizona State University (twelve months) on the ecological and
              physiological significance of thermal stress.

The Heat-Shock Response (HSR)
              is a powerful means of increasing tolerance of individual organisms to
              physiological stress; but the consequences of an individual's HSR expression
              for populations and communities are poorly understood.  The principal
              investigator will examine the interaction between HSR physiology and the
              distribution, behavior and fitness of natural populations of seven species of
              marine snails in the northern Gulf of California.  These snails experience
              wildly variable temperatures on daily and seasonal time scales and a number of
              "heat hours", making them ideal for the study of HSR.  By determining how
              frequently snails experience HSR inducing stress in the field, how the timing
              of the HSR varies during recovery, the long-term consequences of thermal stress
              in natural populations, and the importance and effectiveness of behavioral
              strategies for avoiding thermal stress in the field, she will significantly
              increase our understanding of how sub-lethal stresses affect the distribution
              and abundance of these species.

CEDO has long-term data on species
              abundances and sea-surface temperatures, and several established outreach and
              education programs.  Dr. Hofmann is a leading researcher on intertidal
              animals.

