Title       : Computational Error Estimation and Adaptive Error Control for Multiscaled
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0107832

Award Number: 0107832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Estep estep@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Multiscaled physical systems involving processes acting on vastly different
              scales arise in a variety of important applications. Analyzing such systems
              present overwhelming challenges to mathematical analysis and therefore
              numerical simulation has become a centrally important tool. However, multi-
              scaled problems also strain the limit of current computational abilities and
              resources because of the resolution required to approximate behavior on the
              small scales accurately. The principle investigator will attack this problem by
              means of computational error estimation and adaptive error control. He will
              develop residual-based a posteriori estimates of user-chosen functionals of the
              solution given in terms of the computed numerical solution. The proposed
              approach accounts for the global effects of stability through a variational
              analysis and the dual problem to the original problem. The computational
              estimates will be used to guide the discretization resolution in order to
              efficiently compute numerical solutions of a desired accuracy. The research in
              this proposal will encompass development of computational error estimates,
              analysis of the reliability and accuracy of the estimates, implementation of
              adaptive finite element codes, and the use of these codes to investigate
              physical systems. The underlying applications driving this research will be
              investigations into the behavior of a small number of particles suspended in a
              low-Reynolds number flow and reaction- diffusion systems arising in shear flow
              problems, general relativity, modeling of pattern formation in biological
              systems, and population dynamics.

Some physical systems involve processes
              that act on vastly different scales. An example is given by the motion of small
              particles suspended in a slow flowing fluid, as for example occurs in
              riverbeds. In this situation, the interactions of the particles can occur on a
              very rapid time scale as they approach each other compared to motion of the
              fluid. Other multi-scaled systems include pattern formation in biological
              systems like stripes on Zebras, the dynamics of diseases in populations, and
              problems involving general relativity. Computer simulations of such systems
              have become a main tool for understanding and predicting their behavior. Yet
              the multi-scaled aspects strain current computational ability because of the
              resolution needed to approximate the behavior on small scales accurately. The
              principle investigator will attack this problem by developing computational
              error estimates to be used to guide the resolution needed at each point in
              space and time to obtain simulations of a desired accuracy. The resolution will
              be adjusted through a feedback mechanism as a system evolves. The proposed
              research encompasses development of techniques to estimate the error and adjust
              the resolution of the approximation, implementation of these techniques into
              computer programs that will be made available to the public, and the use of
              these computer programs to investigate real physical systems including those
              mentioned above. 

