Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Event-Related Potentials (ERP)
               Investigation of Russian Scrambling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0107374

Award Number: 0107374
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12311              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irina A. Sekerina   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : I,Sekerina
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    732/445-5586

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107374
Sekerina

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide three months of
              support to Dr. Irina A. Sekerina to work with Dr. Matthias Schlesewsky at the
              University of Potsdam's Institute of Linguistics in Potsdam, Germany on
              Event-Related Potentials (ERP) technique investigation of Russian
              scrambling.

Recently, with interest growing in comparative psycholinguistic
              research focusing on linguistics phenomena in languages other than English, it
              has become possible to address the issue of differences between processing of
              languages with fixed (English) and flexible word order (German).  This research
              project will investigate the question of how speakers of a free word order
              language such as Russian comprehend complex sentences with moved constituents. 
              The goal is to conduct a pilot experiment with native Russian speakers using
              the Event-Related Potentials technique at the Institute of Linguistics in
              Potsdam.  Event-related potentials are small brain potentials within the
              spontaneous electrical activity of the brain.  Their multidimensional nature
              makes them suitable for differentiating between qualitatively different
              processes to systematically investigate language processing, particularly in
              the domains of semantics and syntax.  The experimental sentences will be
              Russian constructions with Scrambling and Wh-Movement comparable to the German
              sentences used by Friederici, Schlesewsky, and Fiebach; results from this
              experiment will serve as a baseline for this comparative psycholinguistic
              project.  The results of this study will increase our knowledge on how the
              human mind works in relationship to language, brain psychology, and
              psychology.

