Title       : Utilization of Existing Structures as Radiation Sources for Telecommunications
               Base Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0107687

Award Number: 0107687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery T. Williams jwilliams@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart A. Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107687
Williams

The research proposed is an innovative approach to solving
              the problem of visually unappealing base-station antennas. It seeks to examine
              how parts of existing buildings and structures might be used as transmitting
              and receiving antennas for these wireless applications. The major issues that
              must be solved to successfully develop antenna systems that are essentially
              invisible in a local environment include understanding

- how to effectively
              exite existing structures
- how to examine their basic radiation properties
-
              how to predict their radiated fields
- how to control their radiation
              characteristics.

In some cases minor modifications may have to be made to
              the existing structure, but the visual impact of such actions would be minimal.
              

Possible candidates for investigation include flashing and gutters around
              the tops of buildings, lightning protection systems, metallic window frames,
              building supports, power lines and supports, portions of existing towers and
              billboards, metal roofs or cupolas, and portions of the metal structure
              interior to a building.

The initial phase of the proposed research program
              will address the following tasks:

- the development of appropriate feeding
              and matching techniques
- the evaluation of the radiation properties for the
              proposed radiation elements
- the investigation of the use of perturbing
              materials and modifications of the structures for current and pattern
              control.

Note, however, that these tasks are interrelated. Each must be
              accomplished to insure the success of the others. Hence, these efforts will be
              conducted concurrently. 

The impact of the successful implementation of such
              antenna systems on the world of telecommunications should be most significant.
              The final results of the proposed study
should provide essential information
              on the feasibility of using existing structures as effective radiators, as well
              as providing preliminary tools and procedures for the design
of these antenna
              systems.

