Title       : Cellular Basis of Growth Cone Turning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0082793

Award Number: 0082793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher S. Cohan CCOHAN@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The adult nervous system depends on highly specific pathways that interconnect
              nerve cells with their appropriate targets such as muscles, sensory organs, and
              other cells within the nervous system. This pattern is established early in
              development by unknown mechanisms that allow growing nerve fibers to navigate
              their environment. The goal of this proposal is to identify the basic
              mechanisms that steer nerve fibers to their targets. This will be accomplished
              by studying the internal organization and movements of tiny structures that
              form the growing end of nerve fibers, called growth cones. Living growth cones
              will be observed microscopically using computer-based imaging while chemical
              agents are released in front of them to either attract or repel their growth.
              As growth cones turn, measurements will be made of regional changes in ions
              that enter the nerve fiber to signal a change in direction. In addition,
              regional changes in the internal scaffold of filaments that determine growth
              cone shape and that form the structural basis of changes in movement will be
              identified.

The turning of growth cones in response to chemical signals is a
              fundamental event that allows nerve fibers to establish highly specific
              pathways in the nervous system. The highly specific nature of these pathways is
              crucial for nervous system function, which depends on point-to-point
              communication within the nervous system. This project will reveal a fundamental
              property of nerve cells that allows them to be guided to their appropriate
              target locations.


