Title       : Incorporating Structural Response into the Prediction of Disturbance of a
               Competitive Dominant on Wave-Swept Rocky Shores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0082605

Award Number: 0082605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily Carrington carrington@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will focus on the study of the structural response to wave action
              of an ecologically important intertidal mussel, Mytilus edulis. Preliminary
              experiments have demonstrated mussel attachment strength varies seasonally,
              peaking in winter and declining in summer. This cycle in attachment strength
              may represent a plastic response to seasonal shifts in wave climate, or
              alternatively, may reflect temporal shifts in the allocation of energetic
              resources between reproduction and attachment. Laboratory experiments will
              determine the environmental and metabolic cues to which mussels respond and the
              time lag between cue and response. In addition, field experiments will measure
              the seasonal variability of the forces imposed on mussels, and of their
              attachment strength and reproductive condition. Together, these experiments
              will allow for predictions of the rate of disturbance of mussels that can be
              verified with measurements of disturbance in the field.
This study will
              provide a detailed understanding of the mechanics which allow this species to
              dominate wave?swept shores, and will enhance the ability to predict the rate of
              disturbance of this ecologically important species. Furthermore, this study
              allows for the prediction of the quantitative response of mussels to any future
              shifts in wave climate. Given current evidence that increases in wave exposure
              may be common in the near future, these estimations are likely to form a
              valuable test of the ability to predict the ecological consequences of climate
              change.

