Title       : A New Collaborative Ice Sheet Modelling Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0082453

Award Number: 0082453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt M. Cuffey kcuffey@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-0082453
Cuffey

This is a collaborative proposal with Principal
              Investigators from the Universities of California-Berkeley and Calgary.   The
              Greenland ice sheet is a rich repository for paleoclimate information and may
              contribute to substantial increases in global sea level.  The Principal
              Investigators will develop a model to improve understanding of Greenland ice
              sheet dynamics and history; this will complement existing modeling programs at
              European universities and institutes.  The work will improve understanding of:
              1) controls on accumulation rate (through more accurate historical
              reconstructions), 2) flow dynamics through the role of ice stream flow, and 3)
              response to climate forcings (by investigating response to spatially variable
              forcings of temperature and precipitation rate).

They will develop a
              numerical fully three-dimensional thermomechanical model of the ice sheet using
              a realistic geographic domain by Dr. P. Huybrechts.  The specific objectives
              include:

1) To improve the accumulation rate history derived from the
              Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP 2) ice core and establish uncertainties for
              this record.  No attempt has been made to reconstruct accumulation rate history
              from the Greenland ice cores that is consistent with the partial dynamics of
              the whole ice sheet
2) To improve the general methodology for derivation of
              accumulation rate from ice cores.  This will be the first attempt to link
              accumulation rate reconstructions to the dynamic predictions of a whole ice
              sheet model. 
3) To improve understanding of Greenland ice sheet dynamics by
              accounting for fast flow in ice streams.  The enormous ice flux through the
              Jakobshavn ice stream has not been resolved in whole ice sheet models, but this
              system affects a large region of the ice sheet and probably allows the ice
              sheet to respond more rapidly to climate change than is usually calculated.
              
4) To improve understanding of the response of the Greenland ice sheet to
              climate change by the response to spatially varying forcings.  Century-scale
              climatic forcing for the model ice sheet will be derived from the NCAR Climate
              System Model, a coupled ocean-atmosphere-sea ice-land surface model. 

