Title       : Chimeric Calcium/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase Mediated Signaling in
               Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0082256

Award Number: 0082256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. W. Poovaiah poovaiah@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This renewal project is focussed on this laboratory's long standing interest in
              understanding the calcium/calmodulin-mediated signaling in plants. Changes in
              intracellular calcium concentration can affect a number of physiological
              processes through the action of calmodulin (CaM), a ubiquitous calcium-binding
              protein. Calcium/CaM-regulated protein phosphorylation is believed to play a
              pivotal role in amplifying and diversifying the action of calcium-mediated
              signals.  Although calcium/CaM-dependent protein phosphorylation is implicated
              in regulating a number of cellular processes in plants, not much is known about
              calcium/CaM-dependent protein kinases and their role in calcium signaling. 
              This laboratory has cloned a chimeric calcium/CaM-dependent protein kinase
              (CCaMK) gene from developing anthers (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 4897-4901,
              1995, communicated by Professor Edwin Krebs, nobel laureate).  CCaMK is
              characterized by the presence of a kinase domain, an autoinhibitory domain, a
              CaM-binding domain and a neural visinin-like calcium-binding domain in a single
              polypeptide.  One of the unique features of CCaMK is the presence of a
              visinin-like calcium-binding domain, an additional calcium sensing mechanism
              not previously known to exist in kinases (J. Biol. Chem., 271: 8126-8132, 1996;
              J. Biochem 121: 984-990, 1997).  The effect of autophosphorylation of CCaMK and
              its interaction with CaM was studied by using 35S-labeled CaM and dansylated
              CaM as probes.  The affinity of CCaMK for CaM (CaM trapping) increases over
              eight-fold upon autophosphorylation.  These results suggest the existence of a
              new state of CCaMK when it has a higher affinity for CaM.  CCaMK is expressed
              in a stage-specific manner in pollen mother cells and tapetal cells during
              anther development (Planta 209: 161-171, 1999).  We hypothesize that CCaMK
              phosphorylates protein(s) in these target cells in a calcium/CaM-dependent
              manner and the phosphorylation triggers stage-specific changes during
              microsporogenesis and microspore maturation.  To study the functional
              significance, transgenic plants carrying the antisense construct of CCaMK were
              produced.  Results indicate that the transgenic plants are male sterile,
              suggesting an important role for CCaMK in anther development.  Based on this
              work, Washington State University Research Foundation has obtained a U.S.
              patent entitled 'Compositions and Methods for Production of Male Sterile
              Plants' and a global patent application is pending.  To investigate the
              biological functions of CCaMK, the yeast two-hybrid system was used to isolate
              genes encoding proteins that interact with CCaMK.  One of the cDNA clones
              obtained from the screening (LIEF-1 alpha 1) has high similarity with the
              eukaryotic elongation factor-1 alpha (EF-1 alpha).  CCaMK phosphorylates LlEF-1
              alpha 1 in a calcium/CaM-dependent manner.  A CDPK isoform cloned and
              characterized in this laboratory (CRPK2) phosphorylates multiple sites of
              LIEF-1 alpha 1 in a calcium-dependent but CaM-independent manner.  Unlike CDPK,
              CCaMK phosphorylates only one site (Thr-257), and this site is different from
              CDPK phosphorylation sites.  Interestingly, Thr-257 is located in the putative
              tRNA-binding region of LIEF-1 alpha 1 (J. Biol. Chem., 274: 12001-12008, 1999).
               We propose to continue this investigation by emphasizing the following:  the
              functional significance of CCaMK in anther development by characterizing
              antisense plants (T1, T2, T3 and T4 generations) and by obtaining T-DNA
              insertion mutants; protein-protein interaction between CCaMK and its target
              proteins in pollen mother cells and tapetal cells; and the structure/function
              relationships of CCaMK, especially the role of the visinin-like calcium-binding
              domain in autophosphorylation and substrate phosphorylation.  A better
              understanding of the regulation and function of CCaMK will increase our
              knowledge of calcium/CaM-mediated signaling in plants while at the same time
              promoting teaching, training and learning at all levels.


