Title       : Information Dependencies in Databases and Data Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0082407

Award Number: 0082407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Robertson edrbtsn@cs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dirk Van Gucht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mehmet M. Dalkilic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on Information Dependency (InD) measures and the
              application of these measures to databases and datamining. InD measures use
              classical (Shannon) information theory to evaluate the information structure of
              database relations. This work extends results by the investigators of this
              project which show how InD measures generalize concepts important in database
              design, namely functional and multivalued dependencies. Research in this
              project is taking place across the spectrum from theory to practice. On the
              theoretical side, deeper details of InD's are investigated with an eye toward
              mechanisms for manipulating and applying InD measures. On the theoretic side,
              properties of InD's are investigated with an eye toward manipulating and
              applying InD measures, as well as toward implications of InD's on modeling. In
              the center, techniques for computing the measures are being investigated.
              Because the ultimate goal of datamining is to inform the user, investigations
              also include the interaction of InD and visualization. On the applied side, the
              major focus is the application of InD measures on data mining. Recognizing that
              research into applications requires real rather than "toy" targets, this
              project seeks collaborations involving data mining: the first such
              collaboration being with researchers in Biology. All of the activities of this
              project ultimately lead toward the development of prototype toolkit components
              based on InD measures.
