Title       : Differentiated Reliability (DiR) in Multi-layer Optical Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0082085

Award Number: 0082085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea Fumagalli andreaf@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andras Farago  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Current optical networks typically offer two degrees of service
              reliability: full (100%) protection (e.g., in presence of a single fault in the
              network) and no (0%) protection. This reflects the historical duality that has
              its roots in the once divided telephone and data environments, in which the
              circuit oriented service required protection, i.e., provisioning readily
              available spare resources to replace working resources in case of fault, while
              the datagram oriented service relied upon restoration, i.e., on dynamic search
              for and reallocation of affected resources via such actions as routing table
              updates.  
     The current trend, however, is gradually driving the design of
              networks towards a unified solution that will support, together with the
              traditional voice and data services, a variety of novel multimedia
              applications. Evidence of this trend over the last decade is the growing
              importance of concepts, such Quality of Service (QoS) and Differentiated
              Services to provide varying levels of service performance in the same network.
              According to the fact that today's competitive networks can no longer provide
              only pure voice and datagram services, the historical duality between fully
              protected and unprotected (100% and 0% reliability in case of a single fault)
              is rapidly becoming obsolete. Modern networks can no longer limit the options
              of reliability only to these two extreme degrees. On the other hand, while much
              work is being done on QoS and Differentiated Services, surprisingly little has
              been discussed about and proposed for developing differentiated network
              reliability to accommodate this change in the way networks are designed.
    
              In this proposal, the researchers proposed to address the problem of designing
              cost effective multi-layer network architectures that are capable of providing
              various reliability degrees (as opposed to 0% and 100% only) as required by the
              applications. In the proposal, the concept of Differentiated Reliability (DiR)
              is for the first time formally introduced and applied to provide multiple
              reliability degrees (classes) in the same layer using a common protection
              mechanism, e.g., line switching or path switching. According to the DiR
              concept, each connection in the layer under consideration is assigned a minimum
              reliability degree, defined as the probability that the connection is available
              at any given time. The overall reliability degree chosen for a given connection
              is determined by the application requirements. In a multi-layer network, the
              lower layer can thus provide the above layers with the desired reliability
              degree, transparently from the actual network topology, constraints, device
              technology, etc. The cost of the connection depends on the chosen reliability
              degree, with a variety of options offered by DiR.
     The proposed research
              explores the multifaceted aspects of DiR-based design of multi-layer optical
              networks, with specific emphasis on the IP/WDM architecture. Optimally
              designing a DiR network is in general extremely complex and will require
              special techniques tailored to handle it with acceptable computational time.
              Therefore, along with research on the architecture and modeling of DiR-based
              networks the researchers propose a powerful novel discrete optimization
              paradigm to efficiently handle the difficult tasks. The optimization approach
              is based on adopting and adjusting the Fourier Transform technique for binary
              domains. This unique technique makes it possible to realize an efficient
              "filtering" of the complex design/optimization problem, such that the solution
              becomes computationally feasible, while still preserving sufficient accuracy.

