Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Optimization and Integrated Control of Low Power
               Wireless Multimedia Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0082064

Award Number: 0082064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Jane Irwin mji@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vijaykrishnan Narayanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajarathnam Chandramouli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4096,4097,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent years have seen an explosive growth in the number of multimedia devices
              and communication tech-nologies.  While these multimedia technologies still
              depend on wireline links, the future of multimedia com-munication is in
              wireless. Mobile multimedia networks will provide seamless communication
              between roam-ing users. Applications such as video conferencing or internet
              access will become available from any where in the world. Widely varying
              classes of network traffic (traffic heterogeneity) that change over time will
              be generated by multimedia applications. The network itself will consist of
              both wireline and wireless links (network heterogeneity). We are already
              beginning to feel this change.
A major constraint in multimedia wireless
              technology is the limited power budget. Mobile devices such as laptops and
              personal digital assistants have limited battery life. The re-chargeable
              battery technology has resulted only in a small increase in battery efficiency.
              So, it is important to optimize network protocols for minimum power to ensure
              the continued growth of wireless based multimedia communication. Many attempts
              have been made towards this goal at individual layers of the network protocol
              stack. Most of these efforts have concentrated only at the physical and link
              layers. In this proposal, we deal with the wireless network protocol stack as a
              whole and provide a unified framework to optimize both computation and
              transmission power at various layers of the protocol stack. A power manager
              serves as the central core of our framework. The
different layers of the
              protocol stack communicate with each other through the power manager that makes
              adaptive policy decisions based on the network, traffic, and power limitations.
              This is a uniqueness of the proposal. In the conventional model, the network
              layers have minimal or no communication at all leading to poor performance
              compared to the proposed framework. The proposed methods strive to optimize the
              quality of service (QoS) with minimum power consumption at the mobile wireless
              nodes.  Towards achieving our objectives we consider the following research
              issues :

Adaptive source coding and modulation strategies at the physical
              layer that minimize power for a desired reliability. The adaptation is done
              based on channel state estimates produced by the link layer.

New
              error-resilient coding methods that do not have the drawbacks of the
              conventional forward error correcting codes. Little overhead, graceful
              degradation, and simple encoding and decoding that reduce the power
              requirements for computations are the main strengths of the coder. The coders
              are especially well-suited for state-of-the-art compression standards like
              JPEG, MPEG, and H.263. Radically different on-line channel state estimators are
              also proposed.

Power-aware transport control protocols that distinguish
              between various channel and battery state.


Application layer adaptation
              mechanisms to conserve power. The mechanisms use techniques from networking and
              signal processing areas to improve the performance.

Adaptive power manager
              (integrated controller) policies that control the entire wireless network from
              a global point of view. Reliability, bandwidth, robustness and power
              considerations are taken into account for policy decisions.



A simulation
              framework to experiment with different hardware configurations and network
              topologies and constraints. The developed framework will be help to validate
              and update our theories. This tool that will be made available through the web
              will be invaluable for other researchers in designing future energy-efficient
              wireless multimedia systems.

