Title       : Collaborative Study of Ice-Ocean Interaction in Svalbard
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0082687

Award Number: 0082687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216852             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Morison morison@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Wettlaufer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The small-scale physics of sea ice formation will be studied in a natural
              setting with the objective to resolve critical paradoxes about the rate of ice
              formation, supercooling in the ocean boundary layer, and the effective
              diffusivities of heat and salt. Factors affecting the mass and energy balance
              of sea ice are currently of much interest both because of the potential impact
              of sea ice on climate change, and because there is a growing body of evidence
              that rapid changes are occurring in the Arctic. An important facet of the
              problem is the exchange of heat and salt at the ice-ocean interface. Here there
              is a significant gap between theory and observation. Current theory suggests
              the boundary layer under growing ice should be constrained by double diffusive
              processes at the ice-ocean interface to force supercooling and in situ frazil
              ice formation in the boundary layer. Theory also suggests that ocean heat flux
              will be greater under thin ice than thick ice. These results greatly affect
              models for small scales and very large scales. Yet, observations indicate these
              things do not happen. This may be because the existing boundary layer theories
              do not properly represent the microphysics of the ice formation process.
              

This effort will cooperate with Norwegian colleagues in a combined
              observational and theoretical investigation to test the hypotheses. The
              observational work will be done from fast ice in frozen but tidally active
              fjords in Svalbard. With proper planning and preparation, and the ability to
              operate from an extensive existing logistics base, the fjord setting will offer
              a superb natural laboratory for investigating small-scale ice-ocean
              interaction. This work will take advantage of the recently signed Statement of
              Cooperation (SOC) between NSF-OPP and the Norsk Polar Institute, and it
              exemplifies close interaction between U.S. and Norwegian scientists. We will
              make educational outreach an important part of this project by: supporting a
              U.S. graduate student who will attend University Courses on Svalbard (UNIS),
              working with the UNIS students in the field, and giving lectures at UNIS. 


