Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geochemical Weathering Controls on Soil Nitrogen
               and Phosphorus: Possible Implications of Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0082460

Award Number: 0082460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Dixon jcdixon@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,9198,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Current predictions of climate change in the Arctic estimate mean annual air
              temperature increases of between 2 and 4.5 degrees C.  Although increases in
              the emission and atmospheric retention of carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse"
              gases are seen as the primary causes of these increases, the Arctic is one of
              the world's regions where a net carbon sink is thought to exist, with more
              carbon is absorbed by plants and the land surface than is emitted.  While this
              sink somewhat ameliorates the impacts of atmospheric carbon accumulation,
              changes in moisture availability or temperature could alter the dynamics of
              chemical exchange in the region.  This doctoral dissertation research project
              will examine one facet of chemical exchange in the Arctic, specifically the
              role of geochemical weathering in controlling the availability of soil nitrogen
              and phosphorus under a global change scenario in Karkevagge in the Swedish
              Arctic.  This project will utilize both field data collection as well as
              laboratory simulations to develop a model that predicts the rates of nitrogen
              and phosphorus release into the environment under changing environmental
              parameters.  This work will build on preliminary fieldwork in Karkevagge
              investigating the spatial variability of chemical weathering.  Previous work
              has suggested that chemical weathering is an important component of the
              geomorphic system in this valley and that the patterns of chemical weathering
              vary spatially.  Weathering rates and surface water solute alteration will be
              investigated by combining in situ weathering measurements made with electron
              microscopy and stream water chemical measurements.  Geochemical models will be
              used to determine the chemical pathways between the weathering calculations
              from the electron microprobe and the measured water chemistry.  Data on soil
              temperature, mineralogy, grain size, and water fluxes will be used to generate
              a laboratory simulation experiment for investigating the potential effects of
              human-induced environmental change on the release of nitrogen and phosphorus
              into the environment.  These simulations will be used to understand the
              controls these parameters have on weathering.  These simulations can be used as
              a first-order test of a model predicting weathering rates in natural systems. 
              The models then will be validated with field data.  Further simulations
              investigating the effects of increasing temperature and pC02 on weathering
              rates will also be undertaken.  Data will then be combined into a synthetic
              model predicting the release of nitrogen and phosphorus into Arctic
              environments by geochemical weathering.  This model will make predictions about
              the possible alterations to this system by human-induced environmental change. 
              The changes investigated through this project may play a role in altering the
              carbon sequestration ability of Arctic ecosystems.  Arctic ecosystems are one
              of the major unknowns in global climate models, because the rates of carbon
              sequestration are largely unknown.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

