Title       : Development of a South Dakota Photodynamics Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a0082978

Award Number: 0082978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. May smay@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, creating high tech self-sustaining operations in the field of
              photodynamics (the study of change associated with the interaction of light and
              matter), will assemble state-of-the-art facilities and involve faculty in
              various stages of their careers. South Dakota has made a conscious effort to
              develop a critical mass of researchers in this area; the effort involves four
              researchers at the University of South Dakota (USD) and two at South Dakota
              State University (SDSU), all in the Department of Chemistry. So far this group
              has had an important impact on the science and technology infrastructure. With
              funds from NSF, the Petroleum Research Fund, the Department of Defense,
              private-sector alliances, university sources, and the South Dakota EPSCoR
              program, some facilities have been added such as two lasers (one nitrogen and
              one YAG), an x-ray diffractometer, a closed-cycle cryostat, and a laser-based
              short-lifetime fluorescence spectrophotometer. This project aims at increasing
              the scholarly activities and promoting the group into the realm of national
              recognition by providing some necessary additional infrastructure to coalesce
              this group into a collaborative team that is capable of national
              competitiveness. As first priority in the development, the Center will increase
              interaction between existing membership by bringing in distinguished faculty as
              part of a lecture series, as well as through a visiting scholar program. Other
              goals include summer symposium support, the augmentation of a faculty start-up
              package, and the enhancement of graduate and undergraduate research in
              photodynamics. Nine detailed project descriptions are provided:
A
              Complementary Experimental and Theoretical Study of Energy Transfer Mechanisms
              for Isolated Lanthanide(III)-Ion Pairs in CsM(II)X3 Hosts,
Photodynamics
              Studies of a Novel Anion-Sensing System,
Studies of the Mechanisms of
              Photoisomerization of Cinnamamides, Thiocinnamamides, and Related
              Compounds,
Studies of the Photofragmentation of Naphthalimide Dyes,
Studies
              of the Complexation of Derivatized Cyclem and Cyclam,
Mapping the Excited
              State Decay Dynamics in a Coupled Lanthanide System,
Excited-State Properties
              of Bimetallic Complexes Containing Cu(II) and Ru(II) Fragments,
Molecular Beam
              Studies of the Decay Dynamics of Isolated Lanthanide Compounds,
              and
Photoinduced Electron Transfer in Chelating Quinone-Bipyridine Complexes.
