Title       : Interdisciplinary Research in Bio-Molecular Data Management and Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a0082979

Award Number: 0082979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499501             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Boyle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jianping Zhu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Hasan M. Jamil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter J. Diehl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ioana Banicescu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes an inter-disciplinary research team in bio-molecular
              data management and computing to develop database support and numerical
              algorithms for bioscientists to retrieve and interpret data efficiently and to
              simulate important biological processes on high performance parallel computers.
               It will create a database query system, a Genetic Query language, which will
              allow biological researchers to successfully extract individually formatted
              information from multiple disparate databases in which bio and genomic
              information is currently located.  The work will incorporate bioscientists,
              computer scientists, and mathematicians to accomplish the following goals.

              Identify genome-centric database research issues and develop database support
              in the form of interconnecting disparate genomic databases on the Internet and
              facilitate intelligent retrieval of data using novel query languages.
Develop
              an easy-to-use one-step query browser, which will provide a unified view of
              various genomic databases on the World Wide Web.
Develop efficient and
              scalable solution algorithms based on multiscale analysis and domain
              decomposition for modeling and simulating important biological processes
              described by systems of nonlinear reaction-diffusion equations, and implement
              these algorithms on multiprocessor parallel computers using novel dynamic
              scheduling and load balancing strategies for large scale computations.
The
              project also suggests a mechanism for allowing researchers to query
              heterogeneous distributed databases for genetic information without many of the
              current impediments and develops scalable methods for domain decomposition that
              would allow efficient use of multiprocessor computer systems for modeling
              large-scale biological processes.  In addition, educational activities in
              computational biology would be enhanced through development of new course
              materials, involvement of undergraduate students in research projects, and the
              conduct of summer student workshops.  Participation of members of groups
              underrepresented in science and engineering will be encouraged and facilitated
              in each of these activities. 

