Title       : Protocols for Open Access Wireless Deployment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0082503

Award Number: 0082503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1255754            (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Clark ddc@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Wroclawski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4095,9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of  this project is to demonstrate a new paradigm for wireless
              network services.  The
motivations for this project are the f ollowing:
    
              (1) Today, wireless service is either local to an institution (as in wireless
              LANs) or is provided as part of
a regional or national service (as in
              cellular).  But there could be other models. Individual providers of
wireless
              service could put up a base station and o er service locally. Users could move
              among these
providers and select a service based on requirements and prices.
              Just as we have over 5000 wireline
Internet service providers today, many only
              serving a small area, we could have wireless coverage
built bottom up.
    
              (2)Today, we see a restricted range of  wireless devices - a laptop PC with a
              wireless card, a cell phone
augmented with data capabilities, a highly
              integrated device such as a pager. There is not an open
market  for new
              wide-area wireless devices, because such devices today are tightly bound,
              both
technically and through service contract, to a particular wireless
              service provider. But there could be a
wide range of  new consumer devices if 
              the proper interfaces and modules were available.
     For this to work, two
              things are necessary. First, each of the broad mix of competing wireless
              services
must be accessible to a wide variety of devices. What is needed is an
              overall system architecture that
allows cheap, small, low-power consumer-level
              objects to access a wide variety of technically
incompatible wireless services
              with ease, using open interfaces. Second, selection of a service
              among
competing alternatives must be easy. For example, a manual process of
              selection and entry of a credit
card would be too burdensome to succeed. What
              is needed is a model for automated dynamic negotiation,
based on rules
              provided by the users and providers, together with a workable economic model
              and a
simple micro-payment scheme.
     The goal of this research is to
              demonstrate two related innovations. The  irst is a framework for
automated
              negotiation  for access to wireless services. The second is a small hardware
              device that the user
can carry, a personal router, which contains the
              necessary wireless transceivers, implements the access
negotiation protocol,
              and provides a network connection for the other devices and appliances that a
              person
might choose to carry. By creation of an open interface between this
              personal router and other devices a
user might carry, an environment can be
              created for the development of new devices and applications.
     The
              intellectual merit of this project is embodied in: a) the automated service
              negotiation framework, b)
experience with systems that use policy constraints
              to guide automatic configuration; c) the related
protocols for security and
              billing; d) the demonstration of the new application user interface
              paradigms
implied by the personal router; and e) identification and definition
              of the interfaces between this device
and the other consumer devices that can
              be connected to the Internet using it. The broader impacts are the
possibility
              of creating a new market model  or wireless service, based on small business
              investment and
local competition, rather than service provision (only) by
              large, national-level corporations, and the
development of  an increased
              understanding of user pricing preference for communication services.
Research
              that explores technology supporting alternative economic models is not likely
              to be done in
private industry, and is thus especially appropriate for
              public-sector support.
