Title       : ITR: Space-Time Spreading and Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0082987

Award Number: 0082987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474716             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay P. Kumar vijayk@ceng.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith M. Chugg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4096,4097,4720,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
The channel fading and co-channel interference present in a
              wireless radio propagation channel presents a harsh challenge to the radio
              design engineer. Diversity techniques commonly used to combat the channel
              include the use of interleaved coded modulation and multiple antennas at the
              receiver end. Lately there has been a great deal of interest in the use of
              multiple antennas at the transmitter end, i.e., in using transmit diversity. 
              Researchers have shown that the capacity of multi-antenna systems significantly
              exceeds that of conventional single-antenna systems. Space-time codes attempt
              to realize the potential increase in capacity by distributing code symbols
              intelligently in space (across the different transmit antennas) and time.  This
              topic has received a great deal of attention since the BLAST space-time system
              was proposed and demonstrated at Bell Labs. This is because, owing to the
              additional dimensionality obtain by exploiting space, a spectral efficiency of
              40 bits per sec per Hz at realistic signal to noise ratios was demonstrated
              (i.e., 20 times the spectral efficiency achieved in current cellular systems).
              The importance of space-time methods in communication and information theory
              was recently recognized by the selection of the work by Tarokh, Seshadri and
              Calderbank for the 1999 IEEE Information Theory Paper Prize.  The great
              majority of space-time coding research has been based on the following
              assumptions:

Single-user link or time-division multiplexed

Complex
              Gaussian channel gains (frequency at fading) from each transmit (Tx) antenna to
              each receive (Rx) antenna.

Independent channels for each Tx-Rx antenna
              pair.

Equal average energy in each Tx-Rx antenna channel.

Time
              non-selective channels (quasi-static assumption)

Based on these assumptions,
              effective design rules have been established by considering the probability of
              pairwise codeword error. These design rules aim to maximize the diversity and
              coding gains.  The assumptions described above best represent a system with a
              dense, rich scattering environment sur-rounding the Tx and Rx antenna arrays
              and stationary or slowly moving receivers. This model is applicable, for
              example, to an indoor office environment. It may also be accurate for a
              pedestrian cellular user in a dense urban environment, depending on the
              base-station antenna location. However, space-time channel measurements and
              models suggest that in many cases of practical interest, the above assumption
              of independence of channel gains is not accurate.  The lack of like-signal
              interference may also not be applicable to code-division multiple access
              (CDMA)
systems since a well-utilized CDMA system is limited by such
              interference. Virtually all third-generation mobile radio standards are based
              on CDMA systems as are the most effective wireless LAN systems. In a CDMA
              system, the effects of signature sequence design must also be considered
              together with coding and
modulation.
In this project, we have developed an
              expression for the pairwise error probability for a system model that is
              broadly applicable. Our model includes arbitrary correlation between Tx-Rx
              antenna channels, multiple CDMA users, and the potential for time variations in
              the channel gains. Based on this model we propose to develop design rules for
              space-time spreading and coding for CDMA systems. Our goal is to develop rules
              that are applicable to a variety of applications (i.e., mobile users and dense
              scattering, or fixed-point systems
out of the scatter) and/or which are robust
              to uncertainties in the channel model.
We propose to generalize the methods of
              space-time coding so that the approach may be used in CDMA systems and/or
              systems without rich scattering environments. Research directions include rules
              for spacetime spreading and code design, investigation of receiver structures
              and channel estimation/tracking, code design for simplified decoding and
              modified design rules for non-Euclidean distance receivers. This study will be
              conducted under different channel model assumptions and presumed knowledge at
              the receiver and transmitter of channel knowledge.

