Title       : Ice-Ocean-Atmosphere Interactions Along the East Greenland Margin on Decade to
               Century Timescales Over the Last 14 ka
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0082347

Award Number: 0082347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $463664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Jennings jenninga@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
OPP-0082347


The Principal Investigators will conduct a detailed
              study of high resolution IMAGES (International Marine Global Change Study)
              cores from the East Greenland continental shelf.   Cores up to 25 m long were
              collected from specially targeted, high-resolution sites with support from a an
              NSF grant their partnership in the 1999 international IMAGES V cruise, Legs 3
              and 4 in the Nordic Seas.  The Leg 4 Greenland cores were collected for study
              of climate and glacial history of the shelf from degradation to the present. 
              The sites were selected from seismic profiles and shorter gravity cores
              collected on previous.  The 25 meter, high resolution cores are unprecedented
              in this are and likely represent at most the last 14,000 years.  Initial
              radiocarbon and dating results and previous work indicate that the Principal
              Investigators will be able to resolve changes occurring on decade-to-century
              time scales.  These records will provide an excellent basis for looking at the
              natural variability of sea ice and climate in the Arctic under a wide range of
              environmental conditions.  The goal is to document the hydrography of the East
              Greenland Current, including its sea-ice cover and freshwater flux, and
              associated changes in the extent of the Greenland Ice Sheet and local glaciers
              during three critical time intervals.  They will employ multiple proxies that
              have been calibrated to modem oceanographic, biological and sedimentological
              data.  The proxies include: oxygen and carbon stable isotope analysis of
              benthic and planktonic foraminifers, benthic and planktic foraminiferal
              assemblages, grain-size changes (including quantification of iceberg rafted
              grains), carbon and carbonate flux changes, diatom assemblages and abundances
              lithofacies and paleomagnetic intensity records.   The Principal Investigators
              will employ sampling intervals to provide decade to-century scale resolution of
              the environmental changes that have occurred through the critical time periods.
               These cores from a shelf area directly influenced by the arctic sea ice, rapid
              sedimentation rates and little influence of relative sea-level fluctuations
              offer exciting prospects for understanding natural variability in the Arctic
              sea ice, in the properties of the EGC, and in the interplay of
              paleoceanography, glacial history and paleoclimate.



