Title       : ITR: A New Generation Wireless System with Integrated Cellular and Mobile
               Relaying Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0082916

Award Number: 0082916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $486078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chunming Qiao qiao@computer.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ozan K. Tonguz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   With the advent of Internet, it is now anticipated that wireless data
              services will within a few years surpass the demand for voice services.  The
              explosive demand for wireless data services is forcing the telecom and
              networking research communities to rethink some of the well-known solutions to
              the limited capacity problem which is fundamental in such networks.
     In
              this proposal, a new concept for solving the limited capacity problem in
              current wireless systems is formulated, and a cost-effective approach to
              implement the concept is described.  The researchers main concept is to
              circumvent congestions in cellular networks by "hopping" to frequencies in the
              unlicensed band, such as the Industrial, Scientific, and Medical Band (ISM)
              band (2.4 - 2.5 GHZ) and by diverting traffic to noncongested areas.  The
              researchers propose to integrate cellular and mobile relaying technologies by
              deploying new devices called mobile relaying stations (MRS's).  With MRS's, a
              mobile host can communicate with the base transceiver stations (BTS's) located
              in a different cell by switching (or "hopping") to the unlicensed frequency
              band.  In this way, a mobile host moving into a congested cell can continue its
              call that would otherwise be dropped; likewise, a new call that would normally
              be blocked in a congested cell could be served by borrowing channels from a
              nearby cell via relaying.  As a result, handoff-dropping probability and new
              call blocking probability of existing cellular systems can be substantially
              improved.  This, in turn, leads to an unprecedented increase in the number of
              users (i.e., capacity) of these systems if one utilizes the proposed new
              concept in conjunction with cell splitting.  While the hardware complexity of
              the proposed next-generation wireless systems will be slightly higher than that
              of the conventional systems, the anticipated benefits in terms of improved
              network performance, capacity, and connectivity at all times will far outweigh
              this slight increase in hardware complexity.
     The success of this project
              could lead to a major paradigm shift in the next-generation wireless network
              standards.  It is also anticipated that this project will enhance the
              telecommunications and networking education and research programs at the State
              University of New York at Buffalo, and could pave the way for a Center for
              Advanced Telecommunications and Networking that houses faculty and graduate
              students from the Department of Electrical Engineering, Department of Computer
              Science and Engineering, as well as other departments.

