Title       : Studies in Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0082529

Award Number: 0082529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $970250             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Neelin neelin@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work aims to understand climate phenomena that arise by
              interactions between the ocean, land surface and atmosphere. Methods developed
              by the PI and his group under previous NSF support will be applied to four
              related areas:
(i) Tropical teleconnections and ocean-land-atmosphere
              interaction. Atmospheric teleconnections by which oceans influence land regions
              often occur within  convective zones, or shifts or modulation of convective
              zones. Hierarchical modeling methods will be applied to analyze convective,
              cloud-radiative and land-surface feedbacks that occur in tropical
              teleconnections and related phenomena in tropical land convective
              regions.
(ii) Intermediate atmosphere-land modeling. The intermediate model
              developed by the group will be maintained in support of research at UCLA and
              other institutions. It will be used as a platform for testing some non-standard
              modeling approaches
(iii) Stochastic convective parameterization. Conventional
              convective parameterizations parameterize the mean effects of small-scale
              convective motions but omit the variance. A method for including this is to be
              explored and the impacts of this on large-scale motions will be tested.
(iv)
              Ocean atmosphere interaction. Continuation of work on ENSO aims to provide
              theoretical prototypes for the substantial variability that is not associated
              with the leading oscillatory mode. Work is also proposed on the tropical
              Pacific signal of global warming that has some features in common with El
              Nino.
The work is important because it will increase our understanding of the
              role of ocean, land and atmosphere in the climate system.


