Title       : Collaborative Research: Temporal Dependence and Economic Fluctuations -- A
               Spectral Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a0082230

Award Number: 0082230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73828              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Otrok cmo3h@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research explores the economic implications of non-time-separable
              preferences and technology. The research is motivated by experience with
              spectral utility for time-separable constant-relative-risk-aversion utility
              functions, as well as non-time-separable functions. Spectral utility functions
              decompose agents' preferences for consumption smoothness into preferences for
              particular types of smoothness by frequency.  Smoothness at low frequencies
              (the long run) may be more or less important than smoothness at high
              frequencies. For time-separable preferences, utility does not vary by
              frequency, but for non-time-separable cases it does. This carries implications
              for a variety of economic phenomena that we propose to study.  We will consider
              how models with habit formation in preferences produce observed equity premia
              and risk-free rates of return and whether such temporal nonseparabilities could
              play a role in explaining the "excess volatility" puzzle of stock prices.   We
              will also analyze the implications for dynamic diversification; optimal
              portfolio allocation, fund separation, and other results require modification
              when returns are serially correlated and/or preferences are temporally
              nonseparable.  We expect that the spectral properties of evaluation devices
              like the Hansen-Jagannathan bounds will provide additional insight into
              behavior of economic models even when preferences are time separable.  Finally,
              we will explore whether or not these devices are useful for assessing the
              successes and failures of business cycle models that use time-to-build and
              other technologies.
