Title       : Multicast Congestion Control Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0082294

Award Number: 0082294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harrick M. Vin vin@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Multicast is a network service for delivering the same data to multiple
              destinations. A wide range of emerging network applications - such as
              multi-participant video conferencing, multi-party interactive games, distance
              learning, group collaboration, and resource location - can greatly benefit from
              this service.
     In this project, the researchers will develop congestion
              control protocols for IP multicast to support scalable and efficient
              dissemination of layered data to a large number of receivers in heterogeneous,
              dynamic networks. The researchers will investigate the use of an integrated set
              of three distinct mechanisms - per-group feedback-based transmission
              adjustment, selective participation, and menu adaptation - to solve the general
              multicast congestion control problem. These mechanisms will operate at
              different time-scales and distribute the responsibility of adaptation to
              different entities in the network. The researchers will experimentally evaluate
              the scalability and performance of protocols in a large-scale network
              environment where the multicast session shares network with other unicast and
              multicast sessions, receivers join and leave the network, and the bottleneck
              links and bandwidths fluctuate over time. The researchers will implement
              multicast congestion control protocol in the network testbed of programmable
              routers, based on the Internet eXchange Architecture (IXA). The outcome of the
              research will be a family of algorithms, protocols, and prototype
              implementations that will significantly advance the state of art in designing
              multicast congestion control protocols.
