Title       : ITR: Energy and Quality of Service Aware Ad-Hoc Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0082998

Award Number: 0082998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dirk C. Grunwald dirk.grunwald@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy X. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    The researchers propose an integrated approach to energy efficient
              collaborative communication in ad-hoc wireless networks. The interdisciplinary
              approach will address simultaneously all key levels of system design: data link
              layer power management, network layer energy, location, and quality of
              service-based routing, and application layer interfaces.
     The objective is
              to reduce communication power consumption while simultaneously increasing the
              communication quality between the collaborators. The model problem assumes that
              people are interacting via ad-hoc networking integrated into pocket computers
              for some common task. For the communication to be successfull, all participants
              must be reachable via the network and have sufficient energy to perform any
              necessary computation. At the heart of the problem is the distributed
              scheduling of communication between entities to reduce communication and
              computation energy. Participants must have an estimate of the remaining energy
              available by other participants as well as models of the communication
              topology. Decisions must be made whether to route traffic through adjacent
              nodes (reducing direct power expenditure while possibly increasing latency or
              global energy consumption) or increasing transmitter power (potentially
              reaching a broader set of participants). This objective will be reached by
              developing design methodologies in the following research areas:
    
              Link-layer controllers that adaptively learn low-power strategies for error
              correction 
codes, transmission power levels, and radio activity times for
              reduced overall power consumption, within the constraints of delay and error
              bounds.
     Network-layer controllers that use inter-node attenuation,
              available node energy, and current traffic flows to optimize routing so as to
              maximize the availability of all nodes.
     Network interfaces that allow the
              programmer to describe delivery constraints on messages such that communication
              schedules can reduce energy in a changing routing topology.
     System level
              power modeling that allows the application layer to trade additional processor
              power to reduce networking power.
     The project is targeted to the emerging
              spectrum of highly capable pocket or wearable computers and the ad-hoc networks
              formed by those computers. The researchers will both deploy an experimental
              infrastructure and use in-depth simulation models to evaluate our system. The
              prototype system will use a combination of laptop computers using 802.11
              wireless networking and the advanced "Itsy" palm-top computer with lower
              bandwidth (and significantly lower power) interfaces. The simulation models
              will use realistic whole-system power models for advanced pocket computers
              coupled with a standard network simulator that we have enhanced with more
              realistic RF propagation models.
     This project is significant because it
              address a communication model that will be common with future generation
              computation and communication devices. It is realistic because it will use an
              experimental network. It is general because we will be able to use the
              simulation framework to model future compute and communication networks.
              Finally, it is achievable because it leverages the on-going work in optimizing
              channel assignment in wireless networks and energy efficient computing.

