Title       : The Role of Reproduction in the Ecology and Life History of Tropical Green Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0082439

Award Number: 0082439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167241             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Clifton clifton@lclark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lewis and Clark College
	      0615 S W Palatine Hill Rd
	      Portland, OR  972197879    503/244-6161

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9141,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Siphonous green algae are a conspicuous feature of many tropical marine
              habitats, including coral reefs, seagrass beds, and mangroves. Within these
              communities, green algae typically represent an important source of food,
              shelter, competition, and sediment.  Understanding the factors that govern the
              timing, intensity, and consequences of algal reproduction represents an
              important step towards elucidating the ecological role of green algae within
              tropical marine habitats. This study seeks to examine the environmental factors
              governing the onset and timing of sexual reproduction; the resulting success of
              gamete release; and the association between these variables and patterns of
              algal dispersal, recruitment, and, life?history.  Field studies will link the
              environment and algal ecology, particularly with regard to life history
              parameters and the expression of sexual reproduction.  Using permanent
              quadrants, the investigator will quantify patterns of algal growth, mortality,
              and reproduction (both sexual and asexual). Measures of the physical
              environment (currents, salinity, day length, temperature) and demography (age,
              size, density) will be correlated with the timing and intensity of reproductive
              events. Algal transplants will help identify causality among these variables.
              Zygote dispersal and development will be monitored during early life?history.
              In addition, the investigator will study fertilization as a function of gamete
              size and behavior (e.g. motility, phototaxis, etc.) by mixing of gametes, in
              vitro, at varied concentrations. Spatial and temporal patterns of gamete
              concentration will be quantified, in situ, as a function of adult dispersion,
              gamete production, gamete size, and the physical environment. These data will
              be compared with rates of gamete cloud dispersion by means of video/image
              analysis.
