Title       : ITR: Supporting Dynamic and Scalable Distributed System Infrastructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0082677

Award Number: 0082677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raju Pandey pandey@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1660,1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Contemporary distributed systems are increasingly extensible, heterogenous and
              dynamically evolving.  Further, the execution environment (including the hosts
              and the network) is dynamic in its underlying structure and capacity.  This
              research project aims to develop and analyze an adaptable distributed
              programming environment (including a programming model and a runtime system)
              for effectively utilizing such complex systems.  
	The research project will
              develop a programming environment in which programs and its components can
              freely migrate across different hosts.  The distribution of program components
              across different hosts can be controlled by binding specific mobility paradigms
              with the components.  Further, the mobility paradigms can be changed
              dynamically, both by an application and/or by the runtime system.  Such a
              programming model entails an execution environment in which distribution of
              program components can be controlled dynamically in order to adapt to changes
              in load, resource availability, resource distribution, component distribution
              and computational capabilities of hosts.  
	The research will also develop
              runtime system techniques for creation and management of mobile components,
              resource allocation and security.  It will develop adaptive scheduling schemes
              that allow hosts to precisely control allocation of local and distributed
              resources to non real-time and real-time distributed components.    

