Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Evolution of
               the Lower Mississippi Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0082226

Award Number: 0082226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Blum mblum1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Mississippi River is the trunk stream of a continental-scale drainage
              network that served as the principle conduit for meltwater and sediment
              discharged from the southern margin of the Laurentide ice sheet during the end
              of the last ice age.  The large braided-stream terraces in the lower
              Mississippi valley (LMV) have been described in three generations of age models
              based on the interpreted significance of glacial dynamics and sea-level change
              on fluvial (riverine) dynamics.  These models are conceptual and/or based only
              on relative age relationships, providing little numerical age control on the
              terrace surfaces.  The dynamic responses of the Mississippi River to changes in
              meltwater discharge, glacial sediment load, sea-level rise, and tectonic
              activity therefore remain largely unknown.  To approach the question of lower
              Mississippi valley fluvial response to these changing conditions, this doctoral
              dissertation research project will provide a field study and dating campaign. 
              The geomorphology, sedimentology, and stratigraphy of the terraces will be
              examined.  Terraces ages will be determined from a new dating technique
              (optically stimulated luminescence, OSL dating) that can measure the age of the
              sediments themselves.  Organic material will be radiocarbon dated.  The dating
              results will be combined with mapping and sediment data to produce a
              comprehensive model of lower Mississippi valley fluvial dynamics during the
              transition from full-glacial to non-glacial conditions.  The proposed research
              will provide, for the first time, a numerical age chronology for lower
              Mississippi valley terrace formation during the transition from late
              Pleistocene full-glacial to early Holocene non-glacial conditions.  During this
              time period the Mississippi River experienced rapid sea-level rise at its mouth
              coupled with large-scale changes in discharge and sediment load from the former
              ice margin and flashy drainage of pro-glacial lakes.  This research will
              provide insight into the lower Mississippi valley fluvial dynamic response to
              these impacting forcing mechanisms; an important contribution to the fluvial
              dynamic community because of the continental-size scale of the river system. 
              This study also will contribute to the understanding of river response to
              environmental change, an issue of interest due to the uncertain impact of
              global warming on river systems and the economic costs associated with river
              related disasters.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

