Title       : ITR: Active Queue Management for Scalable Network Services: Theory and Internet
               Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0082870

Award Number: 0082870
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Jeffay jeffay@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Two of the largest issues facing the Internet today are the problems of (1)
              providing quality-of-service to applications that require some form of
              "guarantee" of bandwidth availability and/or end-to-end delay, and (2) the
              problem of avoiding congestion between traditional best-effort flows. Packet
              scheduling has been the mechanism traditionally used for quality-of-service
              guarantees while end-system adaptations in the transport layer have been the
              dominant form of congestion control. Typically, the problems of congestion
              control and quality-of-service have been addressed as largely independent
              concerns and separate mechanisms have been developed for each .
     The
              essence of this project is to study the interplay between congestion control
              and quality-of-service and the mechanisms that have been employed for realizing
              each. The starting point is an investigation of using active queue
              management(AQM) techniques in network routers to provide both congestion
              control and quality-of-service for IP flows. Active queue management refers to
              the practice of manipulating the queue of packets at an outbound network
              interface on a router to bias the performance of network flows. For example,
              discarding packets from the queue is an active queue management mechanism that
              is used in the RED (random early detection) congestion avoidance mechanism.
  
                There does not yet exist any fundamental theoretical understanding of how
              individual AQM mechanisms effect the performance of network flows. From the
              perspective of Internet service providers this problem is compounded by the
              fact that there is little, if any, understanding of how AQM mechanisms can be
              tuned to realize specific performance goals. The impact of AQM mechanisms on
              broader measures of network performance is unknown because a framework for
              analyzing AQM performance does not yet exist. This is in contrast to other
              approaches for quality-of-service such as packet scheduling. Packet schedulers
              have been carefully analyzed and frameworks exist for computing bounds on
              performance metrics such as delay, delay-jitter, packet loss, etc.  
     The
              main goal of this project is to develop the theoretical underpinnings and
              engineering principles to guide the construction and deployment of AQM for the
              Internet. This requires an analytic and empirical study of AQM mechanisms for
              the purpose of understanding the costs, benefits, and scalability limitations
              of using AQM for congestion control and quality-of-service. The project also
              contributes to the overall understanding of principles of resource management
              in routers. In addition, novel AQM schemes that provide new, scalable solutions
              for quality of service and congestion control are developed.
Specific
              objectives include the following:
     1. Develop an analysis framework for
              understanding the performance of AQM mechanisms. A novel aspect is
              consideration of both network-centric performance metrics such as link
              utilization, and end-system
or user-centric measures such as response time.
 
                 2. Develop and analyze novel AQM and hybrid AQM-packet scheduling schemes
              that realize a spectrum of quality-of-service and congestion control services.
              A key contribution here is a demonstration of the costs
and benefits of using
              packet scheduling v. AQM for scalable implementations of services.
     3.
              Demonstrate the effectiveness of the AQM schemes through a case study in
              managing a research network and supporting an advanced, real-time,
              distributed-virtual-environment application.
     The results of this project
              can have a significant impact on the evolution of the Internet to support new
              levels of service quality and control congestion while ensuring scalability for
              very large numbers of users and devices.

