Title       : A Large-Scale, Highly Configurable Network Emulation Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0082493

Award Number: 0082493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1998133            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Lepreau lepreau@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1087,9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Today there exist three environments in which to perform network research:
              live networks, network
simulators, and static small-scale testbeds. Although
              each environment has benefits, each also has many
limitations. This project
              proposes to build a new type of experimental environment, an "Internet in a
              room," which will not only complement the strengths and weaknesses of existing
              experimental environments, but work synergistically with some of them, such as
              simulation.
     The proposed instrument, a large-scale network emulation
              facility, will be a unique resource for network
experimenters. The researchers
              are currently building a prototype, based on donated equipment and University
              of Utah funds. Under this proposalthe researchers will continue this early
              work, make the testbed "real" through developing significant software and
              deploying additional hardware, work closely with others to integrate it with
              network simulators, and provide professional staffing so that the facility is
              of maximum use to external researchers.  A crucial goal is to make the facility
              universally available to any external researcher, without administrative or
              technical obstacles to simple and straightforward use.
     Single-node
              systems research and development has flourished as the barriers to entry have
              plummeted.
Inexpensive, commodity, open, hardware (x86 PC) and software
              (Linux, *BSD), have made such R&D
possible for all researchers, without large
              budgets. We propose to develop the software for an instrument
that will bring
              similar benefits to network researchers, and apply it to a first instance of
              hardware.
     A significant aspect of this proposal is joint work with other
              researchers  domain experts, especially net-work simulation experts at Georgia
              Tech  to exploit the facility's unique capabilities for network emulation, to
              learn how best to use it, and to guide its evolution.
     The emulation
              facility's unique characteristics include:
     (1)  significant scale: 250
              nodes, each of degree at least four.
     (2)  user-configurable lowest-level
              control over the testbed's "physical" characteristics, such as error models,
              latency, bandwidth, packet ordering, processing power, and buffer space.
    
              (3)  accurate emulation of wide-area networks via internal traffic-shaping
              nodes;
     (4)  capture of low-level device/OS costs such as interrupt load
              and memory bandwidth;
     (5)  experimentation on the router software itself,
              as well as ease of maintainence and robust security, is
provided by fully
              user-replaceable router OS/software;
     (6)  "ns" compatible specification
              language and integration with the Georgia Tech "software backplane
for
              emulation," allowing experiments easily to move between simulation and
              emulation;
     (7) remote configurability and availability to researchers
              world-wide, both time and space-shared;
     (8)  isolated control,
              monitoring, and data acquisition network; remote power control and serial line
              console /debugging for all nodes;
     (9)  incorporation as an integral part
              of the national Active Network Backbone (ABONE).
