Title       : Multimedia Stream Modeling, Relationships, and Querying
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0082817

Award Number: 0082817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfonso F. Cardenas cardenas@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise R. Aberle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project introduces needed advances in multimedia data management
              and access for applications dealing with streams of multimedia data. In
              particular, medical patient information involves streams of sequences of
              multimedia data, including streams of images  (X-rays, MRIs, etc.), medical
              reports, treatment and medication information, and other alphanumeric data
              taken at various points in time, any part of which must be readily accessible
              for patient care. The goal of this effort is to enable doctors and the patient
              to store and easily retrieve and visualize the variety of such medical
              information, and various related data in the web. Data modeling constructs to
              support the needed substreams, aggregated streams, derived streams, and
              relationships among and within these constructs is expected to result from this
              research. A stream algebra for expressing queries is introduced to explore
              methods for effective query processing, as well as a corresponding visual
              language for users to easily express the queries. A Time Line end-user
              interface is extended to incorporate the new constructs introduced for a
              variety of representative medical user queries. A prototype system will be
              developed and tested at the UCLA Medical Center to determine the potential
              impact of these advances through the Time Line paradigm vs current practice in
              the actual medical domain. Demos will be developed for various computer science
              and medical domain forums, and will be accessible via Internet, to highlight
              the technical and medical application innovations. It is expected that the
              resulting multimedia stream data modeling and data accessing advances will have
              significant applicability in the medical domain and other areas.
