Title       : Electrical Characterization and Testing of Microelectronic Materials, Devices,
               and Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2000  
File        : a0082973

Award Number: 0082973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Kotecki kotecki@eece.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, strengthening the microelectronics program in the Electrical and
              Computer Engineering Department (ECE), proposes to establish an electrical
              characterization and test laboratory which will provide the capability for
              measuring electrical properties of materials, devices, and circuits. Electrical
              test equipment for the measurement and characterization of dielectric
              materials, devices, and circuit components, will be acquired in order to
              provide students with hands-on experience in electrical measurements
              complementing the other labs in the ECE Department. In addition to providing
              training in microelectronics testing, the facility will allow for expanded
              research in the area of solid-state electronics. Focusing on material
              characterization, including thin films and novel gas-sensor, the project
              pursues the following objectives for the proposed lab:
Characterizing
              electronic thins films,
Enabling systematic characterization of novel devices
              including gas-sensors, and
Providing a state-of-the-art capability for testing
              custom-designed integrated circuits.
The amount of time needed to adequately
              test integrated circuits has been increasing with the greater level of
              integration in modern microelectronics. Continued increases in the density of
              the microelectronic circuits push against fundamental limits of device
              operation, driving the need for novel devices and new electronic materials.
              Hence, the microelectronic community should exhibit interest in a systematic
              approach to testing and characterization of new materials, devices, and
              circuits. Synergistic with existing programs at the University of Maine (e.g.,
              sensor development, new materials development, and materials and device
              modeling), the project will contribute to strengthen the relationship between
              the ECE Department and the semiconductor industry in Maine, provide students
              with skills needed by these companies, and help forge relationships with
              research groups involved in electronic materials development.

