Title       : ITR: Sensory Level Computation and Information Encoding for Robust Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0082364

Award Number: 0082364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Brajovic brajovic@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. The project
              investigates on-chip analog and mixed mode computation for an intermediate
              sensory signal representation before the information is read out from the
              sensor chip. By appropriate information encoding, such representation will be
              robust to limitations of the sensing and readout process, thus enabling
              efficient extraction of useful environmental information. On-chip computation
              enables a sensor to make partial decisions on-chip and to use those decisions
              to create an optimal signal representation and robust extraction of sensory
              information. This project will focus on image sensors. From a theoretical point
              of view, image sensors are interesting because they are scalable parallel
              systems that require fine-grain, distributed computation and global data
              communication among a large number of sites. The necessity to bring together
              data from a large number of processors/sites quickly saturates communication
              connectivity and adversely affects computing efficiency in large parallel
              systems. The aim of this project is not to miniaturize conventional
              image
processing on-chip, but rather to obtain information about the
              environment that is not obtainable if computation is not performed on the
              sensory level. From a practical point of view, this project focuses on the
              ability of image sensors to adapt to high and low dynamic range scenes. Such
              scenes routinely cause conventional sensors to fail; yet
such scenes are
              omnipresent in everyday imaging applications. The PI's group will
build
              several high resolution CMOS line and area computational image sensors to test
              our signal encoding techniques. Ultimately chips will be tested in an ongoing
              robotic application at the CMU Robotics Institute. One candidate application is
              a visual guidance of fully autonomous or robot-assisted wheelchair for severely
              disabled users who are able to provide only high-level control to the system.
              The primary significance of this research is toward alleviating the problem of
              global data aggregation and communication from large and scalable parallel
              systems. The secondary significance of this research is in its practical
              application to visual perception systems and its superior information
              extraction ability.


