Title       : ITR: New Algorithms for Scalable Modeling in Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0082094

Award Number: 0082094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yousef Saad saad@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Chelikowsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Stathopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              )One of the most significant achievements of the last century has been the
              development of accurate methods to predict the electronic and structural
              properties of matter. These methods, based on density functional theory and
              pseudopotentials, allow us to explore the properties of materials without
              resort to experiments. We can now predict new materials and their properties
              based on numerical calculations. The only inherent limitations of these methods
              are computational constraints; current electronic structures methods have a
              very high computational cost. While the use of modern high-performance
              computers has enabled tremendous progress in raw computational power for these
              problems, gains on the algorithms side are also necessary to accommodate more
              complex materials.

This project will introduce new methods, based on
              efficient algorithms, for bypassing the computational limitations mentioned
              above. It will seek novel solution methodologies that improve efficiency
              without sacrificing accuracy and functionality. In particular, one goal will be
              to avoid the use of eigenvectors, the primary cost for both computation and
              memory. The project will do this by examining the fundamental physics of the
              problem, which reveals that a different basis for the subspace spanned by the
              same eigenvectors can be computed and used instead. The project will find
              efficient and robust methods for computing these bases, find efficient
              solutions to the time-dependent and self-consistent Kohn-Sham equations,
              develop effective out-of-core parallel methods for solving these very large
              systems, and use these methods to perform pioneering calculations of real
              materials.

