Title       : A Rapid Prototyping Approach to Semiconductor Device Manufacturing Process
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0082381

Award Number: 0082381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond A. Adomaitis adomaiti@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0082381
Adomaitis

We  propose to develop the computational framework that
              will make possible a rapid proto-typing approach to simulator development for
              microelectronic device fabrication process systems. This research is intended
              to fill the gap that exists between supercomputer-based, highly resolved
              simulations and lumped-parameter models, a range currently spanned by
              specialized methods for process simulation, analysis,  model reduction, and
              parameter estimation - numerical tools that are generally incompatible with
              each other. The proposed approach to process simulation is based on developing
              computational elements that have a one-to-one correspondence to the steps taken
              when  implementing high-dimensional projection, spectral filtering and advanced
              weighted residual methods, such as the reduced basis and nonlinear Galerkin
              projections.  Methods for assessing model validity; solution analysis (e.g.,
              stability), and discretization error will be addressed in this framework.
              Indeed, because of its reliance on parameter estimation methods, an absolute
              measure of reduced-model predictive power always will be produced in this
              simulation framework. These interconnected computational tools will be
              developed in the MATLAB environment, taking advantage of MATLAB's
              object-oriented programming features to simplify simulations of complex systems
              and to create a pathway to incorporating our simulation tools in spectral
              element and other commercial software packages.

The need to generate
              computationally efficient, validated simulations for improving across-wafer
              processing uniformity in chemical vapor deposition and other semiconductor
              materials manufacturing unit operations provides the primary motivation for
              this research.  Reduced models are suitable for real-time and run-to-run
              control, efficient process recipe optimization, and model-based sensing and
              estimation of unmeasurable processes, such as microfeature evolution.  This
              proposal will support the joint research between the PI and the Tecbnology CAD
              group of Intel through a graduate student internship aimed at testing the
              simulation tools in a corporate research environment. The basic elements of
              this approach also will be developed in the context of a commercial chemical
              vapor deposition (CVD) cluster tool located at the University of  Maryland,
              with the goal of producing a  validated, reduced model to be used for wafer
              temperature prediction and conformal CVD studies.  
***  

