Title       : Global Active IP Networks (GAIN): Support for U.S. Participation in
               International FAIN Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0082386

Award Number: 0082386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $503763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Smith jms@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Farber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The fundamental project hypothesis is that management and control of the
              Internet is the ideal
application of active networks; the researchers propose
              a system architecture to test this.
Active Networks are constructed from
              elements, such as packet routers, allowing programmability
on a per-user or
              even per-packet basis. With the new software capabilities available from
              systems such as Caml and Java, active networks offer the promise of more rapid
              adaptation to changes in technology or requirements, and more rapid
              introduction of new services. These potential advantages come with the
              disadvantages of increased complexity, and its consequences for performance and
              security.
     Early prototype systems (ANTS, CANES, Smart Packets, SwitchWare
              and others) illustrated
various points in the design space, trading off among
              usability, performance, and security. The
prototypes demonstrated first, that
              such systems could be built, that applications did indeed exist,
(e.g., Active
              Bridging and Active Reliable Multicast), and second, that they performed well
              enough
(10-100 Mbps) to handle the throughputs of almost all current Internet
              access points. Thus much
of the "edge" of the Internet can add active network
              capabilities with minimal performance impact.
     A more interesting
              possibility exists, that of using active networking technology to
              incrementally
activate the IP Internet.  The researchers believe this can be
              achieved, as described within the proposal, by
co-locating programmable
              elements with IP routers capable of fast packet forwarding.  The researchers
              have
experimented with this idea on a small scale and it offers considerable
              promise for increasing the
manageability of the Internet with its exponential
              increases in scale.
     The Global Active IP Network (GAIN) project
              represents the University of Pennsylvania's
research program as part of a
              larger 10M Euro research effort (FAIN). FAIN was considered and
top-ranked
              within the E.U. IST Programme competition. European members were funded, with
              the
expectation that Penn would seek funding from U.S. sources. The consortium
              includes University
College London (UK), the Jozef Stefan Institute
              (Slovenia), the National Technical University of
Athens (Greece), the
              Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya (Spain), Deutsche Telekom
              Berkom
(Germany), France Telecom/CNET (France), KPN (Netherlands), Hitachi
              Europe Ltd. (UK),
Hitachi Ltd. (Japan), SAG ICN (Germany), ETH Zurich
              (Switzerland), GMD Forschungszentrum
Informationstechnik (Germany), IKV++
              (Germany), INTEGRASys (Spain), and U. Penn in the
United States. This proposal
              to NSF is a request for funds to support Penn in this
              international
consortium.
     Penn's focus with GAIN is applications of
              Active Networks to IP network resource management
and security. The
              researchers will investigate the prevention and mitigation of sophisticated
              "denial of service" attacks on security.  The researchers  are playing a strong
              role in experiment definition and evaluation for FAIN. This proposal to NSF
              provides background on Active Networking, outlines the research goals for an
              active IP network, sets this work with the context of FAIN, and argues the
              importance of providing U.S. participation in a truly global consortium with
              European and Japanese collaborators.
( The FAIN proposal has been provided to
              NSF.)
