Title       : ITR: Statistical Pattern Recognition in Environmental Observation and
               Forecasting Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0082736

Award Number: 0082736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd K. Leen tleen@cse.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio M. Baptista  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1655,1660,1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary
Environmental observation and forecasting systems (EOFS) are
              emerging new technologies with unparalleled
potential to impact sustainable
              development. EOFS are expected to foster and support new paradigms
              for
generation, transfer and social application of knowledge in domains that
              range from the global earth to its
regional and local sub-systems.
At the
              core of EOFS is the timely and customized acquisition, generation, processing
              and delivery of reliable,
relevant information to many and very diverse
              audiences. Multiple challenges need to be met to implement
this concept.
A
              critical challenge is the development of automated procedures to verify the
              quality of the huge amounts
of observational and simulation data that are
              generated by EOFS both in real-time and off-line. Process-
based strategies
              for quality control of scientific data, while effective for moderate-size
              archival data are too
labor-intensive to map well into EOFS-scale data sets.
              Strategies based on pattern recognition and machine
learning hold significant
              promise as an alternative or complement.
Under the proposed project, we will
              develop approaches based in statistical pattern recognition and
              signal
processing, on-line adaptive systems, datamining, and advanced search
              to address critical quality control
issues including: 1) Detecting sensor
              corruption in non-stationary, spatial-temporal systems, 2) Estimating
true
              signals from corrupted sensor data, and 3) Detecting and characterizing regimes
              where model anomalies
are likely.
These quality control techniques will be
              developed and exercised on CORIE, a pilot EOFS for the COlumbia
RIver Estuary
              and adjacent coastal waters (http://www.ccalmr.ogi.edu/CORIE)
The project will
              have strong social impact, through the role of EOFS (and, specifically, CORIE)
              on regional
and national sustainable development issues. The project will also
              include cross-disciplinary educational
opportunities at multiple levels.
