Title       : How to Generate Random Topologies with Internet-like Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0082287

Award Number: 0082287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sugih Jamin jamin@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Willinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The exponential growth of the number of Internet hosts has been well
              documented in the trade press. The research community, however, has not seen
              many systematic empirical studies of how the Internet topology evolves over
              time and in space. Most recently, the authors of [FFF99] report on several
              power-law relationships observed on Autonomous Systems' (AS) connectivity
              degree, degree frequencies, and the neighborhood size within any given hop
              count from an AS. This pioneering work represents a first important step toward
              a better understanding of the dynamic nature of the actual Internet topology.

                  The need for realistic random topologies in simulations has long been
              recognized by researchers working on routing and multicast protocols, e.g.
              [BE90, ZGLA91, WE94]; more recently, the need for realistic random topologies
              has also been voiced by researchers studying traffic dynamics and protocol
              behavior [MS94, FGHW99, F+00]. In recognition of this, several topology
              generators have been proposed in the literature. The most recent one, proposed
              in [J+00] and called Inet, takes advantage of the power-law relationships
              reported in [FFF99] in its construction of random topologies.
     The
              preliminary work conducted as part of this research and reported in this
              proposal shows exponential growth over time in frequency of every outdegree,
              the outdegree of every rank, and the neighborhood size within any given hop
              count from an AS. The preliminary results also show that only the random
              topologies generated by the Inet model have the power-law relationships similar
              to those of the Internet. Unfortunately, these random topologies do not exhibit
              the exponential growth observed of the Internet. A new Inet topology generator,
              called New Inet,was constructed to generate topologies exhibiting both the
              power law relationships and exponential growth rates over time.

The research
              proposed here consists of three parts:
1. To investigate whether or not
              proposed topology models are in fact capturing the essence of certain
              underlying network design mechanisms or engineering constraints that result in
              random topologies that perforce exhibit many of the empirically observed
              phenomena. To this end the PIs focus on two particular approaches concerning
              the emergence of scaling phenomena associated with Internet-like graph
              structures in the context of the models of Barabasi and Albert [BAJ99, BA99]
              and of Carlson and Doyle [CD99a, CD99b].
2. An in-depth analysis of the
              properties of connectivity graphs at the intra-AS level. In particular, the Pis
              are interested in large ASs spanning wide geographic area.
3. To determine if
              trees constructed from a given graph can serve as a "fingerprint" of the graph
              from which various properties of the graph can be derived; and to model policy
              routing on the Internet as such trees. In particular, the PIs want to check
              whether these tree structures exhibit scaling laws that have been found
              ubiquitous in the context of river networks such as the Horton-Strahler laws
              [Hor45, Str57].
     The PIs propose to continue studying AS-level
              connectivity data made available by the National Laboratory for Applied Network
              Research (NLANR) for better understanding of how ASs connect to each other, how
              this connectivity changes over time, and how each individual AS can be modeled
              in long-running simulations. Additionally, the PIs also propose to model
              router-level connectivity within ASs. For this, the PIs have access to intra-AS
              connectivity information from the AT&T WorldNet backbone.
     Funding for two
              graduate student research assistants was requested in this proposal. Both
              students will spend their academic year at the University of Michigan under the
              supervision of the PI, Sugih Jamin. They will help the PIs carry out research
              on studying AS-level connectivity, intra-AS connectivity, source-rooted trees
              constructed from traceroute data, and improve the New Inet random topology
              generator. During summers, one or both of the students will visit AT&T
              Labs-Research in Florham Park under the supervision of the co-PI, Walter
              Willinger, to collect and study data on AT&T WorldNet backbone. To improve the
              collaboration, the PI and co-PI may also visit each other'ssite during the
              project.

