Title       : ITR:Algorithms for Machine Perception based on Visual Cortex Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0082119

Award Number: 0082119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irina F. Gorodnitsky igorodni@cogsci.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. Inspired by the
              fact that even the simplest of animals, such as insects, have remarkable
              perception capabilities which are difficult for present-day engineered systems
              to duplicate, this project seeks to understand how the brain accurately
              organizes and processes on the macro-scale level the temporal flow of visual
              information at a lower stage of the visual pathway that is the primary visual
              cortex (also called area V1) and to develop machine vision systems based on the
              findings to mimic brain visual function. The novel aspects of this project
              include the innovative use of scalp electrodes to probe macro-scale  processes
              of the visual cortex, investigation of encoding of sequences of patterns rather
              than single  presentations, use of innovative mathematical models, and
              recognition of the existence of several different, task modulated, low-level
              perceptual mechanisms. The experimental part of the project focuses on the
              storage of temporal patterns, presented continuously over the time scale of
              tens of minutes, and how the stored  information is  integrated in the primary
              visual cortex with the newly acquired visual input. Scalp recordings will be
              used to investigate collective responses of neurons in area V1 to sequences of
              patterns in which the similarity among patterns will be modulated in different
              ways. Mathematical models of dynamic aggregation, encoding, and reduction of
              information will be developed. The models will be augmented later  to explore
              different possible roles that memory and attention can play  in this
              aggregation of visual information. Finally, the  models based on  adaptive
              versus fixed cell responses will be compared. Of major interest throughout will
              be the investigation of perceptual capabilities that can emerge at the  level
              of processing of  the primary visual cortex and the innovative machine vision
              algorithms that can be developed that capture these capabilities. In addition
              to the potential of producing machine vision systems with capabilities of real
              vision, the work will contribute to the advancement of basic scientific
              understanding in the field of neurosciences, in particular of  processes in the
              visual cortex. Neuromorphic system design is a developing new discipline that
              meshes neuroscience and mathematical modeling. Furthermore, the project will be
              a three way international collaboration between  laboratories at the University
              of California at San Diego, the Algerian Ecole Nationale Polytechnique, and the
              Brain Science Institute in Japan. This will provide a rare opportunity for the
              students to work in an international research setting and to establish
              collaborative ties they may benefit from in the future in their independent
              research careers.
