Title       : ITR: Adaptive Protocols for a Distributed Java Virtual Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a0082417

Award Number: 0082417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan I. Moldovan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Java is a language of growing importance but so far parallelism in Java has been
              limited to either multi-threading on symmetric multiprocessors (SMP) or
              distributed computing using Remote Method
Invocation (RMI).  The number and
              size of Java-based Internet-related applications require more and more
              parallelism and system scalability.  This proposal addresses the problem of
              designing memory consistency
protocols for a distributed Java Virtual Machine
              capable of self-adapting at runtime to different application characteristics.
              

The proposed work is divided into five tasks: (1) the definition of the
              memory consistency model, (2) the development of consistency protocols, (3) the
              definition of an analytical performance model on which
adaptive protocols are
              based,  (4) the development of processor allocation algorithms for load
              balancing, and (5) the evaluation of the system performance using four classes
              of applications.

A correct distributed Java Virtual Machine specification
              must be first defined. The correctness issue is especially important for a
              distributed shared memory Java Virtual Machine due to the incompatibilities
              between the Sun specification and distributed memory architectures. Preliminary
              work indicates that Sun's JVM specification is too strong for DSM
              architectures. A thorough analysis of the JVMS requirements will produce the
              set of constraints that have to be relaxed from the original Sun's JVMS to
              allow an efficient distributed implementation. 

Once a theoretical memory
              consistency model is established, the next step is to develop consistency
              protocols. An analytical model is proposed to analyze the application behavior
              for various protocols. The application profile can be abstracted by the object
              granularity, temporal locality of accesses, and object access
patterns. A
              novelty of the proposed work is the mapping of application parameters into
              protocol parameters using the analytical model parameters: thread creation
              time, synchronization time, and execution
overhead. These parameters can be
              estimated analytically and measured.  The correlation between model parameters
              and adaptive protocols needs to be investigated. It is necessary to develop
              heuristics that link
parameters with the protocols. 

As part of the
              preliminary work, a distributed Java Virtual Machine called DISK has been
              implemented in our network-of-workstations laboratory consisting of sixteen
              Pentium III computers connected by a
100 Mbps network. DISK currently supports
              two memory consistency protocols: an invalidate and an update lazy release
              consistency protocol. 

Several Java-specific applications will be
              investigated to measure and tune the performance of the adaptive protocols
              developed. Four different classes of applications from the Internet and
              knowledge 
processing technology will be used as new benchmarks:  (1)
              client-side I/O intensive applications, (2) server-side I/O intensive
              applications, (3) computational intensive applications, and
(4) computational
              and I/O intensive applications. 


