Title       : Analysis and Simulation of Strategic Behavior and Price Processes in
               Transmission Constrained Electricity Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a0082506

Award Number: 0082506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross Baldick baldick@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin L. Baughman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stathis Tompaidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Deregulation and restructuring of the electricity industry is fundamentally
              changing a sector of the economy that is crucial to our standard of living. 
              Electricity restructuring is occurring or has occurred in many countries and,
              in particular, in many states of the United States, with change accelerating
              subsequent to orders instituted by the United States Federal Energy Regulatory
              Commission (FERC) in 1996.  Restructuring has the potential to unleash
              competition in the generation sector of the electricity industry, spurring
              reductions in the costs of electricity production and of electricity delivery
              and consequent gains for consumers.
There is a pressing need to understand the
              ramifications of electricity market restructuring and to benefit from the
              experiences in electricity markets that are developing throughout the United
              States and the world.  However, various disciplines are strongly inter-related
              in the analysis of electricity markets and, consequently, research demands a
              coordinated, inter-disciplinary approach.

This proposal is for
              inter-disciplinary research in the analysis of restructured electricity markets
              and for holding an inter-disciplinary research workshop on electricity markets.
               The research will involve significant interaction between faculty and graduate
              students and prepare these students for careers that integrate ideas from
              several disciplines.
The three goals of this project are:

1. to develop
              models of electricity prices over time,

2. to develop models of strategic
              behavior in transmission-constrained electricity markets, and

3. to hold a
              workshop on electricity market organization and design.

The model
              development goals require coordination across several disciplines:
electrical
              engineering, finance, and public policy.

The principal investigators combine
              expertise from these areas.  The proposed work involves both the development of
              analytical methods and the implementation of these methods in software.  The
              results of this project will include enhancements to the University of Texas
              electricity market model as well as journal papers describing the analytical
              methods and software.



