Title       : Elevated N* in the Western Sargasso Sea: Local or Non-Local Origin?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0082166

Award Number: 0082166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. Hansell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas R. Bates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1589,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0082166

Researchers at the Bermuda Biological Station for
              Research hypothesize that there is a supplementary source of  fixed nitrogen to
              the subtropical thermocline of western Sargasso Sea in the form of organic N
              species laterally advected into the upper ocean of the region from distant
              sources via  the Florida Current and Gulf Stream. Subsequent mineralization of
              this organic material is needed to yield nitrogen:phosphorous ratios consistent
              with present geochemical estimates than those expected based on direct
              observation of local N2 fixation rates in the region. In the source regions in
              the Caribbean and Tropical Atlantic, directly evaluated biological measurements
              of nitrogen fixing rates have been described as being more vigorous than that
              observed in the western North Atlantic. Further, the proposed spatial field
              measurements are expected to reveal the physical mixing processes responsible
              for this transport into the subtropical gyre. The index parameters N*and a
              derived quantity, ProN*, will be used to indicate the degree to which the
              observed dissolved inorganic nitrate concentration is in excess of that
              expected from the remineralization of phosphate at Redfield stoichiometries.
              The field program of spatial sampling within the Caribbean, along the western
              boundary current and in the western Sargasso will be examined against the
              temporal variability at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Station (BATS).

