Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Embeddedness of Producer-Service Firms in
               the Republic of Ireland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0082487

Award Number: 0082487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Grant rgrant@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Once located on the margins of the world economy, Ireland is now Europe's
              fastest growing economy.  Investment from high-growth producer-service
              industries like software and financial services has contributed greatly to
              Ireland's recent economic boom.  The success of these sectors is viewed as a
              critical factor for Ireland's continued economic success.  Using the concept of
              embeddedness, this doctoral dissertation research project will determine the
              significance of these industries now and in the near future.  Embeddedness has
              been employed in much academic research to study the connections between
              multi-national corporations (MNCs) and local economies, yet in spite of its
              importance to social science research, the concept remains vague and ambiguous.
               This project therefore will address three goals, seeking (1) to establish a
              concrete framework for analyzing the embeddedness of multinational firms, (2)
              to assess and compare the current and future significance of these firms to the
              Irish economy, and (3) to determine the degree to which software and financial
              service MNCs are embedded in Ireland.  The empirical research will make use of
              interviews with private, public, and non-profit organization leaders, mail
              questionnaires, and published data sources.  This research will assess the
              impact of these industries on the Irish economy and will yield a collection of
              theorized case studies that describe in detail relationships among service MNCs
              and Irish organizations.  The findings of this project are expected to show
              that this recent wave of investment is characterized by more deeply embedded
              firms than previous rounds of inward investment.  This project's research
              results will contribute to academic debates by examining the critical
              intersection between global capital and territorial economies.  This study is
              of direct importance to policy debates within and about the Republic of
              Ireland.  The Irish government relies upon both the software and financial
              service industries to act as engines for future economic development, but if
              these firms are weakly embedded, they are potentially susceptible to relocation
              in the face of greater global competition for inward investment.  Because other
              nations and regions use similar strategies to stimulate growth and economic
              development, the results of this Irish case study may have utility in many
              other locales.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.

