Title       : ITR: A New Computational Paradigm: Robustness as a Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0082056

Award Number: 0082056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chee K. Yap yap@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha J. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,1660,2865,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The problem of numerical robustness and geometric consistency is well known
in
              many areas of computational science. The issue is that inexact computer
              arith-
metic leads to incorrect and inconsistent geometric conclusions (for
              example, is a
point inside or outside a triangle). While computers are getting
              faster, software
is not getting more robust. Indeed, the trend is towards more
              nonrobustness. We
propose a new computational paradigm to reverse this
              trend.

Robustness is often seen as an all-or-nothing proposition. Our new
              paradigm
consists in viewing robustness as a computational resource, to be
              traded off against
other resources such as speed. Each program defines a
              certain robustness-speed
trade-off curve; we want to be able to run the
              program at any point along this
curve. This proposal will develop the
              technology to make this capability effcient
and easily accessible to all
              programmers. As a result, any programmer can produce
nearly ordinary C/C++
              code which can be run robustly. The implications of this
paradigm are wide
              ranging, and will bring the fruits of robustness research into
mainstream
              computing.
We propose to (1) conduct basic research to support this new
              computing
paradigm, (2) to create the technology and software tools to achieve
              this paradigm,
and (3) to explore the applications of fast and usually robust
              algorithms in algo-
rithm design. For (1), we will focus on effciency issues
              such as novel root bounds,
incremental computation, guaranteed absolute
              precision for elementary functions.
For (2), we expect to significantly extend
              the power, efficiency and usability of our
Core Library and include
              capabilities such as symbolic perturbation. Finally an
example of (3) concerns
              the general problem of checking of geometric structures and
their applications
              in new efficient geometric algorithms.
We propose to apply our robustness
              techniques and software to two significant
applications in which nonrobustness
              problems are well-known:

* Mesh Generation: we will construct the first
              fully robust mesh generator which
will be deployed in a major ow solver
              system, Cart3d.

* Geometric Modeling: we will build a robust geometric
              modeler which will be
the first such system that is
              precision-sensitive.

This proposal involves international collaboration with
              Professor Mehlhorn's
Algorithms and Complexity Group at the Max-Planck
              Institute of Computer Sci-
ence in Germany. Our domestic collaborator are
              Michael Aftosmis from NASA
Ames Research Center (on mesh generation) and
              Shankar Krishnan from AT&T
Research Laboratories (on geometric modeling).
