Title       : ITR: Self-Scheduling N-Body Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0082931

Award Number: 0082931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars S. Nyland nyland@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan F. Prins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Hermans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Minion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William V. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The n-body problem - i.e. simulating the motion of many particles that attract
              or repel each other - is a classic one with many applications. N-body
              algorithms are the computational means of solving this problem. The many users
              of these algorithms include biophysiologists and biochemists studying
              biological phenomena, pharmaceutical researchers dealing with drug structures
              and interactions, astrophysicists studying the structure of the cosmos, and
              engineering researchers studying hydrodynamics. The algorithms are also
              interesting in their own right to computer scientists. This project will
              develop an innovative approach to n-body algorithms called self-scheduling
              n-body algorithms. This family of algorithms promises not only reduced
              computational complexity, but also a straightforward
              implementation.

Technically, the research will use a multiple time step
              method where each pairwise interaction is evaluated using a dynamic schedule
              that attempts to equalize the error of each interaction, drastically reducing
              the computational cost. The fundamental new idea is to equalize the impulses
              for all interactions, rather than equalizing the time steps for all
              interactions (which is too conservative in most cases). Mathematically, the
              constant time step t is traded for a constant impulse I, defined as Fij  tij, 
              where Fij is the force between particles i and j and tij becomes the time step
              used to re-evaluate Fij. This leads to an expected execution complexity of
              O(n4/3) per simulation step. Algorithmic improvements that rely on the first
              and second derivatives of force reduce the per step computational complexity to
              O(n log n) and O(n), respectively. The project will fully explore these
              algorithms, analyze their error bounds and computational complexity, implement
              prototype versions, and explore additional topics (such as efficient
              parallelization and cache-efficient memory layouts) as time permits.

