Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Use and Potential Conservation of River
               Turtles in Eastern Lowland Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a0082250

Award Number: 0082250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Binford mbinford@geog.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5926,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              After centuries of exploitation, including the harvest of both adults and eggs,
              populations of the freshwater turtles Podocnemis expansa and P. unifilis are
              seriously reduced throughout most of their ranges in the upper Amazon basin. 
              These turtles remain important wildlife resources for river-oriented
              communities within the jurisdiction of National Park Noel Kempff Mercado in
              eastern lowland Bolivia.  A major challenge facing people of this region is
              maintaining population levels of turtles in the face of growing demand for
              turtle meat and eggs.  This doctoral dissertation research project will
              investigate how contemporary socioeconomic factors affect the hunting pressure
              on turtle populations.  Data will be collected on socioeconomic characteristics
              of two communities where Podocnemis turtles are hunted and consumed.  The
              relative abundance of turtle populations will be assessed through basking
              observations in areas with active hunting as well as in lightly or non-hunted
              river transects.  Human activity patterns along transects of the rivers
              accessed by two communities will be cataloged and recorded using a global
              positioning system.  This information, combined with the relative abundance
              data and socioeconomic information will be analyzed in a geographic information
              system (GIS) to ascertain patterns of spatial correlation.  The relative
              abundance data should provide parameters for the calculation of sustainable
              turtle harvest.  Regression analyses of socioeconomic data will offer insights
              into the importance of specific elements and their influence driving turtle
              protein consumption.  It is hypothesized that with greater access to markets
              and cash-generating opportunities, consumption of turtle meat and eggs as
              subsistence will decrease.  Also under examination will be the relevance of
              microeconomic theories that hold that increased levels of knowledge and ensuing
              protection of natural resources will result as the market values of species
              increase, thereby encouraging residents to be more likely to protect valuable
              species.  The combined relative abundance and socioeconomic information that
              will be gathered through this project will contribute to knowledge about the
              effects of increased access to cash income on wildlife resources and
              community-based conservation and management efforts.  The location of the study
              area in the buffer zone of a protected area should also yield results that are
              useful for protected-area management.  Quantifying the impacts of hunting and
              the driving forces behind them will provide a basis for development of a
              management plan that is based on a local context and thus will be more likely
              to remain in tact than plans developed without consideration of such factors. 
              The aggregation of the information collected in this study will contribute to
              the understanding of the present situation of turtle use in eastern lowland
              Bolivia and to the potential for community-based conservation of Amazonian
              wildlife species.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.

