Title       : ITR: System Support for Energy Management in Mobile and Embedded Workloads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a0082914

Award Number: 0082914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla S. Ellis carla@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amin M. Vahdat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alvin Lebeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1660,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop an integrated
hardware/software
              infrastructure to support power management for
battery-powered mobile and
              wireless applications.  These future
environments will support applications
              with demanding requirements
such as disaster recovery.  Energy conservation,
              especially for
mobile and embedded devices, promises to have significant
              economic,
environmental, and societal impacts.

The activities focus on
              three key directions: i) the development of
power measurement tools,
              workloads, and experimental methods to
evaluate energy consumption, ii) the
              energy-aware APIs to allow
application-directed power management, and iii) the
              development of
system support for high-level solutions.

These research
              projects all rely on experimental techniques for
evaluating ideas. Making
              empirical measurements and observations on
device and workload characteristics
              pinpoints the problem areas of
greatest potential. Initially formulating
              simulation models narrows
the solution space and allows consideration of new
              architectures.
Finally, constructing working prototypes allows observation of
              all
activity associated with real operating environments and offers
deeper
              insights into their behavior.  The popularity and
accessibility of the palmtop
              and handheld platforms gives this
research significant potential for immediate
              technology transfer.


