Title       : Development of a Multidisciplinary Research Culture in Environmental Science and
               Engineering at the University of Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a0082977

Award Number: 0082977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher W. Allen cwallen@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas J. Gotelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, aiming at establishing infrastructure to reduce existing barriers
              to multidisciplinary research in environmental science and engineering,
              originally identified two main areas of research. 
Ombrotrophic bog hydrology
              and 
Environmental change along gradients.
Under reduced funding only the
              first area will be pursued. The team working on the former area, promoting
              interactions between ecologists, hydrologists/engineers, microbiologists, and
              toxicologists, will also focus on hydrology, ecotoxicology, microbial ecology,
              and biodiversity of ombrotrophic bogs of Vermont. The research will include
              field and laboratory measurements, mathematical modeling, and training of
              graduate students with a multi-disciplinary course curriculum. The team working
              on the latter, requiring a smaller investment of seed funding, was expected to
              develop a collaborative effort involving environmental change along spatial,
              temporal, and societal gradients in the Winooski (VT) River basin. This project
              will build a research partnership between selected faculty at UVM School of
              Natural Resources, and the departments of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
              Geology, and Geography.

