Title       : Top-Down Control of Primary Production in Atlantic Salt Marshes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0082467

Award Number: 0082467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Bertness mark bertness@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian R. Silliman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Top?Down Control of Primary Production in Atlantic Salt
              Marshes


Understanding the relative importance of consumers (top?down
              forces) and resource supply (bottom?up forces) in controlling the production
              and distribution patterns in natural communities has long been one of the
              fundamental questions of community ecology. Many aquatic communities have been
              shown to have strong top?down control, while most systems dominated by vascular
              plants have been assumed to be controlled by bottom?up forces. Salt marshes are
              generally used as textbook examples of ecosystems dominated by vascular plants
              that are controlled by edaphic factors and resource supplies. Here we present
              data that suggests grazing by the snail Littoraria irrorata controls primary
              production of the dominant macrophyte in western Atlantic salt marshes, the
              cordgrass Spartina alterniflora. This snail is common in marshes from New
              Jersey to the Gulf of Mexico and often is found at high densities at
              intermediate marsh elevations associated with dying and senescing plants. While
              it has been assumed that these areas represent patches of dying plants that
              attract snail detritivores, our data suggest that snail grazing may generate
              these patterns and thus that these marshes are potentially under top?down
              control.

In this study, we will examine the general hypothesis that the
              marsh snail Littoraria can exert top?down control over the primary production
              of Spartina alterniflora on marshes in the southeastern United States. In
              particular, we examine the generality of our preliminary results on Georgia
              marshes where the paradigm that marshes are controlled by bottom?up forces was
              originally developed over 30 years ago. Specifically, we propose to examine the
              following hypotheses to elucidate the causes and consequences of grazer control
              in these systems.

1) Where does top?down control by snail grazing occur on
              southeastern marshes? We will test the hypothesis that snail densities
              sufficient to control cordgrass production occur where high larval delivery and
              predator refuges coincide across marsh landscapes.

2) Where is top?down
              control by snail grazing possible in southeastern marshes? We will examine the
              hypothesis that grazer control of cordgrass production is possible anywhere on
              the marsh landscape that high snail densities can be maintained.

3) The high
              production of cordgrass in southeastern salt marshes is the consequence of a
              trophic cascade, where snail predators, including crabs, fish and turtles,
              limit the densities of grazing snails that are capable of limiting cordgrass
              production.

The results of this study may change the way we view one of the
              most dominant shoreline ecosystems in North America. If these marshes are
              potentially consumer controlled, as hypothesized, how we manage, restore and
              think about these communities ecologically and evolutionarily will need to be
              rethought.

