Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Post-Colonial Linkages Between Agriculture and
               Tourism in Martinique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0082147

Award Number: 0082147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9993               (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet H. Momsen jdmomsen@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although developing nations frequently focus on natural settings when promoting
              tourism as a central facet of their overall economic development strategies, a
              number of nations recently have given attention to the possible attraction that
              agriculture and other forms of economic activity may constitute for visitors. 
              Within the French dependencies of Guadeloupe, Matrinique, and Guyana, French
              government investments in infrastructure, medical facilities, commercial
              activities, and other sectors have recently been complemented by development of
              a local, "bottom-up" approach for expanding tourism associated with local
              agricultural activities.  This doctoral dissertation research project will
              examine the political, economic, and cultural changes that are taking place in
              current development programs linking tourism and agriculture in Martinique. 
              The project will examine not only the tourists and their impact on the island's
              agricultural economy but also the perceptions and responses of local residents
              to agro-tourism development.  The project will consist of data collection
              through the use of questionnaires, intercept surveys, in-depth interviews, and
              participant observations.  The doctoral candidate also will work with a range
              of voluntary participants, including local, regional and national policy
              makers, food distributors, tourists and farmers.  This research project should
              enhance understandings of the complex interdependencies that exist within the
              continually evolving and increasingly related industries of agriculture and
              tourism.  Questions regarding local identity, tourist food preferences, and
              forms of development will be among the main concerns for which this research
              will provide answers.  By employing a geographic perspective in this study, the
              student will shed new light on many complex questions associated with this type
              of sustainable rural development, using the case study to address the potential
              and consequences of agro-tourism in the region and elsewhere.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

