Title       : Dynamic Adaptive Wireless Networks with Autonomous Robot Nodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0082498

Award Number: 0082498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaurav Sukhatme gaurav@cs.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Estrin  (Principal Investigator former)
              Maja J. Mataric  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Heidemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Govindan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Multihop wireless capabilities are enabling communication and coordination
              among autonomous nodes in unplanned environments and configurations.  At the
              same time wireless channels present challenges of dynamic operating conditions,
              power constraints for autonomously-powered nodes, and complicated interactions
              between high level behavior and lower level channel characteristics (e.g.
              increased synchronized communication significantly degrades channel
              characteristics).
     The major goal of the research proposed here is the
              development, testing, and characterization of algorithms for scalable,
              application-driven, wireless network services using a heterogeneous collection
              of communicating mobile nodes.  Some of these nodes will be autonomous (robots)
              in that their movements will not be human-controlled.  The others will be
              portable, thus making them dependent on humans for transportation.  While the
              focus of the work is on the mobile nodes, the project includs immobile
              computers on the network as well.  The project emphasizes that most (though not
              all) of the mobile nodes will have modest sensing, computational, and
              communication resources.
     The chief scientific motivation behind the work
              is the design of robust, efficient, and scalable algorithms.  The project
              hypothesizes that distributed algorithms that rely on local interactions have
              many compelling characteristics, resulting in these properties.  There is
              significant overlap between the problems of coordinating the autonomous mobile
              nodes that carry some of the sensors and the algorithms that direct the flow of
              information from sources(s)to sink(s) in the network.  Both sets of algorithms
              need to be carefully designed to improve robustness, efficiency, and
              scalability.
     As motivation the project proposes that the experimental
              part of the research be conducted on a testbed which simulates some
              characteristics of an urban post-earthquake scenario in a building.  The
              sensors in the experiments will be distributed geographically (within the
              building) and linked by a wireless network.  Many of the mobile nodes will be
              largely autonomous, serving as easily-accessible knowledge collectors and
              repositories, and exercising a wide range of independent options in the
              dispatch and control of information flow and resources.  Other mobile nodes
              will be carried about the environment by people.  The project will study issues
              of scale (how many sensor nodes does the application software accommodate),
              fault tolerance (how robust is the system to loss of sensors and/or
              communication) and efficiency (e.g. time vs. quality of service).
     As part
              of a one-year pilot study funded by NSF, the project has been conducting
              initial research in the issues underlying a system such as the one above.  The
              project also recently received a substantial equipment grant from the Office of
              Naval Research to support the experimental portion of this work.  The project
              has identified two key unsolved sub-problems that are relevant to the overall
              goals:  localization and communication coverage.  In this proposal the project
              discusses the broad research challenges in the area of communication and
              coordination of autonomous mobile nodes.  The project then focuses on the two
              key problems as concrete questions that will be addressed in the research and
              describes a method involving simulation and experimentation to study them
              systematically.     
