Title       : Empirical Asset Pricing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0082352

Award Number: 0082352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hodrick rh169@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is primarily concerned with the econometric testing of asset
              pricing theories using data on equities, currencies, and bonds. The first part
              develops an empirical analysis of several competing equity pricing models.
              Currently, there is no generally accepted asset-pricing model. The most
              important model in the literature is the CAPM. Unfortunately, it is now well
              known that the CAPM fails along a number of dimensions. Its primary failures
              are the size and book-to-market anomalies: the CAPM under-predicts the average
              returns for small firms and high book-to-market firms. Several new models have
              been offered as replacements for the CAPM. All of the models have distinct
              business-cycle attributes, and the proposed research should enhance our
              understanding of the links between observed cyclical fluctuations and the
              required rates of return on equities. I propose to compare the new models and
              the CAPM on a common data set using the methodology of Hansen and Jagannathan.
              I also plan to draw out the implications of the analysis for international
              pricing of equities. The analysis is important because the expected return on
              equity is one aspect of the cost of capital for corporations. Without an
              understanding of the determinants of required rates of return on equity, the
              profession cannot advise corporations how to perform capital budgeting
              analyses.
The second part of the proposal is a comprehensive econometric
              examination of the expectations hypotheses of the foreign exchange market and
              the bond market. Econometric inference using standard asymptotic distribution
              theory indicates strong evidence against the expectations hypotheses. In fact,
              the evidence is so strange that development of alternative models with
              time-varying risk premiums has proved difficult. However, there is accumulating
              evidence that the small-sample distributions of the usual test statistics do
              not conform well to the asymptotic theory. In such a situation, it is prudent
              to take a close examination of this issue by developing a
well-structured
              Monte Carlo analysis in which the null hypotheses are true by construction and
              the data-generating process conforms as closely as possible to the actual data.
              The proposed research will estimate vector autoregressions that satisfy the
              null hypotheses, and it will use modern bootstrap methods to generate the
              simulated data. The estimation strategy is something that should be emulated
              widely as it involves only matrix manipulations and does not involve non-linear
              search routines which are often difficult to implement and time consuming to
              estimate.

