Title       : ITR: Procedures for the Rigorous Comparison of Vector and Tensor Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0082898

Award Number: 0082898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lambertus Hesselink bert@kaos.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              During the last decade, researchers in our Scientific Visualization Group at
              Stanfor University
have been developing general data analysis techniques for
              vector and tensor fields
based on rigorous mathematical approaches. The work
              has systematically explored direct
visualizations and feature extractions of
              both vector and tensor fields in two and three
dimensions using computers.
              Recently, we have been developing the next stage of our
visualization efforts:
              automated atad comparisons.

Traditional techniques for vector field
              comparison fall into three basic categories: image,
data, and feature based
              comparison. In most instances, comparisons are made visually,
not
              automatically. In addition, there are fundamental limitations with these
              existing comparison
techniques. Image base comparisons suffer from difficulty
              in representing datasets
beyond two-dimensional vector fields, data based
              comparisons suffer from grid alignment
problems, and feature base comparisons,
              while providing excellent location of specific features,
may not show all the
              global information in the field.

Our new approach to this problem is
              essentially a feature-based comparison technique,
with the important
              stipulation that our features attempt to represent the topological
              structure
of the field. This ensures that we do not overlook any important
              structures in the
field. Our paradigm is to analytically study vector and
              tensor fields to extract topologically
critical information, transfer this
              knowledge into effective computer programs, and then to
visualize the fields
              using the results of our analysis.

We have successfully implemented our
              ideas for two-dimensional vector fields and for
three-dimensional vector
              fields. We now intend to study tensor fields associated with white
matter
              brain functions.

Our fundamental technique for the comparison of vector and
              tensord ata would be
applicable to almost every field of science and
              engineering, ranging from the magnetic field of
the sun to airflow over a
              wing. In addition, time varying fields can be studied by comparing
a field at
              a fixed time with its state at later times. Our approach is unique in the field
              of
scientific visualization because it is based on rigorous mathematical
              analysis, and it is the
only approach available to quantitatively study NMR
              tensor brain data. Our methodology
in the analysis of tensor and vector
              datasets allows better design of air vehicles, better
understanding of
              electromagnetic problems, and provides substantial time savings when
dealing
              with large experimental datasets. Quantitative understanding of white matter
              brain
functions has the potential to open up a whole new area of medical
              research.
