Title       : Regulation of Biogenesis and Topogenesis of Acetylcholine Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0082232

Award Number: 0082232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joav M. Prives joav@pharm.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0082232
Prives

Transmission of impulses from nerve to muscle is made
              possible by the existence of neuromuscular junctions; specialized sites of
              communication between motor neurons and skeletal muscle cells. The formation of
              these synapses during embryonic development depends on the intricate
              coordination between nerve endings and muscle cells.  A striking aspect of this
              coordination is the nerve-induced redistribution of acetylcholine receptors
              (AChRs), specialized membrane components that are initially uniformly spread on
              the muscle surface but become highly concentrated at postsynaptic muscle
              surfaces immediately under nerve endings. The objective of the studies
              described in this proposal is to identify the molecular mechanisms that trigger
              neuron-induced AChR clustering.  The focus is on the role of a specific family
              of regulatory proteins - the Rho GTPases - as crucial mediators of AChR
              clustering. The planned studies will utilize cultured muscle cells to measure
              the effects of transfected Rho GTPase mutants on AChR surface distribution.
              Biochemical assays and fluorescence microscopy will be used to analyze the
              mechanisms by which the trans-synaptic signaling proteins agrin and laminin, as
              well as cultured neurons, activate the Rho GTPases and trigger AChR
              clustering.
The overall aim of this study is to elucidate the molecular
              mechanisms that control neurotransmitter receptor site density at synapses.
              Regulation of receptor site density constitutes a potential mechanism for
              functionally altering neuronal circuits. Thus, in addition to increasing the
              understanding of how neuromuscular transmission is regulated, the proposed
              studies can yield information relating to the synaptic mechanisms underlying
              learning and memory.

