Title       : Workshop:-Supply Chain Management Practice and Research-Status and Future
               Directions; April, 18-19, 2001; Gaithersburg, MD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a0082843

Award Number: 0082843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saul I. Gass sgass@rhsmith.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Gass


This grant provides funding for a workshop with the theme: Supply
              Chain Management Practice and Research: Status and Future Directions.  The
              general subject of Supply Chain Management (SCM) has become a driving force for
              the betterment of the U.S. economy, as well as it's having strong implications
              for effective and efficient management of global industrial interactions. 
              Present day and near-future analytical and information-based technologies are
              positioned to make this global concept of SCM an actuality.  However, our
              understanding of current SCM accomplishments indicates that there is a need for
              determining what can now be accomplished, want needs to be done, and what
              research and developments are required to make SCM reach its full potential. 
              To this end, we have enlisted practitioners, researchers and SCM software
              vendors to address specific topics, with the audience being active SCM
              participants.  The workshop is scheduled for April 18 and 19, 2001 and will be
              held at the University of Maryland System Center, Gaithersburg, MD.  The Robert
              H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland and the Manufacturing
              Engineering Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology sponsor
              the workshop, in association with the Center for Logistics Research,
              Pennsylvania State University and the Supply Chain Council.

Each workshop
              speaker will describe a research agenda for their topic.  These agendas will be
              combined into a suggested research program for the further improvement of all
              aspects of SCM.  The workshop papers will be published as proceedings to be
              distributed to all attendees.  The objectives and scope of the workshop, and
              the bringing together of SCM practitioners, researchers, and software
              developers and consultants, will lead to beneficial relationships and projects
              that will further the improvement of SCM.    


