Title       : Northern Rockies Center for Applied Computational Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0082852

Award Number: 0082852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Morton morton@cs.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Opitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond F. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Ruhul Amin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn D. Churchill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Physical and intellectual infrastructures in computational sciences will be
              developed as part of a long-term effort to stimulate new collaborations and
              research opportunities utilizing high-performance computing as a necessary tool
              among a diverse group of researchers.  The physical infrastructure will consist
              of a low-cost cluster of Linux workstations for education, training, and
              development of activities that utilize high-performance computing, coupled with
              partnerships with the Arctic Region Supercomputing Center, the North Carolina
              Supercomputing Center, and the University of Texas Health Science Center at San
              Antonio.  Most importantly, intellectual infrastructure will also be developed
              that provides a highly proactive environment towards training and aiding
              researchers in various disciplines to utilize high-performance computing
              methods to enhance their existing research programs and to establish new
              research approaches.  It is anticipated that the project will result in a
              physical computational infrastructure, a center of expertise in computational
              infrastructure, a center of expertise in collaborative computational sciences,
              and a catalyst for obtaining sustained funding from a wide range of resources. 
              Such environment, the Northern Rockies Center for Applied Computational
              Science, will act as a focal point to stimulate numerous opportunities for
              researchers to branch out in new directions that benefit with increased
              computational literacy. 

