Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research in Internet Topology Models - A Foundation for
               Large-Scale Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0082318

Award Number: 0082318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Calvert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Network simulation is an indispensable tool for researchers seeking to
              understand the principles of network architecture and protocol design. A key
              parameter in any moderate to large-scale simulation is the topology, i.e., the
              way the nodes of the network are organized and connected to each other. "Good"
              models for topology are essential for good simulations.
     The PIs have
              developed graph modeling software that currently is widely used as a tool for
              generating topologies, particularly models of large internetworks. The Georgia
              Tech Internet Topology Models (GT-ITM) package allows researchers to construct
              model topologies whose structure arguably resembles the node-level structure of
              the Internet: routers or switches, connected by (bidirectional) links, and
              grouped into domains. The GT-ITM software is included with "ns2" [2], the
              defacto open-source standard for network simulation.
     Despite the
              wide-spread use of GT-ITM, in general, and its transit-stub model, in
              particular, a number of critical and fundamental questions remain unanswered
              about network topology modeling. For example,
     1)Topology models. Recent
              data indicates that the current Internet topology has some properties that are
              not well reflected in the transit-stub model of GT-ITM [17]. For example,
              features such as the exchanges where many transit domains come together are
              lacking. Are there "better" techniques to generate topologies intended to model
              the Internet? More fundamentally, how should a topology generation technique be
              evaluated (i.e., how is "better" measured)?
     2)Topology scaling. Although
              strides are being made in supporting large-scale simulations [33], most
              researchers will continue to simulate their protocols on topologies that are
              smaller than the target operational large-scale networks. How should smaller
              topologies be configured so that they reasonable reflect their larger
              counterparts? Is there a theory of topology scaling that can provide the
              fundamental grounding for configuring topologies of various sizes?
    
              3)Topology use. The PIs primary interest in topology modeling is to provide a
              foundation for large-scale simulations. Facilitating the use of topologies in
              simulations must go beyond providing theoretically sound models, however, and
              include a set of complementary tools for graph visualization, routing table
              construction, etc. What visualization tools are useful to researchers and
              assist in accurate intuitive understanding of underlying topology? How can
              different routing policies be effectively reflected in routing table
              construction?
     The researchers propose (1) to address these and other
              fundamental questions in the area of topology modeling and (2) to reflect their
               understanding in a set of topology tools and benchmarks made available to the
              research community at large. This work will build on the PIs prior experience
              in modeling internetworks.  The proposed work will contribute to fundamental
              understanding in the area of topology modeling. The work will include a set of
              evaluation criteria to assess the quality of a topology generation method and
              improvements in topology models. The work will also produce an evolutionary
              theory of topology scaling, with implications for efficient simulation using
              topologies that are smaller than the target. In addition to contributions to
              fundamental understanding, a central component of the proposed work is a set of
              tools and benchmarks to be made available to the research community at large,
              following in the tradition of the GT-ITM suite. These tools will allow other
              researchers to generate topologies, assess the quality of candidate topology
              modeling methods, utilize benchmarks based on current and future technologies,
              and interact with a visualization of topology.

