Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Shifting Gender Relations and the Transformation
               of the Social Spaces of Moroccan Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0082253

Award Number: 0082253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9969               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many stereotypes exist regarding the status and situation of women.  Within the
              U.S. and other "western" nations, for example, women in Arab nations frequently
              are assumed to have their identities primarily constructed or influenced by
              Islam.  Corollaries to this assumption are views that all Arabs are Muslim,
              that all Muslims are Arab, and that Muslim women are more oppressed and less
              emancipated than their "western" counterparts.  This extreme oversimplification
              of the vastly complex and diverse histories and people in the Arab world
              perpetuates a situation of misunderstanding and ignorance between countries of
              the region and elsewhere.  This doctoral dissertation research project will
              investigate the processes underlying Moroccan women's spatial practices and
              identity strategies in urban areas in France and Morocco.  The study will focus
              on understanding how Moroccan women from different socioeconomic situations use
              space differently and how power and gender relations in households and urban
              areas come together to influence their mobilities, daily spatial practices, and
              identity strategies in different places.  The concept of spatial practices as
              used in this study refer to the ways that women occupy and move through spaces
              in different ways, such as. using chaperons to go to cafes, walking in groups,
              using taxis as opposed to buses, socializing in particular parks, and avoiding
              streets at night.  Identity strategies pertain to ways that women may mobilize
              certain aspects of their identity, such as accentuating or downplaying
              particular codes of dress, notions of femininity, questions of ethnicity or
              class, and political alliances.  The comparative aspect of this research will
              allow for a consideration of the ways in which different national-cultural and
              socioeconomic contexts (France vs. Morocco, poor vs. non-poor) affect the
              degree and modes of Moroccan women's mobilities.  Working in Montpellier,
              France, and Rabat, Morocco, qualitative research methods will be employed to
              gather primary data on a small number of Moroccan women's daily lives. 
              Intensive in-depth interviews will be combined with time-geography diaries by
              working with female and male members of a limited number of Moroccan households
              on several different occasions.  Time-geographies will be collected from all
              individuals interviewed.  Interviews will be analyzed alongside
              time-geographies in an effort to understand the processes that influence
              women's mobilities, spatial practices, and identity strategies in urban areas
              in both France and Morocco.  These data will be supplemented with daily
              participant observation and field notes, archival records, newspapers, and
              statistical sources.  This study will contribute to theoretical debates
              currently taking place around questions of the role that place and mobility
              play in the construction of modern gender identities.  It will shed light on
              the ways that different characteristics of the settings where women live
              influences their spatial behavior and identities.  Understanding the factors
              that influence Moroccan women's spatial practices and identity strategies in
              France and Morocco will provide insight into how these women understand their
              own modern lives in a way that allows them to cope with the pressures and
              contradictions of contemporary urban life. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

