Title       : ITR: Sequential Signal Processing Methods for Third Generation CDMA Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0082607

Award Number: 0082607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar M. Djuric djuric@ece.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1640,1656,1660,4096,4097,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Petar M. Djuric
Project Summary
Signal processing is an area that already
              plays a significant role in the current GSM and IS-95 systems.
This role will
              only increase in the projected third generation wireless communications, and in
              fact, the
success in implementing these systems will strongly depend on the
              ability of the signal processing methods
to resolve the new technical problems
              that will emerge with it. The underlying technology of the third
generation
              systems will be based on the wideband CDMA (WCDMA) modulation scheme. In the
              core
of this technology will be sequential signal processing algorithms with
              abilities to capture fast-changing
characteristics of transmission channels
              very quickly and to exploit known system information optimally.
The
              significant advances of latest CDMA signal processing methods notwithstanding,
              it is clear that the
requirements for much lower bit error rates than in
              current systems will markedly increase the demands on
signal processing
              capabilities of sequential algorithms for WCDMA signals. Additional challenge
              arises due
to complexities that are a result from the need to handle high data
              rates and users with high mobility. Since
the communication channels will be
              rapidly time varying, the signals will undergo quick attenuations and the
new
              algorithms on channel estimation and tracking, channel equalization,
              interference rejection, and RAKE
receiver adaptations must have extremely fast
              convergence rates. The objective of the proposed research is
to develop
              algorithms that will meet the challenges of this new technology.
The basic
              methodology for the proposed processing of WCDMA signals will be based on
              particle filters, which recently have gained much attention for their potential
              in handling nonlinear and non-Gaussian
models. The underlying principle used
              in the design of such filters is the representation of the
              posterior
distribution of state variables (the unknowns of the system) by a
              set of particles (samples). Each particle
is given an importance weight so
              that the set of particles and their weights represent a random measure
that
              approximates the desired posterior distribution. The particles may also
              represent means of density
functions, usually Gaussians, in which case the
              particles have additional variables, the covariances of the
Gaussians. As new
              information becomes available, these particles propagate recursively through
              the state
space and their weights are modified using the principles of
              Bayesian theory. There are several ways of
applying particle filters including
              sampling-importance-resampling, mixture Kalman filtering, and Monte
Carlo and
              Metropolis-Hastings importance resampling. These approaches have their
              advantages and disad-
vantages in performance, and impose different demands
              for real-time implementation. In the proposal, new
schemes will be studied
              that naturally combine the best features of the existing schemes, and tailor
              them
for processing of WCDMA signals. Not only will the new schemes be able to
              replicate or surpass the best
possible performance of the known methods, but
              they will also be general enough to provide foundations for
development of new
              task specific schemes.
Four important topics will be investigated. The first
              is the examination of fundamental schemes for
propagation of state particles.
              This issue is critical for two important reasons: (a) it aspects the
              performance
of the algorithm and (b) it subsumes the implementation, which
              although parallelizible, is in some cases too
computationally demanding and
              therefore not too practical. The second topic is task specific and is
              related
to multiuser detection and channel estimation as well as exploitation
              of the physical characteristics of the
channel and the base station/mobile
              asymmetry for development of improved algorithms. The third one
is examination
              of the flexibility of the proposed methodology and the interaction of the
              various algorithms
and tasks in order to improve their performances and
              robustness. Finally, the fourth topic will be related to
investigation of
              computational requirements, and structures that would allow for real-time
              use.

