Title       : DOM consumption by marine bacterioplankton: Is the Cytophaga-Flavobacter group
               important?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a0082298

Award Number: 0082298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Garrison                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153963             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirchman kirchman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew T. Cottrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Heterotrophic bacteria play a central role in the carbon cycle of the oceans,
              consuming organic matter equivalent to 30?60% of phytoplankton primary
              production. Although we have learned much about the diversity of bacteria in
              the ocean, there is little information on the metabolic function of specific
              bacterial groups in natural assemblages as few culture?independent studies have
              linked bacterial community structure and function. In particular, there is
              little information on dissolved organic matter (DOM) consumption by different
              phylogenetic groups of bacteria, an important ecological and biogeochemical
              role of bacteria in the ocean.

This study will determine the role of one
              group of bacteria in DOM consumption, the Cytophaga?Flavobacter group. Our
              hypothesis is that the Cytophaga?Flavobacter group plays a central role in DOM
              consumption in the ocean. We will address the following questions: (1) Does the
              Cytophaga?Flavobacter group comprise a large fraction of marine
              bacterioplankton abundance and biovolume? (2) Does the Cytophaga?Flavobacter
              group consume DOM compounds that support a large fraction of bacterial
              production and comprise much of the DOM input? and (3) Is the
              Cytophaga?Flavobacter group responsible for a large fraction of the measured
              bacterial production?

Culture?independent approaches will be used to assay
              communities in estuarine and upwelling environments having a range of DOM input
              and consumption by bacteria. The relative abundance of the
              Cytophaga?Flavobacter group will be determined using fluorescence in situ
              hybridization (FISH). Uptake of DOM compounds by the Cytophaga?Flavobacter
              group will be determined using radiolabeled DOM compounds and
              microautoradiography coupled with FISH (MICRO?FISH). The contribution of the
              Cytophaga?Flavobacter group to bacterial production will be compared to other
              groups by determining which bacterial groups take up 'H?thymidine and
              'H?leucine. DOM uptake is an important aspect of carbon cycling in the ocean,
              so determining which types of bacteria are responsible for the bulk of
              bacterial production and DOM consumption is a key step in developing a better
              understanding of the marine carbon cycle.

