Title       : Scientific and Religious Influences on American Environmentalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0082009

Award Number: 0082009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181430             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Proctor jproctor@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project involves an empirical and philosophical analysis of the relative
              influence of science and religion in recent American popular environmental
              concern.  The empirical component of the project involves development,
              administration, and statistical analysis of a U.S. adult sample survey designed
              to obtain information on the connections between public views of science,
              popular religiosity and spirituality, and extent and form of environmental
              concern, as expressed in relevant attitudes, practices, and policy priorities. 
              The empirical analysis seeks to explain these connections by drawing upon
              theory and methodology from recent research on human values.  The aim of the
              philosophical analysis is to broadly understand and critically evaluate the
              metaphysical, epistemological, and ethical premises of major positions on
              science and religion in the context of environmental concern, ultimately as a
              means of reconstructing the optimal roles science and religion can play in
              informing environmental concern.

The project will result in an
              empirically-based, up-to-date, critically-informed understanding of
              environmental pluralism in America, in particular the scientific and religious
              motivations of different forms of American environmental concern.  It will
              offer theoretical advancement on the role of values in environmental attitudes,
              practice, and policy priorities, as well as empirically-grounded philosophical
              insights into the relationship between science and religion, leading to
              clarification of their appropriate bounds and optimal contribution to
              contemporary policy.  It will also produce a robust, up-to-date dataset on
              American values, environmental attitudes and practice, and other
              characteristics available for further social scientific analysis by other
              researchers.


