Title       : ITR: Adaptive Unitary Matrices For High-Speed Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0082329

Award Number: 0082329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329633             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Barry barry@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4096,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
A fundamental problem in a wide variety of wideband communications
              applications is that of adapting a unitary matrix.  For example, consider an
              array-to-array AWGN wireless communications link in which the transmitter has
              knowledge of the channel. To achieve the Shannon capacity of such a link, the
              optimal transmitter prefilters the vector of transmitted symbols by the right
              unitary factor in the channel singularvalue decomposition. This prefilter,
              coupled with a matrix-valued matched filter at the receiver, converts the
              matrix channel into an equivalent bank of independent scalar channels, greatly
              simplifying the modulation, coding, and other signal processing tasks needed to
              maximize throughput. Despite the optimality of the unitary prefilter, however,
              the high complexity of the SVD (especially for rapidly varying channels) makes
              it difficult to realize in practice. A low-complexity algorithm for adapting a
              unitary matrix could be the catalyst that brings such optimal space-time
              processing closer to reality. Other applications requiring an adaptive unitary
              matrix include blind fractionally spaced equalization; blind multiuser
              detection for CDMA; blind combining for narrowband arrays; and signal-noise
              subspace separation and subspace tracking.  

The objective of this proposal
              is to develop low complexity and robust strategies for adapting unitary
              matrices, to assess their performance, convergence properties, and complexity,
              and to compare them to existing alternatives. The proposal is built around
              three core algorithms for adapting a unitary matrix U k T he MPLL algorithm,
              the subspace separator, and the adaptive SVD algorithm. All three take the
              form:

U k + 1 = U kR l {g(z k )  z k },

where z k = U k * y k and y k is
              the receiver observation vector, and where R l {x  z} denotes a particular
              unitary matrix that rotates x / || x || a fraction l of the way to z / || z ||.
              The memoryless function g(z) is anonlinear decision device for the MPLL, while
              it is a linear matrix for the subspace separator and the adaptive SVD
              algorithm.

This recursion has a number of nice properties; it is
              conceptually simple, and simple algorithms are often the most robust; it
              ensures that U k is always unitary, since R l is unitary; there exists a lower
              complexity implementation that does not require full-rank matrix
              multiplication; and the recursion has a useful geometric interpretation that
              facilitates its application to new areas. Furthermore, as discussed in this
              proposal, preliminary results indicate that the recursion has excellent
              convergence properties.  

The inspiration for the proposed algorithms came
              from the scalar phase-locked loop (PLL). The PLL is clearly the workhorse for
              adapting unitary scalars, primarily because of its robustness, low
              complexity,good performance. It stands to reason, therefore, that some of these
              properties might carry over into the higher-dimensional problem of adapting
              unitary matrices.  

The proposed research constitutes a significant
              advancement in the theory of signal processing and its application to
              communication theory, and is applicable to a wide variety of signal processing
              applications beyond communications. The project will provide two Ph.D. students
              with extensive physical-layer training for next-generation wideband
              communications systems.

