Title       : CSIAC Data Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0082024

Award Number: 0082024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen B. Comfort kcomfor@wested.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WestEd
	      730 Harrison Street
	      San Francisco, CA  94107    415/565-3070

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the past decade, many states and districts, particularly National Science
              Foundation (NSF) funded systemic initiative (SI) programs, have made
              substantial efforts to reform their science eduation systems.  these reform
              effortsare expected to lead to improved learning, which in turn will lead to
              high achievement in science by all students.  But how do these statesand
              districts know that theirefforts are indded making such a difference?  How can
              they determine if all students are learning the content recommended by national
              science statandards?  

The data and results collected by the California
              Systemic Initiatives Assessment Collaborative (CSIAC) can help answer those
              questions.  Over the last four years, CSAIC has established a rich collection
              of student acheivement data, school and district profile data, and student and
              teacher opportunity-to-learn data from numerous SI programs.  The CSIAC data
              study proposes to assemble a group of experts, including SI participants, to
              analyze and report on this collection of data in terms of the achievement of
              different subgroups of students, and to address questions andconcerns regarding
              the correlations between SI efforts and achievement in science by all
              students.

The CSIAC data study will provide important new information to
              science educators who will use the study's findings and recommendation to
              better understand and use assessment data that described the achievement of
              subgroups of students.  SIs and other science reform efforts will use the
              Study's results to inform and change curriculum, instruction and practice so
              that their efforts will lead to improved learning and high achievement in
              science by all students.  This study will also extend current efforts in the
              field of measurement to explore the impact of standards-based assessments on
              differentn groups of students and educational practices.
