Title       : Integrating Immersive Technologies and Geographic Information Science within an
               Internet-based Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0082984

Award Number: 0082984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor M. Harris tharris2@wvu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The integration of the graphical and virtual capabilities of Immersive
              Technologies (VR) with the powerful spatial data generation and analytic
              capabilities of Geographic Information Systems (GIS); promises substantial
              scientific and commercial benefits.  These benefits to both scientists and a
              broader user community will increase significantly if such a coupling can be
              achieved and can be made available and distributed through an Internet
              environment.  To that end this project will develop the scientific research
              base and the core tools needed to integrate VR and GIS technologies and provide
              access and electronic collaboratory capacity to this VR-GIS integration through
              an Internet-based environment.  The integration of these technologies via the
              Internet will address bandwidth issues, platform interoperability, and
              operational constraints.  The scientific, economic, and social potential of
              distributed VR-GIS via the Internet will be demonstrated through application
              test projects.  This work builds on the interdisciplinary national and
              international partnerships essential to the development of the computing and
              scientific methods necessary to achieve successful technical integration.  The
              research cooperators comprise the Departments of Geology and Geography at West
              Virginia University and International Society on Virtual Systems and Multimedia
              at Gifu University, Japan. 
 
