Title       : ITR: Wireless Client-server Technologies for Ubiquitous Multimedia Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0082743

Award Number: 0082743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman D. Hughes hughes@cps.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Biocca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Computer Science and Engineering, and Telecommunication Departments at
              Michigan State University (MSU) requested support to conduct research involving
              the categories: Human-Computer Interface, Information Management, and Scalable
              Information Infrastructure. Three existing research laboratories will be
              connected and used as a testbed to facilitate this collaborative
              interdisciplinary research: High-Speed Networking & Performance Lab (HSNP),
              Media and Entertainment Technologies Lab (MET), and Media Interface and Network
              Design Lab (MIND). A primary objective of the proposed research is to further
              advance the client-server technologies for a ubiquitous multimedia computing
              environment. Since ubiquitous computing capability may take the form of
              advanced personal digitized assistants (PDAs), wearable computer systems
              featuring heads up displays, or argumented reality systems, this proposal
              addresses key issues which include: (1) personal environment data capture, (2)
              environmental data salience, (3) transport of multimedia data over wireless and
              heterogeneous network systems in a client-server environment, (4) media access
              and retrieval, and (5) human-computer-interface (HCI) design and analysis. Some
              of the significant questions that are addressed in the project are: (a) given
              continuous audio and video capture, what is the best choice of content to
              archive in a personal multimedia database? (b) how can audio and video capture
              of unconstrained content be used as an effective query mechanism for a
              multimedia database? (c) how can perceived latency and communications
              performance be optimized in a wireless environment where bandwidth, error
              rates, and latency are continuously variable and dependent upon many
              environmental conditions?, (d) how can the quality-of-service for the transport
              of real-time multimedia traffic be guaranteed using heterogeneous networks and
              wireless network systems?, and (e) what should be the design principles to
              support a fully mobile user engaged in hand-free high-bandwidth, collaborative
              work and communication? New algorithms and techniques will be developed and
              tested to address these questions either via simulation, emulation, or
              experimentation. It is anticipated that the existing facilities will be
              significantly enhanced via a pending NSF research equipment proposal. This
              proposed equipment (e.g., VoD servers, multimedia lap tops, WaveLan products,
              wearable argumented reality interfaces) will be the defining infrastructure to
              support a sophisticated testbed, connecting three research laboratories (HSNP,
              MET, MIND) via wireless links. The multi-lab testbed will be used for the
              experimental phase of the project. As an effort to broaden the participation in
              our research, the PIs will invite interested faculty (via two-week summer
              workshops) and students (via ten-week summer research experience) from HBCUs
              (Historically Black Colleges and Universities) to work with them during the
              three summers. Additionally, the PIs will invite a few interested professionals
              from industry to participate in the research initiatives.

