Title       : ITR:- Virtual surfaces for human/robot mutual labor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0082957

Award Number: 0082957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Lynch kmlynch@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julius Dewald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Peshkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Witaya Wannasuphoprasit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. This project
              addresses the need to assist humans in heavy materials handling, since such
              tasks expose the worker to known risk factors for work-related musculoskeletal
              disorders, such as lifting, bending, twisting, and maintenance of awkward
              postures. This project will study the use of cobots to implement ergonomic
              guiding surfaces to assist a human in the manipulation of a heavy load. With
              such a mechanism, the load can be constrained to move along a frictionless
              guide, and the human is allowed to apply forces in directions which are
              comfortable while the guide directs the motion to the goal. Cobots use rolling
              contacts to directly implement passive guiding constraints, and as a result
              they are safer to interact with and use less power than a conventional robot.
              To design assistive guide constraints, the project will study how humans
              naturally interact with constraints assuming that the essential nature of this
              interaction can be modeled by the human's desire to minimize some notion of
              effort.  With this model, The PIs will design guides that minimize the
              necessary human effort and will experimentally verify the correctness of the
              model.  The PIs will develop software for automatically planning near-optimal
              guides in cluttered workspaces and will test the guides using cobot hardware on
              realistic materials handling tasks. The resulted ergonomic virtual surfaces in
              materials handling will reduce the occurrence of work-related musculoskeletal
              disorders. It will also increase productivity, providing an intuitive and safe
              interface between human and computer.  Finally, this work will expose new
              principles in human motor control, as the design of assistive guiding surfaces
              requires a better understanding of how humans interact with constraints.

