Title       : Scaling of Avian Flight Performance and Muscle Efficiency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0082075

Award Number: 0082075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Dial kdial@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Flight is the most common form of animal locomotion, and much is to be learned
              about evolution of flight design and performance.  Avian flight performance
              appears to vary with body size in a systematic fashion, with small animals
              capable of hovering and flying over a wide range of speeds and larger birds
              being forced to locomote using an increasingly narrow window of flight styles,
              until the largest are rendered flightless.  Although frequently cited,
              fixed-wing aerodynamic theory poorly describes or at least inadequately
              predicts features of avian locomotion.  Important questions yet to be resolved
              concerning avian locomotion are: (1) how and why do animals of differing body
              sizes differ in performance?, (2) what are the metabolic (i.e., fuel
              consumption) and mechanical power (i.e., horse-power) costs during flight and
              can we accurately measure muscle (i.e., the motor) efficiency?, and (3) how do
              three-dimensional configurations of flight surfaces change over a range of
              flight styles and speeds? 
	Locomotion is involved in nearly every aspect of
              animal life including, dispersal, food acquisition, predator avoidance, and
              finding mates.  Locomotor agility, speed, power, and maneuverability typically
              differ among species, allowing them to successfully occupy differing
              environmental conditions. Results from the proposed studies will elucidate
              aspects of avian form and function, as well as have broader implications for
              the evolution of vertebrate biodiversity, body size, and locomotor strategies. 
              Moreover, as we advance our knowledge of the biomechanical bases of locomotion
              in animals, it can provide important insights into design features of
              human-made locomotor machines, as was done by the great aeronauts of aviation
              history.

