Title       : Arkansas Center for Nanodevices (ACEND)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0082975

Award Number: 0082975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yujie J. Ding   (Principal Investigator current)
              Min Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Beitle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaogang Peng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Salamo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the basic science needed to realize new nanosize devices
              specifically related to optoelectronic and optical communications.  It aims at
              forming the nucleus of the Arkansas Center for Nanoscale Devices (AceND). 
              Research will focus on the design, epitaxial growth, fabrication, modeling, and
              testing of nanodevices for generating and detecting coherent waves over a wide
              range of spectral regions covering IR and mid-IR (1-6mm), far-IR (6-100mm ) and
              THz (100-1000mm).  The development of coherent sources and detectors in these
              wavelength ranges will impact medicine, food inspection, pollution control,
              communications, and remote sensing.  Quantum-dot detectors and lasers, optical
              parametric oscillators and amplifiers, mid-IR and THz emitters, and inter
              sub-band lasers are included among the examples of specific devices to be
              investigated.  Currently, two categories of quantum are being investigated
              (i.e., self-assembled dots grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy in a vacuum chamber
              and colloidal dots synthesized by chemical methods either in solution or in
              certain host matrices). Although the two categories are related to each other
              by quantum confinement and other size-dependent physical properties, each
              category differs from the other based on its popular size range, fabrication
              technology, and promising applications.  ACeND scientists will integrate active
              research on both categories of quantum dots to enhance the understanding of
              quantum effects in quantum dots, and thus the capability of implementing and
              optimizing nanodevices based on them. 

