Title       : Environmental Air Quality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0082800

Award Number: 0082800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. Erickson lerick@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad H. Hosni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project represents a comprehensive effort to develop a nationally
              recognized interdisciplinary research and graduate training program in air
              quality.  It emphasizes physical, chemical, and biological characterization and
              control of particulate matter.  This effort will involve researchers at Kansas
              State University, Kansas University, and the University of Nebraska joined by
              an active Internet link.  The project will examine the science and engineering
              of indoor and outdoor air quality with special attention given to sampling and
              analysis of air, including research on processes to remove volatile compounds
              and particulates from air as well as methods to reduce contaminant generation
              in production processes.  Major Kansas and Nebraska industries depend on
              advances in air quality control technology to remain competitive and in
              compliance with regulations (e.g. production agriculture, aircraft
              manufacturing, grain handling and processing, building systems, bioprocessing,
              and microelectronics).  Graduate students will be trained in three major air
              quality areas: indoor air quality in buildings, particulate sampling,
              characterization and control, and bioaerosol science and engineering.  Students
              in toxicology, biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering will participate in
              interdisciplinary research efforts.  The project represents a major step
              towards the establishment of an Environmental Air Quality program that will
              play a significant role in both the technological and economic development of
              Kansas and Nebraska.  

