Title       : The Glass Transition in Normal and Exceptional Glassformers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0082535

Award Number: 0082535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $477564             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Austen Angell caa@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on glassforming liquids.  It includes a study of formation
              of glasses of unusual properties via first order liquid-liquid phase
              transitions to test the possibility that there exists a class of vitreous
              materials of unusually low entropy (appromixating "perfect glasses"), with
              atypical vibrational characteristics.  It also includes exploring the
              possibilty of creating a class of (variably) porous, hence lightweight, glasses
              by using the Maxwell randomly-connected freely-joited slats approach, with
              rigid molecular slats chemically linked at pivot points.  These new project
              will be blended with a variety of novel studies addressing conventional body of
              visocous liquid glassformers.  One source of novelty here comes from the
              recognition that the configurational excitation of liquids, which usually
              progresses continuously once the glass transition temperature has been passed,
              can occur in distinct stages if the intermolecular interactions have
              inhomogeneous components.  The major thrust of the project involves a search
              for deeper understanding of the physics of the glass transition.  The molecular
              level distinction between "strong" and "fragile" liquids and plastic crystals,
              on the one hand and the distinction between "structural" glassformers on the
              one hand, and the various spin glasses, dipole glasses, etc of solid state
              physics, on the other will be explored.  The project will also address the
              relation between glassforming liquids and biomolecules and, alternatively the
              use of glassforming liquids to preserve biomolecules studies of the relation
              between folding in individual molecules(proteins) and two-tier excitation
              processes in simpler systems, and possible links between the nucleation
              phenomenon in complex systems and the aberrant folding of membrane proteins to
              new forms involved in "mad cow" disease and its human disease relatives will
              continued.
%%%
Describing at the nanometer level the amorphous state of
              solids in central to many areas of advanced materials technologies that include
              polymers, metals, pharmaceuticals and biomaterials.  An understanding of the
              amorphous state and how it is prepared and stabilized will lead to new routes
              for synthesizing novel materials with unique properties. 

