Title       : RUI: Understanding the Labor Market Implications of Western Hemispheric Economic
               Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0082057

Award Number: 0082057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92696              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Robertson robertson@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to study the effects of economic integration
              on labor markets. This project supports three primary activities: data
              collection, research, and the development of a web-based teaching tool for
              undergraduate education. The project complements the Program for the
              Improvement of Surveys and the Measurement of Living Conditions in Latin
              America and the Caribbean implemented by the Inter-American Development Bank,
              the World Bank, and the Economic Commission of Latin America and the Caribbean
              of the United Nations.
The academic literature has established that three
              types of data are necessary to thoroughly examine the effects of international
              economic integration on labor markets. First, the Heckscher-Ohlin (HO)
              framework that embodies the Stolper-Samuelson theorem suggests that
              product-price data are necessary because, in the HO model, price changes
              directly affect wages. Second, models that move beyond the single cone
              framework and relax additional assumptions of the HO model suggest that trade
              liberalization affects firm behavior and ultimately wages, employment, and
              productivity. Thus, firm-level surveys are also necessary. Third,
              household-level surveys are necessary to capture worker heterogeneity, measure
              skill, and control for changing demographic patterns. This project will collect
              and harmonize these three types of data from the four largest Latin American
              countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico. The principle investigator has
              already collected these data for Mexico and will combine these data with
              similar U.S. data to analyze effects of U.S.-Mexican integration. As the data
              arrive from the rest of Latin America, they will extend the initial
              research.
The goal of the research component is to produce at least three
              empirical papers. The first will examine the role of borders and distance in
              segmenting labor markets and identify which factors play the largest role in
              market integration. The second will apply the HO model in a price study by
              comparing mandated wage equations and cointegration techniques using time
              series of wages and prices. The third will relax the numerous assumptions of
              the HO model to explore factors at work at the firm level that affect labor
              markets, such as technology choice.
The research and data collection will be
              integrated with teaching through the development of a web site. This web site
              will provide Internet access to the data and serve as a source point for
              structured upper-division undergraduate research projects. The site will also
              be used to guide lower-division undergraduate research projects by making
              tailored subsets of the data available for "active learning" projects that
              illustrate key concepts in international economics. The goal of the
              upper-division component is to develop a class for economics majors in which
              students use the web site as part of original publishable research.
The timing
              of the research corresponds to the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas
              negotiations so that the results may inform involved countries about potential
              benefits and risks of the agreement. Because the data will ultimately be
              universally available, it will help fill a large gap in the empirical
              literature on the effects of liberalization in developing countries. The
              research also directly addresses currently unresolved academic issues in the
              "trade and wages" debate and offers potentially important contributions to the
              literature. The web tool will significantly enhance economic education in ways
              consistent with recent studies of undergraduate education by using technology
              in the classroom to encourage active learning. 

