Title       : IT Transfer to Egypt: Process Model for Developing Countries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0082473

Award Number: 0082473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Loch kloch@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole E. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherif Kamel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Detmar Straub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Research on Information Technology Transfer (ITT) to developing countries has
              suffered due to a lack of knowledge about how the process works. Studies have
              generally been done from a distance and have assumed an acultural environment
              in which national IT policy plays an unspecified role. Implementation factors
              have also been missing from the explanatory models. The goals of this project
              are to test a theoretical model that explains the ITT process and examine the
              effectiveness of national IT policy in one developing country -- Egypt.
              Egyptian users of urban/rural information centers, cybercafes, and ISPs,
              private and public sector knowledge workers, and national IT policy makers will
              be sampled. Research methods will include ethnography, interviews, systematic
              observation, and questionnaires. Drawing from anthropological, economic, and
              technology innovation and diffusion theories, this research integrates
              technical and socio-cultural factors within a national setting. Policy makers
              in developing countries can learn why some policies encourage the process of
              ITT while others hinder it. Managers in transnational firms charged with
              introducing IT in foreign subsidiaries, offices, and plants can learn how to
              better implement IT. This research will result in new knowledge, theories and
              methods for assessing Information Technology Transfer in other developing
              countries.


