Title       : ITR: Multiple Time Scale Traffic Control for Next Generation Internets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0082861

Award Number: 0082861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kihong Park   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chao-Ju Hou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The Internet is governed by a compendium of protocols spanning a number of
              functionalities including congestion control, routing, multicast, label
              switching, resource reservation and admission control, error control, and
              network management. These protocols engage in control actions at multiple time
              scales, from microseconds for routing and label switching, to milliseconds for
              congestion control, and the several second range for multicast, routing table
              updates, and network management. The behavior and performance of a network
              system is influenced by the workload that drive the protocols - reliable
              transport of heavy-tailed files, QoS-sensitive streaming of VBR video and
              audio, burstiness of connection arrivals, skewed make-up of short- and
              long-lived flows, and self-similar burstiness of multiplexed traffic - with
              Internet workload exhibiting variability and correlation at multiple time
              scales, from multiplicative scaling observed for IP flows in the millisecond
              range, to long-range correlations present in the second range.
     With QoS
              emerging as a unifying umbrella under which the various network subsystems
              can
be organized and viewed as provisioning user-specified services, the need
              arises to coordinate and
integrate the control activities - many of whom have
              direct impact on end-to-end QoS - such that
both effective and efficient
              services can be rendered. In tandem with the QoS integration challenge, the PIs
              are presented with the opportunity to explicitly exploit the multiple time
              scale nature of network protocols and Internet workload to affect seemless and
              predictable services. In the proposed project, the PIs plan to address the
              following two-pronged problem: (1) exploit multiple time scale property of
              network protocols to facilitate effective coordination and integration of
              disjoint network controls for end-to-end QoS, and (2) exploit multiple time
              scale nature of Internet workload to achieve workload-sensitive traffic
              controls.
     Problem (1), in turn, is comprised of two key issues:
              sufficiency or separation conditions under which two network controls - e.g.,
              routing and congestion control-acting at different time scales can be
              integrated without causing harmful effects with respect to stability and
              efficiency, and the effective coupling of protocols when time scale separation
              is not available - e.g., label control and congestion control. Problem (2)
              consists of three key issues: short-lived connection management using
              lightweight optimistic control, long-lived connection management using
              connection duration prediction and multi-layered feedback control, and QoS
              amplification through workload-sensitive, end-to-end and per-hop control. The
              two-fold challenge that the PIs plan to attack is grounded in well-defined
              technical problems, and at the same time, represents an innovative traffic
              control dimension with broader implications to the next generation Internet.
 
                 The PIs bring expertise in core traffic control areas spanning congestion
              control (Park), QoS
routing (Hou), multicast (Hou), label switching (Park),
              and traffic modeling (Park). Both PIs
have significant experience in
              performance analysis and protocol design, and they complement each other's
              strengths with respect to simulation (Hou) and implementation (Park) based
              performance evaluation. The PIs will leverage existing benchmarking platforms -
              the Purdue Infobahn QoS testbed comprised of Cisco 7206 routers (Park) and the
              NetSim performance evaluation environment (Hou) - to implement, test, and
              benchmark the protocols. The research results, technology demonstration, and
              software prototypes will be made available through the Web to academic
              institutions, industrial affiliates, and the networking community at large.

