Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of New Rare-Earth Metal-Main Group Metal
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0076180

Award Number: 0076180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Dorhout pkd@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at the study of four interrelated areas of materials
              synthesis with an emphasis on developing phase maps for targeting specific
              rare-earth metal main group metal materials.  The quaternary phase space of
              rare-earth metal chalcophosphates, quaternary rare-earth metal
              chalcoantimonates and bismuthates, and quaternary rare-earth metal
              chalcotrielates and tetrelates, and the high-pressure physical behavior of
              these materials will be investigated.  One hypothesis will demonstrate that
              formulae suggesting products are indeed valid.  These formulae, in some cases,
              can predict the space group symmetry of the related products.  The quaternary
              phase diagrams of related materials will be explored to identity regions of
              phase space that support particular oxidation state of phosphorous for a series
              of selenophosphates.  Based on a series of mineralogical studies, other target
              formulae will be investigated to explore how phases and structures may be
              controlled.  Quaternary phase diagrams will be developed for a series of
              rare-earth metal chalcotrielates and chalcotetrelates, whether the triels will
              gallium and indium and there tetrels will germanium and tin.
%%%
The metal
              chalcogerides class of materials are highly relevant to applications that
              include catalysis optical deices such as lasers, infrared detectors, and solar
              cells, and as new materials called thermoelectrics for refrigeration.

