Title       : Doctoral Disstertation Research: Regional Mobility and the Development of
               Segmentary Structures: A Case Study from the Prehistory of the Taos District,
               New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a0076083

Award Number: 0076083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10286              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard I. Ford riford@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Ford, Mr. Severin Fowles will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. Through a combination of archaeological
              excavation and the analysis of extant museum materials he will reconstruct the
              social organization and population movements of prehistoric peoples in the Taos
              District of New Mexico during the several centuries preceding Spanish arrival.
              During this period of marked social change aggregated populations dispersed and
              then rearranged themselves in new concentrations marked by large multi-story
              pueblo villages. Some areas such as Taos which had been sparsely inhabited saw
              the rise of multiple village communities. Mr. Fowles wishes to understand both
              the origins and social organization of these entities. 

Ethnographic data
              indicates that many early historic Southwestern Native American peoples were
              organized into segmentary lineage systems. Clearly defined subgroups existed
              within the society and individual membership was parentally inherited.
              Relationships between lineages were clearly defined and social control,
              marriage patterns, inheritance and ritual responsibility all were determined by
              lineage structure. While likely this pattern existed prehistorically, this is
              difficult to prove. It is also unclear how it originated. Mr. Fowles
              hypothesizes that the aggregated community he plans to examine was structured
              according to segmentary lineage principles, that its founders derived from
              distinct cultural groups who migrated from different areas and came together to
              found it, and that the individual lineages correspond to individual founding
              groups. To examine this model, will use excavated material from several museums
              to reconstruct population structure prior to aggregation and search for
              material signatures which characterize individual groups. He will then examine
              one large site, Pot Creek Pueblo to determine whether these antecedent
              populations came together to form the site. He will study the distribution of
              these cultural markers within the site to find out whether they blend or
              maintain clear and distinct associations and, if so, whether the are spatially
              segregated within the as one would predict if segmentary lineages were
              present.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will provide insight into how
              groups at a technologically simple level adapt and rearrange themselves across
              a changing landscape and how they are organized into coherent and functioning
              societies. This project will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

