Title       : Metal Boride Thin Films: Synthesis of CVD Precursors and Growth by Remote-Plasma
               CVD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0076061

Award Number: 0076061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $521000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Girolami ggirolam@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Abelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Advanced Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry
              Division and the Electronic Materials Program in the Division of Materials
              Research supports the work of Professors Gregory Girolami and John Abelson of
              the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.  The focus of the research is the
              synthesis of transition metal and lanthanide borohydride complexes and
              deposition of thin films from them using remote hydrogen-plasma-assisted
              chemical vapor deposition. The efficiency and mechanism of thin layer
              deposition and physical properties of the films prepared are being
              investigated.  These studies will provide scientific information on bulk
              diffusion properties and limits of metal borides as diffusion barriers in
              microelectronic integrated circuits.  In addition, the research provides
              training to students in an important interdisciplinary area of materials
              science.

Pure metal borohydrides, which contain only the metal, boron, and
              hydrogen, are being synthesized and characterized.  Thin films for applications
              in integrated electronic circuits as barrier materials are being prepared by
              vapor deposition methods.  In addition, the interdisciplinary approaches of
              this project provide knowledge and training to students in materials chemistry,
              synthesis, characterization, and thin film deposition.  The knowledge gained
              from these studies will have applications in the design and fabrication of
              integrated circuits for electronic and photonic devices.
