Title       : International Research Fellows Award: Extending the DIRT (Detritus Input and
               Removal Treatments) Study to Sikfokut Forest, Hungary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0076182

Award Number: 0076182
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin L. Vanderbilt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : K,Vanderbilt
	      2815 NW Mulkey Ave.
	      Corvallis, OR  97330    541/758-7126

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5916,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0076182
Vanderbilt

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers 
to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards 
provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary 
facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide Dr. Kristin L.
              Vanderbilt with support for her to work with Dr. 
Janos Toth at the Kossuth
              Lajos University in Debrecen, Hungary during four field 
seasons.

A better
              understanding of the environmental controls on soil nitrogen and carbon cycling
              
is needed to improve predictions of forest nutrient availability under
              different 
management scenarios, changes in global carbon budgets due to
              climate change, and 
forest response.  To address these questions, long-term
              manipulative plant litter 
experiments (referred to as the DIRT ( (Detritus
              Input and Removal Treatments)) 
experiments) have been established at a
              network of sites in the U.S.  The objective of this 
research project is to
              establish and sample long-term litter manipulation experimental 
plots at
              Sikfokut Forest in Hungary like those already installed at several U.S.
              locations.  
This site differs greatly from the sites in the U.S. in terms of
              management history.  Dr. 
Vanderbilt will conduct baseline measurements of
              soil and soil solution carbon and 
nitrogen chemistry, and compare results
              with data from U.S. sites.  She will establish 
protocols for plot maintenance
              and sampling, and work with graduate students in ecology 
at Kossuth Lajos
              University to develop research projects using the litter manipulation 
plots. 
              Besides promoting and furthering collaboration between researchers in the U.S.
              
and Hungary, this project will help realize the potential of cross-site
              research between 
Long Term Ecological Research and International Long Term
              Ecological Research sites 
to provide spatially extensive information about
              how different ecosystems respond to the 
same treatments.

Dr. Toth has
              spearheaded the nutrient cycling and litter decomposition studies at
              
Sikfokut.


***

