Title       : GOALI: A New Paradigm for Mechanical Ventilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0076818

Award Number: 0076818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Lutchen klutch@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bela Suki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren G. Sanborn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0076818
Lutchen
Objective: Two crucial deficiencies associated with pulmonary
              care during mechanical ventilation are:1) inadequate diagnostics on mechanical
              function; and 2) the propensity for ventilator induced lung injury. The first
              prevents efficient weaning of patients off of mechanical ventilation while the
              second can initiates or exacerbates a condition known as Adult Respiratory
              Distress Syndrome (ARDS).  In this GOALI grant we will collaborate with
              Mallinckrodt, Inc., the world leader in mechanical ventilators, Tufts
              University School of Veterinary Medicine, and the Harvard Medical School to
              advance a new paradigm in ventilation that can solve both deficiencies.
              Recently, we invented an Enhanced Ventilation Waveform (EVW) and a methodology
              that, in principal, is "friendly" with current commercial ventilator platforms
              (). The EVW is a broadband waveform that combines the energies from all its
              frequencies in an ingenious manner. The  resulting waveshape permits reliable
              estimates of respiratory resustance and elastance (R and E) from 0.1 - 8 Hz
              while simultaneously ventilating the subject with typical tidal excursions on
              each breath. These data can allow differentiation from among categories of
              structural alterations in the lung due to disease. Likewise, we have proposed a
              potential solution to prevent ventilator induced lung injury; namely the
              application of noisy or "variable ventilation" (VV).  In conventional
              ventilation (CV) the same tidal volume and breathing period are applied on
              every breath.  In VV the tidal volume and breath time are varied from
              breath-to-breath while mean ventilation is maintained (somewhat akin to natural
              breathing). Our group has proposed a mechanism by which VV would  minimize
              injury.  Hence, in this grant we will expand our relation with Mallinckrodt,
              Inc. to test the following two hypotheses:

1) If delivered clinically, the
              EVW would provide enhanced diagnostic information on lung mechanics, and,
              because it contains higher frequency components, will simultaneously provide
              improved ventilation distribution and blood gas levels compared to any existing
              CV waveforms; and 

2) The EVW and VV concepts are synergistic permitting a
              new EVW-VV paradigm in mechanical ventilation that will a) provide continuous
              monitoring of the mechanical conditions in the lung; b) provide superior gas
              exchange compared to other modes of CV; and c) avoid or minimize the risk of
              ventilator induced injury.
						
To test these hypotheses we will advance
              several new technologies. Our specific aims are:

1. To develop technology
              for delivery of an EVW and a stochastic based VV pattern with currently used
              commercial ventilators, and then to combine this VV pattern with the EVW on a
              breath-by-breath basis. One key aspect of this challenge is to develop an
              adaptive feedback approach for insuring delivery and monitoring of the desired
              EVW to the patient through a long compliant patient tubing circuit.

2. To
              experimentally evaluate in a sheep model of asthmatic like constriction the
              efficacy of the EVW waveform for monitoring lung mechanics in the time and
              frequency domains and for improving ventilation distribution.

3. To evaluate
              the diagnostic, preventative and  therapeutic benefits of the combined EVW-VV
              approach via experimental studies in a Sheep model of ARDS.


