Title       : Development of In-Situ Magnetic Characterization for Magnetic/Semiconductor
               Heterostructures Research, Student Training and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0076493

Award Number: 0076493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Palmstrom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076493
Palmstrom

This is an award for the development of an in-situ
              magnetic characterization system that will interconnect to an in-situ atomic
              level growth and characterization facility. The new instrument will allow
              magnetic and spin polarization measurements to be made at different stages of
              magnetic/semiconductor heterostructure growth. These magnetic measurements will
              be correlated with in-situ structural and elemental studies to obtain a
              fundamental understanding of ferromagnetic/semiconductor heterostructures and
              interfaces. The instrument will also be used for in-situ magnetotransport and
              electroluminescence measurements to determine spin transport across
              ferromagnetic/semiconductor heterojunctions and magnetoresistance of
              ferromagnetic epitaxial layers. In designing and developing this
              instrumentation the students and postdoctoral associates will learn to work as
              a team and be exposed to multiple disciplines ranging from low temperature and
              semiconductor physics, superconductivity, optics, magnetics, and UHV practices
              to molecular beam epitaxy, surface and materials science.

This is an award
              for instrument development at the university of Minnesota-Twin Cities. The
              possibility of manipulating and detecting the spin of an electron in addition
              to its charge is the key to the development of "Spintronics", which integrates
              magnetic and semiconductor materials. However, the detailed knowledge of both
              the magnetic and electronic properties of ferromagnetic/semiconductor
              interfaces, is needed to understand and control the electron spin as it crosses
              the interface. The development of a in-situ magnetic characterization will
              allow magnetic, magneto-optic and magnetotransport properties of
              magnetic/semiconductor single crystal structures to be studied during their
              formation from subatomic layer to micrometer thicknesses as they are grown by
              molecular beam epitaxy without exposing the structures to air. During this
              project, students and postdoctoral associates will be acquire skills in
              experimental techniques (ultra-high vacuum technology, magnetics, optics,
              cryogenics, superconductivity, electronics, mechanical design and materials
              processing) as well as in understanding the underlying physics (role of atomic
              structure at surfaces and interfaces and in the bulk of materials on the
              magnetic properties of thin films and the spin polarized transport across
              interfaces between magnetic materials and semiconductors).



