Title       : Computational Techniques From Geometry and Statistical Physics Applied To Fluid
               Mechanics and Interface Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0076510

Award Number: 0076510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandre J. Chorin chorin@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Sethian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Chorin
0076510

     The investigator an his colleague continue working in
              the area of interface modeling, level set methods and fast marching methods,
              with applications to plastic injection moulding, the computation of seismic
              travel times, semiconductor manufacturing and computer vision.  They also
              continue to develop statistical prediction methods for partial differential
              equations with underresolution and partial data, with applications to
              turbulence, climate modeling, and many-body problems.  The common thread of
              these topics is computation and analysis in the presence of uncertainty

    
              The main difficulty in many important problems of engineering is to find the
              exact location of a surface or the exact time a signal arrives at a given
              point.  Well-known examples occur in the manufacture of microchips, where it is
              important to control exactly various manufacturing processes, and in robotics,
              where one has to find the optimal way to perform a task.  The investigators
              have developed powerful computer methods for solving such problems; these
              methods obviate the need for costly and lengthy trial-and-error in a physical
              laboratory.  They continue to improve these tools, with new applications in
              manufacturing, geology, and computer vision.  Many problems in science lack
              sufficient data for a complete specification, or are so complex that they
              cannot be solved in full.  Examples are weather and climate forecasting as well
              as problems in biology.  The investigators have examined carefully what is the
              most one can reliably say in such situations, and have developed computer
              methods for finding effectively the best information one can in problems where
              a full solution is out of reach.  They are also developing ways of telling in
              advance what the uncertainty in the answers will be when one can estimate the
              uncertainty in the data.


