Title       : Conservation and Curation of the U-Iowa Stanford Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a0076725

Award Number: 0076725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Franciscus robert-franciscus@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley J. Schermer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Anthropology and the Office of the State Archaeologist at the
              University of Iowa recently acquired legal possession of one of the largest
              collections of documented human skeletal remains in the United States. 
              Officially transferred in 1998 from Stanford University's School of Medicine,
              this extraordinary collection of nearly 1,100 individuals was amassed in the
              first half of the 1900s from individuals born in the mid to late 1800s.  They
              are thus the remains of people that lived prior to major improvements in modern
              health care practices including the advent of antibiotics and epidemiological
              science, the widespread use of fluoride and other modern dental practices,
              improvements in the treatment of degenerative diseases such as arthritis, and
              the availability of vitamin supplements and other nutrition based improvements.
               The U-Iowa Stanford Collection thus provides an important new resource for
              physical anthropologists given the rapidly shrinking availability of human
              skeletal material in the United States, and adds significantly to the range of
              ethnic and regional variability encompassed in the other major collections
              (e.g., the Terry Collection, Smithsonian Institution, and the Hamann-Todd
              Collection, Cleveland Museum of Natural History).  These collections constitute
              the cornerstone research resource for many aspects of physical anthropology,
              and with the advent of new bone DNA extraction and analytical technology, the
              U-Iowa Stanford collection, in particular, promises to contribute widely to
              health-related research.  It is unlikely that such large, systematically
              amassed human skeletal collections could be obtained today, or ever will be
              again in the future.  The proper curation and research availability of those
              few that exist, therefore, is a high priority in physical anthropology and is
              the focus of the current project.



