Title       : Acquisition of a High-Resolution X-ray Diffractometer for Characterization of
               Epitaxial Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0076338

Award Number: 0076338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Switzer jswitzer@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076338
Switzer
    
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
              Research program and the Ceramics program will allow the University of Missouri
              Rolla to acquire a high resolution x-ray diffractometer for the study of
              electrochemically deposited epitaxial films of metal oxide semiconductors.  The
              instrument will be equipped with dual channel-cut monochromators, 100 mm
              scanning sample stage with motorized z-translation, texture goniometer, high
              dynamic range detector (0.15 to 1,300,000 cps), and a triple axis stage.  The
              instrument will perform tilt and azimuthal scans, rocking curves, and pole
              figures for texture analysis, and reciprocal space maps with the triple axis
              stage to separate the effects of strain and lattice tilt.  It will also be used
              to measure film thickness and interface roughness by low-angle x-ray
              reflectivity.  The diffractometer will be the main characterization tool for
              epitaxial films of metal oxide semiconductors such as cuprous oxide, bismuth
              oxide, zinc oxide, and ceric oxide deposited directly onto single crystal
              substrates such as gold, platinum, and silicon.  The films are deposited from
              aqueous solution at room temperature.  Both the out-of-plane and the in-plane
              orientation of the films relative to the substrate will be measured.
              Coincidence lattices often form due to the large lattice mismatch. The rotation
              of the film relative to the substrate will be measured by azimuthal scans and
              pole figures.  The large lattice mismatch causes many of these epitaxial films
              to form self-assembled ordered nanostructures that may show quantum confinement
              effects due to their small size. The instrument will be available for student
              training and education within an NSF REU program at university of Missouri
              Rolla.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program
              and the Ceramics program will allow the University of Missouri Rolla to acquire
              a high resolution x-ray diffractometer for the study of electrochemically
              deposited epitaxial films of metal oxide semiconductors. The films are
              deposited onto single crystal substrates such as silicon wafers using a very
              inexpensive and simple technique - electrodeposition.  Although
              electrodeposition has been used for many years to produce deposit films of
              metals, the deposition of metal oxide semiconductors is very new.  The
              diffractometer will be used to determine how the film is oriented on the
              single-crystal substrates.  Since the film, and substrate often have very
              different crystal structures, many of these films form self-assembled ordered
              nanostuctures in order to reduce strain. These nanometer-scale structures can
              be considered "designer solids," because the optical, electrical, and magnetic
              properties can be tuned by changing the size. The instrument will be available
              for student training and education within an NSF REU program at university of
              Missouri Rolla 




