Title       : Acquisition of a Near-Millimeter and Far-Infrared Fourier Transform Polarizing
               Spectrometer for Characterization of Novel Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0076150

Award Number: 0076150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice L. Musfeldt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076150
Musfeldt

This is an instrument acquisition award to State University
              of New York at Binghamton. The overall goal of this project is to set up a
              near-millimeter and far-infrared spectrometer, a dedicated high-sensitivity
              detector for the spectrometer, and the associated accessories for temperature
              dependent measurements over the frequency range of the instrument. Acquisition
              of this spectrometer will impact on-going programs in magnetic oxides,
              fullerene polymers, molecular magnets, and organic superconductors. It will
              also provide an important experimental compliment for the other spectroscopic
              capabilities that currently exist in my lab. In addition to supporting the
              low-energy spectroscopy of the aforementioned novel electronic and magnetic
              materials, the equipment will aid in the training of undergraduate, graduate,
              and postdoctoral students in the area of materials spectroscopy. 
***

This
              is an instrument acquisition award to State University of New York at
              Binghamton. The overall goal of this project is to set up a near-millimeter and
              far-infrared spectrometer, a dedicated high-sensitivity detector for the
              spectrometer, and the associated accessories for temperature dependent
              measurements over the frequency range of the instrument. In addition to
              supporting the low-energy spectroscopy of novel electronic and magnetic
              materials, the equipment will aid in the training of undergraduate, graduate,
              and postdoctoral students in the area of materials spectroscopy. 
%%%

