Title       : Ammonia Assimilation in the Chemoautotrophic Bacteria-Clam Symbiosis Solemya
               Velum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0076604

Award Number: 0076604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond W. Lee rlee@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Davitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Symbiosis with chemoautotrophic bacteria enables some marine invertebrates, such
              as clams, mussels, and tubeworms, to live without relying on particulate food
              for their nutrition.  Instead, these organisms are autotrophic.  They are able
              to fix carbon dioxide and ammonia into organic compounds using hydrogen sulfide
              as an energy source via a process analogous to photosynthesis in plants.  Many
              of the biochemical pathways of autotrophy are localized to intracellular
              symbionts housed within specialized cells of the host tissues.  Consequently,
              these invertebrates thrive in otherwise inhospitable or food-poor environments
              such as deep-sea hydrothermal vents, cold seeps, and anaerobic sediments.  The
              goal of this project is to determine the physiological and biochemical
              mechanisms that result in autotrophic metabolism.  This project will involve a
              readily collected coastal clam symbiosis, Solemya velum.  Previous studies have
              largely been of animals that are difficult to collect and maintain in the
              laboratory.  Experiments will focus on assimilation of ammonia into organic
              compounds and address specific questions including:  what are the ammonia
              uptake capabilities of S. velum, how is ammonia uptake affected by
              environmental conditions, what biochemical pathways are responsible for
              assimilation, and are these pathways localized to the host or symbiont?  These
              questions will be investigated using a combination of biochemical and molecular
              techniques as well as whole organism physiological studies using a newly
              designed automated flow-through respirometry system.            
              
Symbiosis-based autotrophy is a globally important process that can support
              entire ecosystems such as deep-sea vents or coral reefs.  This process results
              from mutualistic host/symbiont interactions that are not well understood in
              these and many other symbiotic systems.  A better understanding of the nature
              of these interactions and how they affect the characteristics and physiology of
              the association as a whole can be valuable in preserving and managing
              ecosystems that rely on symbiotic organisms.  This information potentially has
              even broader impacts, since association of bacteria (mutualistic and parasitic)
              with other organisms are ubiquitous.
