Title       : Critical Phonema In Composit Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a0076129

Award Number: 0076129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Golden golden@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A scientifically and technologically important class of
composite materials are
              those which exhibit a sharp transition in their
material and microstructural
              properties as some parameter is
varied near a critical point. One example with
              extremely rich
behavior is an electrorheological (ER) fluid, which is a
              
colloidal suspension of polarizable particles of high complex
dielectric
              constant, with typical sizes ranging from micron to
millimeter scales, in a
              viscous fluid of low complex dielectric
constant such as oil. The application
              of a strong electric field 
to such a suspension produces within milliseconds
              a dramatic
transition from an oily slurry to a solid-like state with
              an
increase in the viscosity of the suspension by many orders of
magnitude.
              For non-conducting dielectric spheres, the transition 
is characterized by the
              formation of chains which aggregate into
columns parallel to the field. For
              metal spheres, net-like
structures with fractal characteristics form. Recently
              the
investigator has introduced a way of applying the methods of
statistical
              mechanics to macroscopic problems in composite
media, for length scales much
              larger than the in the traditional
domain of statistical mechanics. In the
              research supported by this 
award, the investigator will develop these methods
              further and begin
applying them to study the critical properties of ER
              fluids,
particularly those with larger spheres where thermal effects
are
              negligible, and classical application of statistical
mechanics yields little
              information.


Materials such as electrorheological (ER) fluids which
              exhibit 
some type of marked transitional behavior appear throughout 
science
              and engineering, and are important in many technological 
applications. Other
              examples include sea ice, porous media 
such as sandstones and soils,
              particulate composites used in
smart devices and in conducting films for
              electromagnetic 
applications, and material failure due to fracture. The
              fluid/solid 
transition in ER fluids is a particularly interesting example of
              the 
type of critical behavior exhibited by these materials. The potential for
              rapid
electrical control of rheological properties has attracted
considerable
              attention to ER fluids, with applications including
clutches, pumps, brakes
              and shock absorbers. From a theoretical
standpoint, however, there remains
              much to be understood about 
the material behavior and properties near the
              transition. In the
proposed work the investigator will develop mathematical
              methods
for understanding the transition in ER fluids, as well as
              other
composite materials exhibiting critical behavior.

