Title       : Acquisition of a Variable-Temperature Scanning Probe Microscope System for
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0076485

Award Number: 0076485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rufina G. Alamo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Durbin  (Principal Investigator former)
              Peter N. Kalu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Justin Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Garmestani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation materials Research program to Florida State
              University is for the acquisition of a variable-temperature scanning probe
              microscope system. The instrument will be used for studying microstructures not
              only at the nano-scale but also on the meso-scale, particularly at high sample
              temperatures, with applications in thin film semiconductors, semi-crystalline
              polymers, high-temperature superconductors, and nanostructures of superplastic
              and precipitation hardening materials. Methods to extend the temperature range
              capability of atomic force microscopy (AFM) to temperatures in excess of 1500 K
              will be investigated by the addition of thermocouple sensors on the
              heat-sensitive probe assemblies, and modification of the sample mounting
              configuration to minimize the volume being heated.  This extremely large
              temperature range will provide scientists from FAMU-FSU College of Engineering
              with the opportunity to observe and investigate in-situ such phenomena as
              superconductor vortex structures, crystal reorientation, texture evolution,
              internal stress development and phase transformation. The information obtained
              from SPM may be used to complement the data acquired with other techniques, and
              thereby expand knowledge of the micromechanisms of deformation and phase
              transformation.  The surface atomic arrangement will be used to obtain texture
              in bulk materials, even at high temperatures. The instrument will be used for
              instruction at both the undergraduate and graduate level, providing the
              opportunity for students to work with a truly state-of-the-art instrument at
              the forefront of materials research.
%%%
This award from the Instrumentation
              materials Research program to Florida State University is for the acquisition
              of a variable-temperature scanning probe microscope system. The relatively new
              field of scanning probe microscopy has opened up an enormous number of
              opportunities for detailed atomic-scale study of dynamic surfaces.  The
              fundamental principle behind the technique is the precision electrical
              manipulation of a needle probe whose tip is less than one-thousandth the
              diameter of a human hair. Simply by changing the material of the needle probe,
              the instrument can be converted to respond to differences in magnetic field,
              temperature, electron density and even chemical reactivity- all on the atomic
              scale.  This instrument is capable of performing measurements on samples over
              the temperature range of 25 degrees above absolute zero, to over 1500 degrees.
              This remarkable temperature range will enable users to investigate a wide range
              of surface phenomena and material properties, including high temperature
              superconductors, shape-memory metallic alloys, high-purity semiconductors, and
              novel types of polymer materials.  The instrument will be maintained by the
              FAMU-FSU College of Engineering, a jointly managed program of Florida State
              University, and Florida A&M University, a Doctoral-granting historically black
              university.  Approximately 50% of the engineering students are minorities, and
              over 25% are women. The instrument will be used for instruction at both the
              undergraduate and graduate level, providing the opportunity for students to
              work with a truly state-of-the-art instrument at the forefront of materials
              research.
***


