Title       : Development of a Fiber Optic Infrared Spectrograph with Focal Plane Array
               Detection for Studying Materials during Processing and for use in
               Graduate/Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0076017

Award Number: 0076017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203759             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Rabolt rabolt@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mei-Wei Tsao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076017
Rabolt 
This GOALI proposal, which involves the University of Delaware
              and Dupont Corporate Research and & Development Lab, is jointly funded by the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and the Instrumentation for
              Materials Research program in DMR. The award  supports the development and
              construction of a fiber-optic IR spectrograph that uses an InSb focal plane
              array detector and, as such, has no moving parts. The dramatic success of FTIR
              over the last 30 years is directly attributable to the multiplex and throughput
              advantages offered by interferometric instrumentation. However the use of such
              scanning instruments in a process environment can significantly reduce if not
              eliminate these advantages, due to the elevated noise level which couples with
              the scanning mechanism of such instruments. With the advances in optical design
              and material technology, dispersive instruments can now compete with FTIR in
              terms of throughput while keeping the multiplex advantage. With zero moving
              parts, the noise can be time-averaged by the spectrograph design. For this
              reason we believe that such a portable dispersive focal plane array
              spectrograph may offer significant advantages for infrared spectroscopy in a
              process environment where sample fluctuation is common.

This GOALI proposal,
              which involves the University of Delaware and Dupont Corporate Research and &
              Development Lab, is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities in MPS and the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in
              DMR. The award supports the construction of a "first-of-its-kind" fiber optic
              IR spectrograph at the Materials Science and Engineering Department of the
              University of Delaware. This is a powerful analytical tool with no moving
              parts. It employs an ultrafast focal plane array detector for real-time studies
              of different chemical species. The success of this instrumentation project will
              enable an entire family of analytical tools that will find applications in
              on-line process monitoring, environmental protection and forensic sciences. The
              use of fiber optics and a focal plane array makes this infrared instrument
              portable, allowing it to be brought to the location of interests, e. g., to a
              production line of thin polymer films. In addition, The involvement of an
              industrial partner in this project is a good example of how a strong R & D
              project can provide a valuable experience for students who will spend part of
              their time doing research in an industrial laboratory, providing them with
              additional work-force-ready skills. The students and postdoctoral fellows
              involved in this projects will be exposed to both the state-of-the-art
              instrumentation and real-life industrial environment, which are both crucial
              educational components for a successful career in engineering.

