Title       : Upgrading of a Neutron Diffractometer at Los Alamos Neutron Science Center for
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0076488

Award Number: 0076488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeshi Egami egami@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Parise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Despina Louca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony K. Cheetham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon  J. L. Billinge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This instrument development award from the Instrumentation for Materials
              Pesearch program allows the to the university of Pennsylvania to upgrade the
              Neutron Powder Diffractometer (NPD) at the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center
              (LANSCE) to a world-class high-resolution diffractometer for materials research
              and education. With this upgrade the beamline will have a unique capability for
              simultaneous high-Q (momentum transfer) crystallographic analysis as well as
              the real-space atomic pair-density function (PDF) analysis. The data
              acquisition rate at high angles will increase by a factor of five by adding a
              large backscattering detector module, upgrade computers and install a
              beam-chopper. The upgrading of NPD will have wide-ranging educational impact.
              This fivefold increasing in the data collection rate will create more research
              opportunities for graduate students from five different institutions. Graduate
              students will also participate in the calibration task and development of
              software, and thus acquire precious experience of setting up a large instrument
              at a national facility.  This project will significantly contribute to
              increasing the university users.  
***

The power of pulsed neutron powder
              diffraction method in materials research is widely recognized. It is capable of
              determining the atomic structure of complex materials with high accuracy, thus
              providing basic information vital to materials science and technology. This
              award will allow the University of Pennsylvania to carry a very cost-effective
              upgrade of the Neutron Powder Diffractometer (NPD) at the Los Alamos Neutron
              Science Center (LANSCE) to a world-class high-resolution diffractometer for
              materials research and education. This will allow a dramatic  improvement of 
              the data collection rate, by a factor of five. Upgrading this beamline will
              have significant impact on graduate education and training at five different
              institutions. This will help contribute to overcome a critical shortage of
              trained scientists in neutron scattering in the US. The IMR award is
              significantly leveraged using funds from LANSCE.
%%%

