Title       : Acquisition of State-of-the-Art Instrumentation for Static and Dynamic Light
               Scattering Research/Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0076014

Award Number: 0076014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy W. Mays   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary M. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rigoberto C. Advincula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076014
Mays

An award is made to the University of Alabama at Birmingham
              (UAB) to purchase a ALV/DLS/SLS-5022F goniometer system.  This is a research
              grade instrument capable of performing simultaneous static and dynamic light
              scattering measurement and features an avalanche photodiode detector that
              allows high counting intensity while employing an inexpensive, low power (22mW)
              Helium-Neon laser.  It also features a very large useable angular range (12
              degrees to 155 degrees), temperature control from sub-ambient to 90 degrees C,
              and offers ease of alignment and superior software features.  This instrument
              will provide new infrastructure at UAB for research and education in the area
              of polymeric materials.  From a research perspective, this instrument will be
              extremely valuable in characterizing molecular weights, radii of gyration,
              virial coefficients, and hydrodynamic radii of various linear and branched
              polymers and copolymers and dendrimers being synthesized at UAB.  It also will
              provide a powerful means for characterizing polymer micelles, a research area
              of intense current interest in the Department of Chemistry.  In addition, this
              instrument will allow UAB to develop new teaching laboratories for both
              Biochemistry and Polymer Chemistry classes, thus exposing approximately forty
              students annually to the use of light scattering for characterizing natural and
              synthetic macromolecules.
***
This instrumentation award to the University of
              Alabama Birmingham is for the purchase of a state-of-the-art light scattering
              instrument for use in characterizing polymers, polymeric micelles, and
              dendrimers.  This instrument will provide new infrastructure at UAB for
              research and education in the area of polymeric materials.  From a research
              perspective, this instrument will be extremely valuable in characterizing
              masses and sizes of various linear and branched polymers and copolymers and
              dendrimers being synthesized at UAB.  It also will provide a powerful means for
              characterizing polymer micelles, a research area of intense current interest in
              the Department of Chemistry.  Overall, new and existing research programs of
              about thirty research scientists in the UAB Chemistry Department will be
              favorably impacted.  In addition, this instrument will allow new teaching
              laboratories for both Biochemistry and Polymer Chemistry classes, thus exposing
              approximately forty students annually to the use of light scattering for
              characterizing natural and synthetic macromolecules.
%%%




