Title       : Acquisition/Development of Apparatus for Ultrathin or Interfacial Semiconductor
               Layer Growth and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0076461

Award Number: 0076461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Osgood osgood@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This IMR award is for acquisition of an instrument that manipulates surface
              chemistry for new approaches to the growth of ultra-thin (~ one to tens of
              monolayers) layers. The instrument will be an UHV system equipped with dosers,
              supersonic nozzles, in situ probes, and a variable temperature substrate
              holder. The scope of the research includes both potential transition layers
              between substrate and epitaxial films, and ultra-thin layers between two
              epitaxial films. The instrument provides an important new capabilities for the
              Columbia University and will allow the Principal Investigator to conduct
              research on his DMR program DMR-99-03704, "Manipulation of Surface Reactions
              For Growth of Ultra-thin Films (1-20 ML)."  The research program attempts to
              apply recent advances in our understanding of detailed and fundamental
              semiconductor surface chemistry to the development of new approaches to the
              actual growth of ultrathin semiconductor and transition layers.  The materials
              chemistry studied will have implications both for conventional, molecular-based
              growth, and for fundamentally new approaches to growth.  The instrument will
              incorporate ultrahigh vacuum probes, both conventional and nonstandard, to
              interrogate the detailed surface chemistry, including, for example, the
              composition, bonding, and ordering of surface ligands and the reaction pathways
              of precursor molecules and surface species.

This is an instrument
              acquisition award to Columbia University. The new instrument will be used to
              perform in situ surface materials chemistry studies for ultrahigh vacuum growth
              of ultra-thin semiconductor layers.  The apparatus has two central goals: 1)
              collaborative research on new means for chemically forming ultra-thin
              interfacial layers and 2) graduate education on analytic tools for surface and
              materials study and for hands-on undergraduate training in experimental
              techniques.  Note that the proposed instrument is composed of both purchased
              and fabricated components and is thus a combination of the "acquisition" and
              "development" uses of the IMR Program.  The proposal provides an orderly plan
              for bringing this instrument on line and a tested plan for maintenance of this
              instrument. The instrument request includes 35% matching funds provided by
              Columbia University.



