Title       : Acquisition of the Specimen Preparation Equipment for Transmission Electron
               Microscopy for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0076512

Award Number: 0076512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70969              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Johnson wlj@hyperfine.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brent T. Fultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076512
Johnson

This an award is for the acquisition of a modern sample
              preparation equipment to prepare with minimum damage specimens of complex
              materials for transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The equipment will
              provide new opportunities and advance the current capability of the TEM
              facility at Caltech acquired earlier with NSF support. The new sample
              preparation equipment will allow reliable and controlled specimen preparation,
              and the reduction of specimen contamination in the electron microscope. It will
              facilitate investigations of micromechanisms of deformation in bulk metallic
              glasses, interfacial phenomena in composites and other fundamental properties
              of a wide range of materials. The equipment will see heavy use for a broad
              range of materials investigations currently and for materials research at
              Caltech over the next decade.  
***
This an award is for the acquisition of a
              modern sample preparation equipment to prepare with minimum damage specimens of
              complex materials for transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The equipment
              will provide new opportunities and advance the current capability of the TEM
              facility at Caltech acquired earlier with NSF support. The new sample
              preparation equipment will allow reliable and controlled specimen preparation,
              and the reduction of specimen contamination in the electron microscope. It will
              facilitate investigations of micromechanisms of deformation in bulk metallic
              glasses, interfacial phenomena in composites and other fundamental properties
              of a wide range of materials. The equipment will see heavy use for a broad
              range of materials investigations currently and for materials research at
              Caltech over the next decade.
%%%

