Title       : Economic Utility of Geophytes in the Intermountain West
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0076167

Award Number: 0076167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117717             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. O'Connell james.oconnell@anthro.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. James O'Connell will conduct
              research to determine the economic utility of non-domesticated geophytes (the
              underground storage organs of perennial plants) to reconstruct their potential
              role in prehistoric subsistence patterns. Based on ethnographic data it is
              clear that geophytes were widely eaten by hunting and gathering groups. Many in
              the US West incorporated multiple species into their diets. Scientists however
              do not know how much nutrition individual species provide, how difficult they
              are to obtain or how much energy must be expended to collect them. The extent
              to which benefits exceed costs is unknown. Through controlled experimentation
              Dr. O'Connell will address these issues. He and his colleagues will assemble a
              comprehensive data base on ethnographic patterns of geophyte exploitation
              throughout the Great Basin region and then conduct a series of experiments
              designed to quantify the costs of collecting and processing seven widely-used
              geophyte taxa. They will also generate new, more reliable data on the
              nutritional utility of these taxa. 

Recent research suggests that changes in
              geophyte exploitation may have been implicated in several key developments in
              human evolutionary history, from the emergence of Homo erectus to the
              appearance of intensified storage-based economies world-wide in the last ca
              150,000 years. Exploration of these changes has, until recently, been hampered
              by the difficulty of tracking geophyte use archaeologically. Advances in trace
              element and physical residue analysis promise to improve this situation,
              although the inductive nature of these techniques inevitably limits their
              results. The analytic framework of optimal foraging theory which Dr. O'Connell
              will employ should help circumvent this limitation since it provides a basis
              for developing theoretically well warranted potentially testable predictions
              about geophyte exploitation under a wide range of circumstances. The data which
              Dr. O'Connell collects will explore this potential though investigation of
              ethnographic and recent prehistoric geophyte use in the Intermountain West. It
              will then provide the basis for extrapolation further back into human
              prehistory.

