Title       : International Research Fellow Awards Program: Boundary Analysis of Mammal
               Densities in Protected, Pastoral and Agropastoral Landscapes in Western
               Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0076213

Award Number: 0076213
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Coppolillo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : P,Coppolillo
	      
	      Davis, CA  956168671    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5928,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0076213
Coppolillo

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide Dr. Peter Coppolillo
               with support for twenty-four months to work with Dr. Simon Mduma at the
              Serengeti Wildlife Research Centre in Tanzania.

The goal of this project is
              to understand the factors limiting species' distributions in semi-natural
              habitats.  The researchers will examine the effects of livestock grazing
              intensity (resource competition), human presence (interference competition),
              wood cutting (habitat modification), and landscape change from cultivation
              (fragmentation).  Specifically, they will structure sampling using a boundary
              model, which examines transitions between landscape units (protected, pastoral
              and agropastoral areas).  Data will be analyzed using multiple logistic
              regression and principal components  analysis.  This work will provide an
              important observational basis for understanding the effects of semi-natural
              matrix habitat on protected areas.  This will help disaggregate the factors
              affecting large mammal distributions and identify key variables for future
              experimental investigation.  Results will provide insights helpful to protected
              area management and for community-based conservation.

Dr. Mduma is director
              of the Serengeti Biodiversity Program (SBP) located in Arusha, Tanzania.  The
              location of this project, the Rukwa Valley is an ideal site because of its
              local salience and because it will provide important ecological data on an
              underrepresented ecosystem, Miombo woodlands. 
***

