Title       : Acquisition of a Rheometer Enhanced with Scattering and Imaging for Complex
               Fluids Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0076448

Award Number: 0076448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Stone has@stokes.deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Weitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frans Spaepen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mara G. Prentiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program allows
              Harvard University to acquire a rheometer enhanced with scattering and imaging
              for complex fluids research and education. One of the key features of all
              complex fluids is their response to stresses or strains; as with all "soft"
              materials, the larger scale structures that typify complex fluids make them
              more easily deformed and thus help define their most fundamental properties.
              Unfortunately, the relationship of microscopic properties to macroscopic
              response is still poorly understood for many important complex materials. Of
              particular interest here are the mechanical responses of foams and emulsions,
              colloidal suspensions, thin polymer films, and electrorheological suspensions.
              For example, concerning foams and emulsions, we will explore the influence on
              the bulk properties of the interfacial rheology of the surfactants used, the
              related interfacial elasticity, and the drainage of fluid from the interstitial
              space. In addition, researchers at Harvard University will investigate "jammed"
              states that dramatically influence the properties of weakly attractive
              colloidal suspensions. In order to examine these systems, they will develop
              instrumentation around a stress-controlled rheometer, which will be outfitted
              with two different optical probes: dynamic light scattering and a high-speed
              digital camera. This collaborative interdisciplinary research involves
              scientists from engineering, physics, and materials science.

This award from
              the Instrumentation for Materials Research program allows Harvard University to
              acquire a rheometer enhanced with scattering and imaging for complex fluids
              research and education. We are all familiar with solids, liquids, and gases.
              However, many other common materials have properties that are intermediate to
              those of simple liquids or simple solids. For example, consider a foam such as
              used for shaving or washing dishes. These materials undergo a finite strain
              when exposed to a small stress (it is easy to do this experiment for yourself),
              which is characteristic of a solid, but the constituents of the foam (mostly
              water and air) are both fluids! Of course, this response is influenced greatly
              by the surfactants (basically large macromolecules) that reside at the
              interface between the gas and liquid. Materials whose macroscopic properties
              depend crucially on the different constituents are commonly referred to as
              complex fluids, which includes foams and emulsions, electrorheological
              suspensions (materials that respond to electric fields), polymer solutions,
              polymer films, etc.  Because the macroscopic response is so dependent on the
              microscopic constituents, the proposed research will use modern optical and
              mechanical measurements to investigate further the world of complex fluids, and
              will elucidate more clearly the manner in which the microscopic and macroscopic
              properties are coupled.

