Title       : The Role and Regulation of Ethylene in the Cell Death Program of Maize Endosperm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0076434

Award Number: 0076434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346713             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd E. Young teyoung@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In cereal seeds, the starchy endosperm develops as a storage tissue that is
              fated to die prior to maturation but persists into the mature seed.  The
              progression of cell death in the endosperm of developing maize kernels occurs
              in a highly organized manner which is accompanied by a moderate increase in
              nuclease activity and internucleosomal fragmentation on the nuclear DNA.  The
              endosperm cell death program of wheat and maize is regulated, in part, by
              ethylene.  Consequently, the analysis of the genes responsible for the
              biosynthesis and perception of ethylene, as well as the nuclease responsible
              for DNA fragmentation will extend our understanding of the regulation of the
              cell death program in cereal endosperm.  The specific aims of this project are:
              (1) to investigate the expression of the ethylene biosynthetic and perception
              machinery during maize organ development and identify the endosperm-specific
              members of each gene family; (2) to determine the spatial and temporal
              regulation of the ethylene biosynthetic and perception machinery during the
              initiation and progression of the cell death program during endosperm
              development; (3) to isolate ACC synthase and ethylene receptor knock out
              mutants to genetically characterize the requirement for ethylene biosynthesis
              and perception for endosperm cell death; and (4) to characterize an
              endosperm-expressed nuclease and investigate its role in directing
              internucleosomal DNA fragmentation.  The expression studies will be carried out
              using RT-PCR and in situ RNA localization throughout the development of the
              maize endosperm.  Transposon-insertion mutagenesis has been used to generate
              mutants affecting ethylene biosynthesis which will be used for phenotypic
              analysis of ethylene during maize development.  The proposed experiments will
              represent a significant advancement in understanding a basic yet poorly
              understood aspect of cereal kernel development that will contribute to the
              improvement of cereal crops by providing a novel means to increase yield
              through extending the window of storage reserve deposition during cereal seed
              development.
