Title       : Senior Design Projects at SUNY Stony Brook to Aid Children with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0076310

Award Number: 0076310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79151              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiaode Jeffrey Ge qge@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fu-Pen Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0076310
Ge
This award provides opportunities for senior engineering students
              at SUNY Stony Brook to develop and deliver custom-made prototype assistive
              devices to improve the quality of life for a group of severely disabled
              children at nearby BOCES (Boards of Cooperative Educational Services of the
              State of New York) Forest Brook Learning Center. The five year program centers
              on a systematic approach to engineering design called "Total Design". The
              design approach requires the students to interact directly with their clients
              in order to develop the product design specifications based on the specific
              physical limitations of a physically challenged child and then carry out the
              design tasks systematically. 

Eight senior design projects are planned each
              year to develop prototype devices for the disabled. One of the areas emphasized
              in these projects is the development of "Adaptive Play Technology" for creating
              adapted devices and toys that are enjoyable, stimulating, and offer rewarding
              activities for the child. Another feature of the program is the participation
              of high school students from the "Young Scholar" program at SUNY Stony Brook. A
              summer workshop for local high school teachers is planned. 

The outcome of
              the program will include the prototype devices developed for the disabled
              children and a set of case study materials that high school Technology/Science
              educators could use to stimulate interests of high school students in
              engineering, and especially assistive technology for the disabled. The
              education outreach activity will be coordinated with the New York State
              Standards for Science and Technology. The case study materials will be
              subjected to the Peer Review process for possible inclusion in the web based
              American Association for the Advancement of Science MARCOPOLO collaboration.

