Title       : Acquisition of a Cold Cathode Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0076513

Award Number: 0076513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Lea Rudee rudee@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanna M. McKittrick  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jan B. Talbot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Kavanagh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Sailor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geert W. Schmid-Schoenbein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to the
              University of California San Diego is for the acquisition and installation of a
              cold cathode field emission gun scanning electron microscope(FEG-SEM) with
              analytical capabilities for the Electron Microscopy Facility of the Materials
              Science Program, part of the Jacobs School of Engineering at the University of
              California San Diego (UCSD).  The new instrument will enhance existing and new
              research projects currently active at UCSD in the engineering, physics and
              chemistry departments, as well as at the Scripps Institute of Oceanography. 
              The FEG-SEM will provide high beam stability, low energy fluctuation, low beam
              current and high brightness in a range of accelerating voltages, features that
              are required for imaging nanoscale features in electronic, magnetic, optical,
              structural, organic and biological materials.  The instrument will enhance both
              graduate and undergraduate research and education.  The graduate students will
              benefit from hands-on exposure to a state-of-the-art microscope that will aid
              significantly in their research projects. Undergraduates will particularly
              benefit from this class, as it will be offered to upper division students who
              have a materials emphasis in their major program (currently available in
              mechanical, electrical, physics and chemistry departments).

This award from
              the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to the University of
              California San Diego is for the acquisition and installation of a cold cathode
              field emission gun scanning electron microscope(FEG-SEM) with analytical
              capabilities for the Electron Microscopy Facility of the Materials Science
              Program, part of the Jacobs School of Engineering at the University of
              California San Diego (UCSD).  The proposed equipment will replace the existing
              Cambridge 360 SEM, now 10 years old, and provide state-of-the-art capabilities.
               This system currently supports the research programs of faculty from
              departments and research units campus wide. The Materials Science Program will
              manage the new SEM and it will be available to all UCSD affiliated personnel
              and the outside community on an hourly fee basis. 

The new instrument will
              enhance existing and new research projects currently active at UCSD in the
              engineering, physics and chemistry departments, as well as at the Scripps
              Institute of Oceanography (SIO). The FEG-SEM will provide imaging of detailed
              structures coupled with the elemental analysis capabilities; it is a crucial
              tool for modern materials research and for training the next generation of
              engineers and scientists.

The instrument will enhance both graduate and
              undergraduate research and education.  The graduate and undergraduate students
              will benefit from hands-on exposure to a state-of-the-art microscope. A
              graduate level course in scanning electron microscopy will be introduced yearly
              into the Materials Science curriculum and will be available to all graduate
              students at UCSD and SIO.  Undergraduates will particularly benefit from this
              class, as it will be offered to upper division students who have a materials
              emphasis in their major. In summary, the new instrument will provide a
              much-needed research and teaching tool by providing image and analytical
              capabilities not currently available to students on the UCSD campus.

