Title       : Formal and Empirical Analyses of Bureaucratic Delay: The Case of FDA Drug Review
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0076452

Award Number: 0076452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Carpenter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Why do bureaucrats delay?  Why do regulatory choices made under
              identical
administrative procedures exhibit highly varying decision times? 
              The
investigator conducts a formal and empirical analysis of the duration
              of
bureaucratic decisions, with applications to drug approval times by
              the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  The speed with which drugs
              are
reviewed is now one of the most controversial issues in federal
              regulation,
and is arguably the most salient case where the duration, more
              than the
content, of bureaucratic decision making is at issue. While the
              political
control of agencies has been well studied, relatively little is
              known about
why agencies wait, and whether the duration of agency decisions is
              subject
to political control and from what sources.

The project tackles
              this problem through the elaboration of a
generalizable formal model of the
              approval decision.  The investigator models
product approval as an optimal
              stopping decision by an uncertain
regulator subject to political demand for
              the drug.  The regulator seeks to
preserve a reputation for consumer
              protection and sees drug approvals as
irreversible (or reversible only at a
              significant reputation cost).  The
payoff of approval is also a function of
              the political "demand" for drug
approvals from consumers (patients) and
              producers (firms).  The model
predicts that even under risk-neutrality, quick
              approvals are highly
unlikely, not all drugs will be approved, and that larger
              firms receive
"protection" (quicker approvals) even when firms are not
              politically
organized.

The investigator tests this model using maximum
              likelihood
duration analyses of FDA drug review times.  The formal model
              suggests that
the proper hazard function for estimation is the inverse
              Gaussian
distribution, which has a non-monotonic hazard function.  Drug
              approval
times will be modeled as a function of political preferences,
              budgetary
shifts, media coverage and congressional hearings on the diseases
              treated
by the drug, and characteristics of the submitting firms. 
              Preliminary
results on a partial sample of 67 drugs approved from 1985 to 1995
              support
the model's predictions, and also suggest that political "control" in
              drug
approval occurs less through "principals" (Congress and the
              presidents)
than through organized interests (patients and firms) and the
              media.



