Title       : Strategies in Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0076287

Award Number: 0076287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296705             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Johnson-Laird phil@clarity.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the reasoning of adults untrained in logic.  When
              such individuals tackle a series of logical problems, they spontaneously
              develop different strategies for going about the task; that is, they come to
              rely on different sequences of mental steps to make inferences.  Some
              individuals, for instance, try to keep track of all the possibilities
              compatible with the premises, while others try to concatenate the premises into
              a complex conclusion, and still others follow up the consequences of a single
              possibility.  There are also other sorts of strategy, and they all have a
              profound impact on logical performance.  The first step in the research will
              therefore be to trace the development of strategies, to examine their effects
              on logical accuracy and speed of response, and to attempt to gain experimental
              control over which strategies participants are likely to develop.  The research
              will test predictions from Johnson-Laird's theoretical account of how reasoners
              discover strategies, which is based on his earlier theory of mental models. 
              One of its predictions is that the process of strategy discovery is biased by
              the possibilities compatible with the premises.  Experiments will test this
              prediction, along with others made by the theory.  The second step in the
              research will be to apply the strategic theory to teaching people to improve
              their reasoning.  The pedagogical aim for this step is to devise a strategy
              that can be taught in a few minutes, that enhances performance, and that can be
              carried out without the use of pencil and paper.  The intellectual aim is to
              throw further light on strategic thinking.  The third step in the research will
              be to apply the new theory to the study of complex inferential problems from
              everyday life.  Although such problems are outside the scope of current
              psychological theories of reasoning, the ability to cope with them correlates
              with intelligence and is crucial for success in academia, science, and
              business.  The project should yield a deeper understanding of the development
              of strategies in reasoning, an effective pedagogical aid, and an account of the
              mental processes underlying reasoning in daily life.
