Title       : Development of a Quantitative Electrostatic Force Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0076486

Award Number: 0076486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry A. Atwater haa@daedalus.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Flagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              

0076486
Atwater

This grant will help develop quantitative electrostatic
              force scanning probe 
microscopy.  The project includes modification of a
              commercial ultrahigh 
vacuum scanning probe microscope and development of new
              electrostatic force 
microscopy simulation software.  The program comprised
              both ultrahigh 
vacuum electrostatic force microscopy measurements and
              development and 
testing of finite element electrostatic simulation software
              describing 
tip-sample interactions, including van der Waals and electrostatic
              force 
contributions .  This will enable more quantitative understanding of
              
nanometer-scale charge distributions and low mobility electronic 
transport.
               The immediate scientific use for the instrument will be in a 
collaborative
              Caltech/Bell Labs/NASA-JPL multi-investigator research 
program aimed at
              probing charge injection and storage in silicon 
nanoparticle structures for
              nonvolatile memory applications.  Information 
and software needed to perform
              quantitative EFM will be disseminated to the 
materials research
              community.

Electrically insulating thin films are critical and ubiquitous
              components 
of electronic devices such as integrated circuits and
              micromechanical 
devices.  Trapping of electronic charge, whether by design or
              as an 
unintended effect, is a common characteristic of insulating thin films.
               It 
is desirable to be able to quantitatively measure the extent of and
              
mechanisms for charge trapping in order to better understand the
              
performance and reliability of insulating thin films.  Scanning probe
              
microscope techniques such as electrostatic force microscopy have opened a
              
new vista in the understanding charge trapping in insulators because they
              
enable measurement at nanometer-scale spatial resolution and total charge
              
sensitivity down to the single electron level.  To date, such electrostatic
              
force microscopy measurements have been used as a qualitative but not a
              
quantitative tool for understanding charge trapping in insulators.  This
              
project aims to put the electrostatic force microscopy method on a firm
              
quantitative foundation, through a combination of measurements and
              
development of simulation software needed for quantitative 
understanding. 
              The results will be applied to characterize charge trapping 
in nonvolatile
              floating gate memory device materials containing 
semiconductor nanocrystals. 
              These materials and the devices made with them 
are very promising candidates
              for the next-generation of ultradense, 
low-power nonvolatile "flash" memory
              chips like those now used widely in 
portable electronic devices such as
              wireless telephones, pagers, electronic 
cameras and personal digital
              assistants.

