Title       : Acquisition of Optical Access Superconducting Magnet System for Materials
               Physics Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a0076466

Award Number: 0076466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77299              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea Markelz amarkelz@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Cerne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Athos Petrou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. McCombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076466
Markelz

This grant supports the acquisition and use of a versatile,
              optical-access, high-field (10T), split-coil superconducting magnet system for
              experimental investigations of quantum dots and quasi-two-dimensional excitons
              in semiconductors, and the dynamical conductivity of high Tc superconductors.
              This research is directed at achieving an understanding of several outstanding
              physics problems: 1) Internal transitions of excitons in lateral fluctuation
              quantum dots in GaAs/AlGaAs, 2) dynamics of photoexcited neutral excitons in
              GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wells, and 3) the dynamical conductivity and relaxation
              times in high temperature superconductors (HTSC) in the mid-infrared and
              terahertz regions of the spectrum.  An improved understanding of the behavior
              of the fundamental optical excitation of low-dimensional semiconductor
              structures, the exciton, which may be important in implementations of quantum
              computation, is also expected to be developed from these studies.  In addition,
              this research will provide insight into one of the fundamental conundrums of
              high temperature superconductor materials, the apparent non-Fermi liquid
              transport behavior in the normal state.

This project supports the
              acquisition of a high magnetic field, optical access, cryogenic system to
              enable unique optical studies of materials systems of fundamental and
              technological interest using our existing versatile optical systems that range
              in frequency from the microwave to the ultra violet.  We will initially focus
              on two materials systems: 
quantum confined electronic structures in
              semiconductors and high temperature superconductors.  This research is directed
              at achieving an understanding of several outstanding physics problems: 1)
              Internal transitions of excitons in quantum dots in GaAs/AlGaAs, 2) dynamics of
              photoexcited neutral excitons in GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wells, and 3) the
              dynamical conductivity and relaxation times in high
              temperature
superconductors (HTSC) in the mid-infrared and terahertz regions
              of the spectrum.  These studies will improve present day understanding of the
              behavior the fundamental optical excitations of low-dimensional semiconductor
              structures, which may be important in implementations of quantum computation.  
              In addition, this research will provide insight into the origins of high
              temperature superconductivity.

