Title       : Development of an Atomic Resolution Analytical Transmission Electron Microscopy
               Facility for Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0076501

Award Number: 0076501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan J. Jacobson ajjacob@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne Stemmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076501
Jacobson

This is an instrument acquisition award to upgrade a user
              facility and provide a new capability at the University of Houston and at Rice
              University. With this new capability, variations in the chemistry and the
              composition of materials can be detected, even if these changes occur within
              less than one nanometer within the material. The key to the new technique is
              the ability to form very small electron probe (less than 0.2 nanometer in
              diameter) and the ability to precisely position and control the probe.
              Electrons transmitted through the material contain information about the
              chemistry of the material at the location of the electron probe. This new
              capability allows researchers to analyze these electrons. These electrons can
              also be used to generate a "compositional" image of the material, in addition
              to the "structural" image. It is anticipated that the close collaboration
              between the users at the University of Houston and at Rice University initiated
              with this proposal will lead to transfer of knowledge in modern electron
              microscopy techniques benefiting the education of undergraduate and graduate
              students. Educational opportunities will be provided as formal courses in
              electron microscopy including a laboratory component and through multi-user
              materials characterization facility (MCF) research experience programs. MCF is
              also an important component in this educational outreach programs designed to
              increases K12 student interest and achievement in science and provide
              opportunities for the development of teachers.  
***
This is an instrument
              acquisition award to upgrade a user facility and provide a new capability at
              the University of Houston and at Rice University. With this new capability,
              variations in the chemistry and the composition of materials can be detected,
              even if these changes occur within less than one nanometer within the material.
              The key to the new technique is the ability to form very small electron probe
              (less than 0.2 nanometer in diameter) and the ability to precisely position and
              control the probe. Electrons transmitted through the material contain
              information about the chemistry of the material at the location of the electron
              probe. This new capability allows researchers to analyze these electrons. These
              electrons can also be used to generate a "compositional" image of the material,
              in addition to the "structural" image. It is anticipated that the close
              collaboration between the users at the University of Houston and at Rice
              University initiated with this proposal will lead to transfer of knowledge in
              modern electron microscopy techniques benefiting the education of undergraduate
              and graduate students. Educational opportunities will be provided as formal
              courses in electron microscopy including a laboratory component and through
              multi-user materials characterization facility (MCF) research experience
              programs. MCF is also an important component in this educational outreach
              programs designed to increases K12 student interest and achievement in science
              and provide opportunities for the development of teachers.
%%%

