Title       : Acquisition of a Fatigue Crack Growth/Fracture Toughness System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0076078

Award Number: 0076078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89377              (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar S. Es-Said oessaid@lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      One LMU Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an instrument acquisition award to Loyola Marymount University in Los
              Angeles. A Fatigue Crack Growth/Fracture Toughness System will be purchased.
              The instrument will be used to study Stress-Corrosion-Crack (SCC) growth rates
              of various aluminum alloys.  Specifically, the Fatigue Crack Growth/Fracture
              Toughness System is a critical piece of equipment which, in combination with
              other equipment, will be used to study the effect of retrogression and re-aging
              on 6xxx and 7xxx series aluminum alloys in muffle furnaces.  Successful results
              will produce weight savings, a great benefit to aluminum industries.

This is
              an instrument acquisition award to Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles.
              A Fatigue Crack Growth/Fracture Toughness System will be purchased. The
              instrument will be used to study Stress-Corrosion-Crack (SCC) growth rates of
              various aluminum alloys.  Undergraduate students will be taught the background
              of fracture mechanics and how to use the Fatigue Crack Growth/Fracture
              Toughness System.  Additionally, the undergraduate students will learn the
              background of retrogression and re-aging and the significance of the success of
              this work.  After completing the curriculum and sample experiments, the
              students will then incorporate the results of testing on this system with the
              results of other experiments, namely, heat treatments, tensile testing, and
              electrical resistivity determination. 
 


