Title       : Development of Spectroscopic Instrumentation for Research and Student Training
               Involving Confined Fluids and Friction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0076392

Award Number: 0076392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Granick sgranick@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076392
Granick

This is an instrument development award to the University of
              Illinois Urbana-Champaign. The PI will develop a new instrument for
              spectroscopic studies of confined fluids. Prior work on confined fluids by
              force-based methods now poses scientific questions that require spectroscopic
              study for definitive answer.  This will be the first such experimental platform
              for integrated spectroscopic and force-based measurements and will take
              advantage of the fact that modern laser instrumentation has advanced to the
              point that it can be used productively for materials research by students who
              are relatively unsophisticated in ultrafast lasers, yet expert in nanorheology.
               Specifically, an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) pumped by a femtosecond
              laser will be needed to (a) generate time-resolved vibrational spectra using
              sum frequency generation (SFG) with broad-band detection for heightened time
              resolution;  and (b) measure, using time-resolved fluorescence depolarization
              (FD) after two-photon excitation, molecular rotational times when the thickness
              of fluid films becomes comparable to the size of molecules
              themselves.
***
This is an instrument development award to the University of
              Illinois Urbana-Champaign. A new instrument for spectroscopic studies of
              confined fluids will be developed. Micro and nano-devices will have enormous
              impact on next generation technology. This new ultra small technology will
              significantly improve the performance of already existing robots, computers,
              communication, and other electro/opto/mechanical devices. While initial efforts
              have been principally devoted to the fabrication and electrical performance,
              recent studies have discovered a profound deleterious influence of friction and
              wear on the efficiency, power output, and steady state speed of micro-dynamics
              devices. Friction imposes serious constraints and limitations on the
              performance and lifetime of micro-machines and, undoubtedly, will impose even
              more severe constraints on the emerging technology of nano-machines. To make
              the needed future advances in micro- and nano-technology, a fundamental
              understanding of the operational, friction, and wear characteristics is
              paramount.  Reducing wear and friction has a profound economic impact. By most
              recent estimates, improved attention to friction and wear would save developed
              countries up to 1.6% of their gross national product - over $100 billion
              annually in the United States alone.  The expected outcome of this new
              instrumentation will be to leapfrog our ability to define, predict, and control
              frictional properties of sliding nano-objects.  It will cut across traditional
              disciplinary lines;  it will train engineers to take a chemical point of view
              and will train chemists and physicists to work productively in the field of
              friction.



