Title       : Regulation of Cdc42-Dependent Signaling Pathways Throughout the Cell Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a0076826

Award Number: 0076826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas I. Johnson dijohnso@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The long-term objective of this project is to understand the
              signal-transduction mechanisms that control cellular morphogenesis during the
              eukaryotic cell cycle. Normal morphogenesis is essential for the fidelity of
              cellular differentiation and reproduction. The goal of this project is to
              decipher the signal-transduction mechanisms that control the cell polarity
              process in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Polarized growth in response to
              different signals during the yeast cell cycle can result in the generation of
              several different morphological structures, such as buds, mating projections,
              and pseudohyphae. The principal investigator has previously characterized two
              protein components of the cell polarity apparatus in yeast; the Ras-related
              GTPase Cdc42p and its guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Cdc24p. These
              components are integral parts of a signal-transduction pathway that leads to
              the generation of cell polarity during the cell cycle. These components have
              conserved counterparts in other eukaryotes, suggesting that common
              signal-transduction mechanisms controlling cell polarity may exist. The goal of
              this project is directed at understanding the regulation of the Cdc42p GTPase
              and how it interfaces with different cell-cycle regulatory processes. The
              hypothesis that will be tested with these proposed experiments is: The Cdc42p
              GTPase regulates multiple cell-cycle events through interactions with different
              downstream effectors. Analysis of Cdc42p effector domain mutations has
              indicated that Cdc42p is involved in multiple processes during the mitotic cell
              cycle, including bud emergence, a early post-bud emergence checkpoint, the
              apical-isotropic switch, the G 2 /M morphogenetic checkpoint, and cytokinesis.
              However, the molecular mechanisms by which Cdc42p interacts with multiple
              downstream effectors to regulate these processes is still unclear. The function
              of Cdc42p in these multiple cell-cycle events will be examined, concentrating
              on the early post-bud emergence checkpoint, through the characterization of the
              D38E mutant allele and new Cdc42 effector-domain mutants. In addition, the
              mechanism by which Cdc42p is targeted to sites of polarized growth will be
              determined, through the mutational analysis of a functional GFP-Cdc42 fusion
              protein. The answers to these questions will not only be relevant to the basic
              understanding of signal-transduction mechanisms in cell biology, but also to
              the understanding of the cellular morphogenesis process in yeast and other
              eukaryotes. 

