Title       : Acquisition of a Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS) System for Research and
               Education in Nanostructured Materials Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0076498

Award Number: 0076498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique J. Lavernia   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076498 
Lavernia

This award to the University of California at Irvine is
              for the acquisition an equipment for Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENSTM model
              750) process, for the direct fabrication of nanostructured coatings/laminate
              composites.  The LENS process utilizes computer-aided design solid models to
              automatically control the manufacture of functional, near-net shape, fully
              dense coatings metallic parts with reasonably complex features. Moreover, the
              LENSTM technique is unique in its flexibility for the direct fabrication of a
              component over conventional processing as well as Rapid Prototyping (RP)
              technologies, including the ability to create an "embedded" structure, superior
              material properties for a comparable wrought material, and minimum waste.   The
              research will establish the fundamental issues underlying the fabrication of
              nanostructured coatings/laminate composites based one firm and detailed
              understanding of the relevant fundamental phenomena.  One example is the
              unusual thermal stability inherent to certain types of nanostructured
              materials.  Critical issues in nanostructured coating and/or layered structural
              materials fabricated by LENSTM technology will be addressed. By varying powder
              mixture and using multiple powder feeders, the LENSTM facility will be used to
              fabricate a functionally gradient coating and laminate composites from a
              variety of materials.  The PI 's will fabricate functionally gradient
              nanostructured coatings/laminates, and investigate the related fundamental
              phenomena (i.e., interfacial bonding, thermal stress, and grain size and
              growth) as well as mechanical properties will be investigated.
%%%

This is
              an instrument acquisition award to the University of California at Irvine. 
              Professor Lavernia and collaborators will purchase a LENSTM model 750 for Laser
              Engineered Net Shaping process, for the direct fabrication of nanostructured
              coatings/laminate composites. Significant interest has been generated recently
              in the field of nanostructured (also described as nanocrystalline, nanophase,
              or nanoscale) materials, in which the grain size is usually in the range of
              1-100 nanometers.  More than 50 volume percent of atoms in nanocrystalline
              materials may be associated with grain boundaries or interfacial boundaries
              when the grain size is small enough.  Thus, a significant amount of interfacial
              component between neighboring atoms associated with grain boundaries
              contributes to the physical properties of nanocrystalline materials.  Interest
              in this class or materials is driven by their unusual physical properties, such
              as a very high strength and thermal stability.  In the case of nanostructured
              coatings, the potential applications span the entire spectrum of technology,
              from thermal barrier coatings for turbine blades to wear resistant rotating
              parts.  The new instrument will strengthen the interdiciplinary training of
              undergraduate and graduate students at UCI.  

