Title       : Ligand Control in CVD of Nanostructured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0076141

Award Number: 0076141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne L. Gladfelter gladfelt@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professor Wayne Gladfelter of the University of Minnesota-Twin
              Cities is a renewal of an earlier award and is supported by the Advanced
              Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry Division and the Electronic
              Materials Program in the Division of Materials Research.  The focus of the
              research will be to study the chemical vapor deposition of mono- and multimetal
              oxide films from anhydrous metal nitrates.  The award also will evaluate the
              ligand controlled kinetics and microstructure mechanism of the deposition
              processes, and studies to determine relationship between the deposition
              mechanism.  Another component of the award is the study of atomic layer
              chemical vapor deposition of multicomponent oxide.  In addition, the research
              will provide training to students in an important interdisciplinary area of
              materials chemistry.

This award will study the ligand controlled kinetics
              and microstructure mechanism of the deposition processes, and studies to
              determine relationship between the deposition mechanism and film composition
              during the chemical vapor deposition.  Various thin metal oxide films will be
              prepared by chemical vapor deposition and atomic layer chemical vapor
              deposition under this program and these amorphous high dielectric materials may
              be used for the fabrication of thin films with tunable electronic and photonic
              properties.  In addition, the research program will provide a rich
              multidisciplinary education and training opportunity to students in material
              chemistry.
