Title       : Magnetic Properties of Molecular and Rutheno-Cuprate Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0076331

Award Number: 0076331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Naughton naughton@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a professor at Boston College for an
              experimental research project that focuses on the electromagnetic and
              thermodynamic properties of two classes of low dimensional systems in which
              superconductivity and magnetism compete, or even coexist.  These properties
              will be investigated at low temperatures and high magnetic fields.  In one
              case, critical information on the pairing symmetry in the superconducting state
              of linear chain molecular conductors (TMTSF)_X will be sought. Previous
              research has provided strong evidence that these materials, whose
              superconducting phase is in close competition with an antiferromagnetic spin
              density wave, are p-wave triplet superconductors. If so, then there would be no
              Zeeman pair-breaking mechanism to destroy superconductivity in a magnetic
              field.  In addition, there exists the possibility that the orbital
              pair-breaking effect can be reduced or eliminated, which means that the
              superconducting state would persist to extremely high fields.  In this project,
              one post-doc and two graduate students will be involved in extending previous
              work to 50% higher field and 1/5th the temperature of previous efforts, in
              search of definitive evidence for triplet pairing and reentrant
              superconductivity.  In the second case, the hybrid ruthenate-cuprate magnetic
              superconducting system, a possibility also exists for high field
              superconductivity, but perhaps by a different mechanism.  These materials have
              alternating superconducting and antiferromagnetic (with weak ferromagnetic
              order) layers, providing a unique setting to test the antagonistic relationship
              between the two broken symmetry states of magnetism and superconductivity.  The
              experiments will be performed in a new laboratory facility at Boston College
              housing several new high field magnets and dilution refrigerators.  The
              students involved in this project will learn techniques that will prepare them
              for positions in academic, governmental, or industrial research.
%%%
It has
              long been established that magnetism destroys all superconductivity.  For
              example, the superconducting magnets that power modern MRI machines are limited
              in strength (and thus sensitivity and resolution) due to the fact that the very
              field created in the magnet's windings diminishes the wire's ability to carry
              current.  There may be ways around this suicidal tendency of superconductors,
              however.  In certain low dimensional geometries, namely in situations where the
              superconducting electrons are confined to planes (like the pages of a book) or
              even individual chains (like the lines on a page), the possibility exists for
              the superconducting state to regain its strength, and to persist in fields well
              beyond conventional expectations.  This individual investigator award to a
              professor at Boston College is for a project that will investigate this
              possibility in certain low dimensional materials, where previous work (on
              so-called "molecular superconductors") has shown an exciting tendency for
              enhanced superconductivity in very strong magnetic fields.  It turns out that
              these materials are ones in which superconductivity and magnetism "compete"
              against each other on a nanoscopic scale, a fact that may prove important in
              the realization of high field superconductivity and, eventually, the
              fabrication of ultra-high field magnets.  The graduate student and postdoc
              involved in this project will learn techniques that will prepare them for
              positions in academic, governmental, or industrial research.
***

