Title       : FRG: Morphological Electronic and Chemical Structure of Lattice-Mismatched III-V
               Heterojunctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0076362

Award Number: 0076362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $962393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Brillson brillson.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Wilkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan P. Pelz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Ringel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This FRG project involves a cross-disciplinary group of PIs to explore
              underlying properties that dictate ultimate device-viability of
              lattice-mismatched heterojunctions. Lattice mismatch not only determines the
              growth morphology but also affects thermodynamic stability, creation of
              localized electronic states, and transport barriers at band edge
              discontinuities. Techniques for lattice matching lattice-mismatched materials
              can manipulate electronic and optical properties on an atomic scale. Control of
              these issues may remove constraints imposed by standard materials (e.g., GaAs
              and InP) on the functionality attainable from the full range of semiconductor
              materials. The perceived challenges are to achieve planar growth and thermal
              compatibility with simultaneous control of mechanical, chemical, and electronic
              structure. The inter-relationships between these properties and growth
              parameters must be understood at a fundamental level to achieve significantly
              greater utilization of lattice-mismatched heterostructures. The project strives
              to not only understand each set of properties, but also to discover how they
              result from specific variations in growth conditions. The approach incorporates
              (i) growth by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), (ii) direct measurement of the
              atomic structure of the created materials, (iii) in-situ and ex-situ
              measurements of electronic, atomic-scale and optical properties, and (iv)
              theoretical calculations of electronic structure of the actual materials. A few
              model systems based on III-V compounds were chosen both for the technological
              importance of these material systems in advanced devices and as precisely
              controlled sample sets necessary to interpret the measurements and
              calculations. The project focus is primarily on InAlAs, InGaAs and InAsP
              mismatched heterostructures grown on InP, InGaP and InAlP grown on GaAs, and a
              few choice binary combinations of varying misfit to provide precisely
              controlled measurement data for correlation with theoretical calculations of
              properties. 
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
              area of materials science with high technological relevance. The project builds
              on recent advances in representative heterojunction systems, while adding new
              capabilities for characterizing electronic properties of mismatched films as
              they evolve with growth. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the
              research is expected to contribute to improving semiconductor materials
              performance in current and future device and circuit applications. An important
              feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              The multidisciplinary (materials science, electrical engineering, physics)
              nature of this FRG project offers unique educational opportunities for students
              to experience a teamwork-oriented research environment. 
***

