Title       : International Research Fellow Award: Programmed Structural Order in Functional
               Dendrimer Protein Mimics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a0076184

Award Number: 0076184
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald K. Castellano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,Castellano
	      TSRI 10550 N. Torrey Pines Rd.
	      MB-26, La Jolla, CA  92037    619/640-7831

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5950,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0076184
Castellano

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers 
to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards 
provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary 
facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide Dr. Ronald K.
              Castellano with support for twenty-four months to 
work with Dr. Francois
              Diederich at Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule (ETH) in 
Zurich,
              Switzerland.  This project is being co-funded by NSF's Directorate for
              
Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.

This project involves the study of programmed structural order
              in functional dendrimer 
protein mimics.  Dendrimers are
              symmetrically-branched molecules.  In biological 
systems, secondary and
              tertiary protein structures work cooperatively to modulate the 
enzyme active
              site by exposing functionality and providing substrate accessibility.  As a
              
next step toward functional, dendrimer-based protein mimics this research
              will address 
control over dendrimer surface and branching structure.  The
              proposed coiled coil 
dendrimers will be a new class of synthetic protein
              model systems that combine both 
structural and functional elements and will
              represent the first peptide-containing 
dendrimers to demonstrate well-defined
              and tunable structural order.

Dr. Castellano's project will complement
              ongoing research at Dr. Diederich's lab, on 
functional dendrimers for
              recognition and catalysis and promises to help work toward 
major advances in
              the field of dendritic biological mimics. Dr. Diederich has nearly 20 
years
              of experience in molecular recognition and supramolecular architectures.  He is
              a 
leader in biomimetic dendrimer chemistry.  The ETH will provide a unique
              melding of 
biological and chemical sciences making it the ideal place to this
              bioorganic research 
project.  This research will have impacts in fields such
              as biochemistry, specifically 
biometric synthetic chemistry and in self
              assembly of nanoscale materials.


***

