Title       : LTREB: Long-Term Studies of Population and Community Ecology in an
               Experimentally Fragmented Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0076064

Award Number: 0076064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Martinko martinko@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin P. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan L. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman A. Slade  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0076064
Holt
Understanding the implications of patchiness and spatial dynamics
              is fundamental to many issues in ecology, including many applied problems. This
              is particularly true of habitat fragmentation, which is a dominant feature of
              global change. A long-term experiment on habitat fragmentation is underway in
              the prairie-forest ecotone of eastern Kansas aimed at examining the impact of
              fragmentation on secondary succession, defined broadly to include key consumer
              groups, as well as plant dynamics. The physical layout of the experiment
              (initiated in 1984) is an archipelago of habitat patches in a large mown field.
              During the first phases of the project, there wre dramatic patch size effects
              on the distribution of small mammals, but no overall effect of patch size on
              succession. By 1993, colonization of woody plants was beginning to accelerate.
              It was hypothesized that this would lead to patch size effects on succession.
              This hypothesis has been borne out: the rate of succession towards woody
              vegetation has increased with patch size and decreased with distance from
              woodland source pools. There has been corresponding succession and spatial
              shifts in the small mammal community, and small mammals have been shown to
              inflict considerable damage on woody seedlings. In 1998 there was a
              serendipitous emergence of 17-year periodical cicadas, which imposed high
              levels of damage, with more damage in large patches. Monitoring of plant and
              small mammal dynamics will continue to determine the persistence of patch size
              and distance effects on successional trajectories. Because a large number of
              individually marked woody samplings exists, the demographic consequences of
              succession on woody species can be characterized, including the potential
              impact of the cicada emergence event on sapling demography. This project is
              unique in that no experimental studies of succession exist in which patch size
              effects on plant and animal dynamics have been measured.

