Title       : Structure, Energetics and Phase Behavior in Polyelectrolyte-Colloid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0076068

Award Number: 0076068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Dubin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The interactions between polyelectrolytes and small oppositely charged colloids
              are manifested in some important biological and technological phenomena.  In
              order to rationalize these observations and current theory, experiments on
              well-defined model systems are essential.  Such experiments will be carried out
              on polyelectrolytes in combination with three classes of well-defined synthetic
              colloid particles - mixed micelles, dendrimers, and carboxylated Ficoll
              fractions - and also with proteins.  Polymer MW, linear charge density and
              chain stiffness will be varied systemically, along with colloid size and
              charge.  A wide range of techniques, including turbidimetry and total
              intensity, electrophoretic light scattering, QELS, fluorescence recovery after
              photobleaching, SANS, time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy and rheology will
              be used to answer questions about the energetics of interaction, the structure
              of soluble complexes, and phase behavior.
%%%
In addition to addressing
              fundamental questions and linking theory with experiment, the work will be of
              relevance to problems in (1) chemical technology, (2) cell biology, and (3)
              environmental issues, as follows.  (1) Polyelectrolyte-colloid interactions are
              central to stabilization and flocculation in: water treatment, paper-making,
              and preceramics. (2) Non-specific polyion-protein association may be an
              important phenomenon controlling the role of proteoglycans in the extracellular
              matrix.  (3) Complexes between polyelectolytes and micelles adsorbed on
              sand/soil may serve as barriers in the aquiferous migration of apolar
              pollutants.  Students involved in this work will be exposed to a highly
              multidisciplinary approach that spans theory and applications.

