Title       : Acquisition of Optical Parametric Oscillator, Monochromator and Multiscaler for
               Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0076322

Award Number: 0076322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan N. Houde-Walter shw@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary W. Wicks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis G. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076322
Houde-Walter

The Institute of Optics at the University of Rochester
              is building an excitation spectroscopy laboratory for research in new optical
              sources utilizing nano-engineered optical materials.  An optical parametric
              oscillator, monochromator and multiscaler will be used in four research
              programs and two undergraduate/graduate training labs.  Energy transfer will be
              studied using excitation spectroscopy to refine laser rate equation models and
              help to determine the best host composition and doping levels in rare-earth
              doped nano-glasses.  In a related teaching lab exercise, students will observe
              cooperative luminescence in Yb-doped glasses, as is currently practiced in
              optical amplifier research.  In another project, radiative impurity complexes
              will be introduced into silicon-on-insulator (SOI) structures that exhibit
              enhanced absorption/emission via nanostructured surfaces. Excitation
              spectroscopy will be used to elucidate the microscopic processes that determine
              emission cross sections in the hybridized SOI structures.  Photoluminescence
              (PL) spectroscopy will be used to explore phonon mode control in isotopically
              pure crystalline Si. The new lab will permit the excitation of high spatial
              densities of indirect excitons, which may result in coherent phonon emission. 
              Group III-V quantum dots, as made by in-situ laser patterning during
              molecular-beam epitaxial (MBE) growth, will also be investigated.  Resonant
              excitation will be used to probe quantum dots of very narrow size distributions
              and may indicate the limit of what might be eventually achieved with an
              ensemble of uniform features.  In a related lab, undergraduate students will
              investigate the absorption spectra of bulk crystals with various bandgaps (Si
              or GaAs, GaP, and GaN or diamond) as well as quantum well and dot group III-V
              semiconductors grown in our MBE lab.  Honors students will also be encouraged
              to use the new lab for independent projects during their senior year.
***
The
              Institute of Optics at the University of Rochester, which grants Bachelors,
              Masters and doctoral degrees in Optical Science and Engineering, is building a
              new optical spectroscopy lab for research and training.  New optical materials
              that utilize features on the nanometer (one billionth of
a meter) scale, will
              be emphasized.  New training exercises that are closely related to this
              research will be offered to both undergraduate seniors and first-year graduate
              students.  A tunable source and associated detection equipment will be used to
              probe the relationships between the microscopic components and their radiative
              efficiency.  Improved knowledge and design of materials for many applications,
              including biomedical research and telecommunications, are expected.  However,
              the overarching goal of this new laboratory is to reveal fundamental relations
              and elucidate hidden connections in the characterization and process parameters
              of new (or just useful) optical materials.
%%%
 

