Title       : Spontaneous Miniature Outward Currents in Parasympathetic Neurons: Mechanisms of
               Generation and Physiological Role
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0076741

Award Number: 0076741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney L. Parsons   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0076741
Parsons

Neurons generate electrical signals called action
              potentials, which are produced by a regulated movement of ions into and out of
              the neuron's surface membrane through specialized water-filled ion channels. 
              The proposed studies will investigate how one class of membrane ion channels,
              the BK potassium channels, is regulated and how the activity of these BK
              channels affects the generation of action potential.  Experiments will be done
              on neurons dissociated from the heart of Necturus maculosus, an aquatic
              amphibian.  Recordings of electrical activity will be used to measure the
              movement of potassium ions through BK channels.  The synchronous activation of
              a cluster of BK channels causes a small ionic current, the spontaneous
              miniature outward current or SMOC.  The present study is designed to test what
              initiates and terminates SMOC activity and how this affects the generation and
              propagation of action potentials.  BK channel activity also is dependent on
              fluctuations of calcium ions inside the neuron.  A second aspect of the
              proposed study will use sophisticated optical techniques to determine what
              regulates the release of calcium from internal stores and how an elevation of
              internal calcium acts as a stimulus to direct BK channels to open.   

The
              question under study is important because information in the nervous system is
              conveyed by action potentials traveling along neurons.  The results of the
              proposed studies will provide insight into the regulation of action potential
              generation.  It is also well established that the activity of membrane ion
              channels, which generates action potentials, is highly regulated and complex. 
              Thus, understanding the regulation of membrane ion channels in neurons is
              critical to understanding how information is processed in the nervous system. 
              The results of the proposed studies will provide significant, new information
              about how one important class of ion channels, the BK channels, is regulated.
              


