Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0076169

Award Number: 0076169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Hollingsworth mdholl@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Higgins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Klabunde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. A. Sherwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maryanne M. Collinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076169
Hollingsworth

This  award is for the acquisistion of a scanning
              probe microscope for use in the Chemistry Department at Kansas State
              University. This microscope will incorporate a variety of capabilities,
              including scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), contact and non-contact atomic
              force microscopy (AFM), magnetic force microscopy, phase imaging, chemical
              force microscopy, lateral force microscopy, and electrochemical STM and AFM.
              This instrumentation will benefit several research programs, including those
              concerning polymer-dispersed liquid crystal films, crystal growth and
              dissolution of organic inclusion compounds, ferroelastic and ferroelectric
              domain switching in organic inclusion compounds, sol-gel-derived silicate glass
              films used for template-derived sensors and electrochemical devices,
              semiconductor and magnetic nanoparticles, carbon fiber composites, and oxidized
              metallic surfaces. Acquisition of this new instrument will greatly benefit
              graduate student training and research and will also help enhance the
              undergraduate curriculum in the Chemistry Department at Kansas State
              University.
***
This award is for the acquisition of a modern scanning probe
              microscope for use in the Chemistry Department at Kansas State University. 
              This instrument will provide molecular-scale information about the
              topographical features and adhesive properties of a variety of surfaces, as
              well as spatially resolved information about the electronic and magnetic
              properties of numerous materials.  Such information is important because it
              provides a molecular-level understanding of the physical and chemical
              properties of materials that are relevant in the areas of optical
              communications, information storage, remediation of hazardous wastes,
              biomedical sensors, high tensile strength materials, and metallic surfaces in
              corrosive media. Acquisition of this new instrument will greatly benefit
              graduate student training and research and will also help enhance the
              undergraduate curriculum in the Chemistry Department at Kansas State
              University.
%%%





