Title       : Exploring the Links Between Anti-Predator Behavior and Mating Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0076484

Award Number: 0076484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann V. Hedrick avhedrick@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This study examines links between mating behavior and cautiousness towards
              predators. Experiments will be conducted on a cricket, Gryllus integer, in
              which females prefer males with long calls. Cautiousness of females will be
              measured as the time required to emerge from a shelter when placed in an
              unfamiliar environment. To measure female mating preferences, a tracking device
              will measure the speed, distance and angle of movement as the female runs in
              response to alternative male calls. Mating preferences will be combined with
              cautiousness scores to examine whether females with stronger mating preferences
              are either more cautious or more bold than females with weaker mating
              preferences. To test whether selectivity declines when apparent predation risk
              increases, females will be tested in the presence and absence of a threatening
              visual stimulus. Finally, to examine flexibility in female mate choices as
              perceived predation risk increases, females will be presented with a graded
              series of visually threatening stimuli. Females are predicted to become less
              selective in their mate choices as perceived predation risk increases. 
	The
              proposed experiments will provide detailed information on the links in
              individual females between mating behavior and cautiousness. This information
              is critically important for current models of the evolution of female mating
              preferences, because it addresses the balance between natural selection and
              sexual selection. 

