Title       : RUI: Calcium Homeostasis Modeled on the Freshwater Crayfish Molting Cycle: From
               Physiology to Molecular Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0076035

Award Number: 0076035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele G. Wheatly michele.wheatly@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of this proposal is to use the crayfish molting model to characterize
              the Ca2+ pump and Ca2+ exchanger (Na+/Ca2+ exchanger) on external and internal
              membranes, the genes that encode them, and the steroid hormone that putatively
              regulates the genes.  Postmolt provides a natural model for
              upregulation/activation of epithelial Ca2+ transporters as crayfish transition
              from intermolt Ca2+ balance to impressive unidirectional Ca2+ influx (2
              mmol/kg/h) across the primary exchange epithelia.  Both cellular and
              subcellular Ca2+ homeostases are challenged during mass Ca2+ transit across
              epithelia.  The hypothesis to be tested is that a suite of Ca2+ transporting
              proteins work together to achieve Ca2+ homeostasis in crayfish cells.  During
              postmolt (experimental), enhanced transepithelial unidirectional influx of Ca2+
              is associated with coordinated changes in activity or expression of these
              proteins compared with intermolt (baseline levels, control). 

Crayfish
              tissues to be studied are epithelia as well as non-epithelial cells (muscle). 
              The Ca2+ pump and NCX will be characterized during postmolt (transepithelial
              Ca2+ influx, experimental) as opposed to intermolt (Ca2+ balance, control). 
              The specific aims are:

1. Physiological characterization of Ca2+
              transporters through in vitro techniques:  The kinetics and pharmacology of
              ATP- and Na+-dependent Ca2+ uptake into basolateral membrane vesicles (BLMV)
              will be studied using flow cytometry to detect change in mean fluorescence
              intensity (versus side scatter) of the Ca2+ sensitive dye fluo-3.  The
              technique will be further refined through binding antibodies to intracellular
              epitopes, enabling inside out vesicles to be sorted.  At the same time, rapid
              filtration uptake of radiolabelled Ca2+ will be determined into BLMV as well as
              microsomes prepared from SR/ER to determine the kinetics/pharmacology of Ca2+
              transporters on external or internal membranes respectively.  

2. Molecular
              characterization of purified Ca2+ transporting proteins and their evolution: 
              The complete cDNA of crayfish PMCA and NCX will be cloned using standard
              molecular techniques.  Construction of phylogenetic trees of these ancient gene
              families will be used to estimate their rates of evolution. 

3. Regulation
              of expression of genes encoding Ca2+ transporting proteins:  Expression of Ca2+
              transporters will be quantified using standard molecular techniques.

4.
              Localization of Ca2+ transporters using purified antibodies for
              immunocytochemistry: Antibodies have been successfully raised against crayfish
              SERCA/PMCA/NCX. Immunocytochemistry will be used to locate the tissue
              distribution of the transporters (using bright field, epifluorescence) and
              their subcellular distribution (laser scanning confocal, electron
              microscopy).

5. Regulation of genes encoding Ca2+ transporters: Regulation
              of genes encoding the Ca2+ transporters will be determined through
              characterizing genomic DNA.

Ca2+ homeostasis has profound biological
              relevance.  Integrating the associated changes in Ca2+ transporting proteins
              and their genes at multiple epithelia will delineate Ca2+ homeostasis from an
              organismic context.  The project will also enhance research training of
              students from underrepresented groups.  

