Title       : Acquisition of a Variable Temperature Scanning Probe Microscope for Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0076459

Award Number: 0076459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Garfunkel garf@rutchem.rutger.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore E. Madey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Bartynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sang-Wook Cheong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Torgny Gustafsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable
              Rutgers University to acquire a variable temperature scanning probe microscope
              (scanning tunneling microscope and atomic force microscope, or STM/AFM) with
              spectroscopic capabilities for shared use in the Laboratory for Surface
              Modification (LSM) at Rutgers University. The LSM is a multidisciplinary
              laboratory with research in many areas in the science and engineering of
              surfaces and thin films. The instrument will be used, in conjunction with other
              techniques, for several different projects. These include imaging and
              characterizing charge stripe phases in highly correlated materials, roughening,
              structural and electrical properties of ultra thin gate oxides for
              microelectronic applications, and vacancy diffusion, quantum size effects and
              nano-faceting of metal surfaces and ultrathin metal films. Rutgers will also
              integrate the SPM into materials education and outreach programs, including
              developing some web-based classroom training modules. The latter activity will
              link research-active postdocs and graduate students with middle and high school
              students and their teachers, and with undergraduates.
***
This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable Rutgers University
              to acquire a variable temperature scanning probe microscope (scanning tunneling
              microscope and atomic force microscope, or STM/AFM) with spectroscopic
              capabilities for shared use in the Laboratory for Surface Modification (LSM) at
              Rutgers University. The LSM is a multidisciplinary laboratory with research in
              many areas in the science and engineering of surfaces and thin films. The
              instrument will be used, in conjunction with other techniques, for several
              different research projects that require state of the art imaging of surfaces
              at the atomic scale. Today, the need for truly atomic level imaging of surfaces
              is compelling. Scanning tunneling microscopy and other scanning probe
              techniques have revolutionized surface science and been applied to a wide range
              of problems related to interfaces. The SPM will be integrated into materials
              education and outreach programs, including developing some web-based classroom
              training modules. The latter activity will link research-active postdocs and
              graduate students with middle and high school students and their teachers, and
              with undergraduates.
%%%

