Title       : Acquisition of a Friction Stir Welding Equipment for Metal Joining Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0076433

Award Number: 0076433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajiv S. Mishra rsmishra@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hai-Lung Tsai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Van Aken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This award provides partial funding for the acquisition of Friction Stir
              Welding (FSW) equipment. FSW is a relatively new solid-state joining technique
              where a welded joint is produced by the stirring action of a pin that
              plasticizes and moves material. This simple concept of friction stirring allows
              joining of any aluminum alloy or composite as no filler material is involved.
              This is particularly attractive for high strength and advanced aluminum alloys
              and composites, which are traditionally considered unweldable. In addition,
              formation of very fine grains in the stirred region due to severe plastic
              deformation leads to mechanical properties of the joint that are 80-100 % of
              the parent material. This presents a tremendous advantage over the conventional
              fusion welding technique where joint strength reduction of 50 % is typical. The
              equipment will provide data for modeling of the friction stir welding
              parameters and it will lead to a better fundamental understanding of the
              mechanisms involved in the FSW process. The equipment will also provide
              opportunities to develop new processing techniques by utilizing the friction
              stir concept. The new friction stir welding equipment will allow research in:
              1) Joining of high strength aluminum alloys and aluminum matrix composites; 2)
              Friction stir welding of integrated passive damping structures; and 3) Friction
              stir processing for economical superplastic forming in commercial aluminum
              alloy sheets. The research will be conducted by an interdisciplinary team which
              includes collaboration with industries (e.g. Rockwell Science Center and Boeing
              Phantom Works) and government laboratories (e.g. Air Force Research
              Laboratory). In addition, the friction stir welding facility at UMR will serve
              as a research and educational resource for the educational institutions and
              small-to-medium industries in the entire mid-western region where no such open
              facility exists at present.

This grant provides partial funding for the
              acquisition of Friction Stir Welding (FSW) equipment. Friction stir welding is
              a relatively new solid-state joining technique where a welded joint is produced
              by the stirring action of a pin that plasticizes and moves material. This
              simple and elegant concept of friction stirring allows joining of any aluminum
              alloy or aluminum matrix composite as no filler material is required. This is
              particularly attractive for high strength and advanced aluminum alloys that are
              traditionally considered unweldable. Even for weldable aluminum alloys,
              significant improvements in properties are expected with the FSW method. This
              technique is also environment friendly as no flux or cover gases are involved
              and the localized friction heating makes the process highly energy efficient.
              In addition, the severe plastic deformation during friction stirring leads to
              very fine grains in the stirred region. The fine-grained microstructure
              produces very desirable mechanical properties that are as high as 80% of the
              base metal. This is a tremendous advantage over the conventional fusion welding
              technique where the joint strength is reduced by 50%. The equipment will
              provide data for modeling of the friction stir welding process that will lead
              to a better fundamental understanding of FSW. The research will be conducted by
              an interdisciplinary research team from the University of Missouri at Rolla,
              industries (e.g. Rockwell Science Center and Boeing Phantom Works) and
              government laboratories (e.g. Air Force Research Laboratory). The friction stir
              welding facility at UMR will be the only such facility at an educational
              institution in the state of Missouri and one of only a few in the nation. It
              will serve as a research and educational resource in this joining technology at
              UMR as well as other educational institutions and small-to-medium size
              industries in the entire mid-western region where no such open facility exists
              at present.


