Title       : Poly(ethylene oxide) and Water: Simulations and Modeling of Solution Properties,
               Phase Behavior, Partitioning and Particle Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0076306

Award Number: 0076306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant D. Smith gsmith@geoffrey.emro.utah.e  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076306
Smith
This grant is funded jointly by the Theoretical Chemistry  and
              Materials Theory Programs in the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research
              respectively.  Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), also referred to as poly(ethylene
              glycol), is used in a multitude of aqueous solution applications ranging from
              drag reduction to drug delivery.  In addition, PEO solutions have been widely
              studied, being themselves of fundamental interest as well as serving as model
              systems in efforts to better understand aqueous polymer solutions. 
              Experimental and modeling studies have resulted in valuable insight into the
              behavior of PEO solutions.  However, many of the most interesting
              characteristics of these solutions responsible for their broad scope of
              applications, such as conformations, hydrophobic interactions, phase behavior,
              the influence of salts, and the interactions of the polymer with particles and
              proteins, remain at best poorly understood.

The principal goals of the
              research are to gain improved understanding of the behavior of aqueous polymer
              solutions through coordinated simulation and modeling studies of PEO solutions,
              to develop and disseminate the computational algorithms and tools required to
              carry out these studies, and to familiarize undergraduate students students
              with the power and utility of molecular modeling.  Atomistic molecular dynamics
              simulation studies will be carried out in order to investigate the
              conformational, structural, thermodynamics and dynamic properties of aqueous
              PEO solutions.  Additional simulations aimed specifically at understanding the
              phase behavior of PEO solutions, including the influence of molecular weight
              and pressure as well as the role of polymer conformations, water structure, and
              ether-water hydrogen bonding, will be performed.  Finally, simulation studies
              of the interactions of PEO solutions with model nanoparticles and proteins will
              be carried out, aimed at gaining a better understanding of polymer mediated
              depletion attraction between particles as well as the roles of competitive
              hydration and hydrophobic polymer-particle interactions.  Acheiving these
              scientific goals requires the capability of addressing solution properties over
              a wide range of length scales.  A force field development toolkit will be
              created to link the electronic structure level to the atomistic level through
              parametrization of accurate classical atomistic potential functions.  In turn,
              the detailed results of atomistic molecular dynamics simulations of PEO
              solutions will serve as input into liquid state theory models for polymer
              solutions and interactions of polymers with particles, potentially extending
              the length scale of the atomistic studies as well as allowing investigation of
              parameter space well beyond that directly accessible by molecular dynamics
              simulations.

These studies have important ramifications beyond the benefits
              provided by an improved understanding of PEO solutions.  These efforts will add
              significantly to the overall understanding of the behavior of aqueous
              solutions, both synthetic and biological, as well as that of polymer solutions
              in general, particularly in crossover concentration regimes and at higher
              concentrations where there is a paucity of simulation studies.  The
              computational tools and algorithms developed for the proposed simulations, such
              as the force field development toolkit and methods for determining free
              energies and phase equilibrium in polymer solutions, will be widely beneficial
              to the simulation community.  Molecular dynamics simulations tools, currently
              used for graduate teaching as well as graduate and undergraduate level
              research, will be developed into tools for undergraduate coursework and will
              include materials simulation and property prediction modules designed to give
              undergraduate students hands-on experience with computational materials
              science.
%%%  
 This grant is funded jointly by the Theoretical Chemistry 
              and Materials Theory Programs in the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials
              Research respectively.  Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), also referred to as
              poly(ethylene glycol), is used in a multitude of aqueous solution applications
              ranging from drag reduction to drug delivery.  In addition, PEO solutions have
              been widely studied, being themselves of fundamental interest as well as
              serving as model systems in efforts to better understand aqueous polymer
              solutions.  Experimental and modeling studies have resulted in valuable insight
              into the behavior of PEO solutions.  However, many of the most interesting
              characteristics of these solutions responsible for their broad scope of
              applications, such as conformations, hydrophobic interactions, phase behavior,
              the influence of salts, and the interactions of the polymer with particles and
              proteins, remain at best poorly understood.
The principal goals of the
              research are to gain improved understanding of the behavior of aqueous polymer
              solutions through coordinated simulation and modeling studies of PEO solutions,
              to develop and disseminate the computational algorithms and tools required to
              carry out these studies, and to familiarize undergraduate students students
              with the power and utility of molecular modeling. 
***

