Title       : Acquisition of a Sum-Frequency Generation Spectrometer for Research and
               Education in Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0076388

Award Number: 0076388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey O. White white5@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Braun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Lyding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew A. Gewirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Leckband  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign is for the acquisition
              of a sum-frequency-generation spectrometer. The instrument will help develop a
              clearer picture, at the microscopic level, of surfaces and buried interfaces.
              This picture is difficult or impossible to obtain with conventional forms of
              spectroscopy, because the region of interest typically has a thickness of only
              one nanometer.  Although their dimensions are small, the technological
              importance of surfaces and interfaces is extremely large.  For example, the
              Si-H bonds that passivate the Si/SiO_2 transistor interface affect the
              properties of 95% of the world's integrated circuits.  The SFG spectrometer
              will allow to determine the number of bonds at the interface, and therefore to
              optimize the processing of Si wafers.  Surfaces are also very important in
              catalysis and corrosion.  The SFG spectrometer will enable to acquire knowledge
              which will help in the search for alternative corrosion inhibitors that are
              less harmful to the environment.  Another example is the surface of
              polyethylene oxide (PEO), which is used to coat prosthetic devices because it
              prevents the adhesion of proteins and cells.  SFG spectroscopy will increase
              our understanding of the molecular properties responsible for the biological
              activity of PEO, and accelerate the design of new and better biomaterials.  The
              spectrometer will be placed in a user facility, open to all, where graduate
              students will be able to receive training, use a state-of-the-art  instrument
              in their research, and interact with experts both inside and outside of their
              disciplines.
***
 
This is an award from the Instrumentation for Materials
              Research program to the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign for the
              acquisition of an infrared-visible sum-frequency-generation spectrometer. The
              instrument will help develop a clearer picture, at a microscopic level, of
              phenomena occuring at surfaces and buried interfaces, e.g. adsorption,
              deposition, catalysis, corrosion, templating, and steric selection.  Infrared
              spectroscopy is well-suited to this endeavor because it allows one to identify
              many of the chemical bonds which determine the properties of interfaces, e.g.
              the Si-H bond which passivates the Si/SiO_2 transistor interface. 
              Sum-frequency-generation spectroscopy is particularly sensitive to the
              interface, even though it is often less than a nanometer thick, because the
              signal is generated only where the sample lacks inversion symmetry.  The
              spectrometer will help answer scientific questions of technological importance,
              for example: Why is chromate so effective in preventing the corrosion of
              aluminum?  Why do cells and proteins not adhere to the surface of prothetic
              devices coated with polyethylene oxide?  How does adding a minute amount of
              benzotriazole to a plating bath drastically change the surface morphology of
              copper?  The spectrometer will be placed in a user facility where a large
              number of graduate students will receive training and participate in research
              projects to answer questions such as those above. 
%%%

