Title       : Physiological Limits to Hibernation in Large Mammals: Energetics, Body
               Composition, and Sleep in Black Bears (SGER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a0076039

Award Number: 0076039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29538              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Barnes ffbmb@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-00-76039
Barnes

  The Principal Investigator will take
              advantage of an unexpected opportunity for investigating hibernation behavior,
              physiology, and neurobiology in hibernating black bears, Ursus americanus.  The
              Alaska Department of Fish and Game will provide two "trouble" bears that are
              just entering hibernation.  These bears would be destroyed because they have a
              history of endangering people.

The Principal Investigator has outdoor
              artificial dens and preliminary that suggests that large mammalian hibernators
              achieve energy savings with very different physiological mechanisms than do
              small hibernators, such as arctic ground squirrels, Spennophilus parryii.  For
              example, bears substantially reduce their metabolic rate and do not fast for
              six months.  They achieve this with only a 3-5oC reduction in body temperature
              (versus a 40 oC decline in ground squirrels).  They also remain almost
              continuously in slow-wave sleep.  The Principal Investigator will measure these
              variables using state-of-the-art telemetry, which allows them to continuously
              monitor body temperatures, brain waves, EKG, and rates of oxygen consumption in
              untethered black bears hibernating in natural conditions for six months.  There
              is now an unexpected opportunity to extend these measurements to a female that
              is likely to be pregnant.  This hibernation physiology has never been studied
              in a hibernating bear that will gestate, give birth, and nurse an
              offspring.

The Principal Investigator will collaborate with Dr. Oivind
              Toien, previously with the Norsk Polar Institute. Dr. Toien is critical to the
              study because of his expertise in respirometry and telemetry. 


