Title       : Thinking Spatially: The Incorporation of Geographic Information Science Across
               the K-12 Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0076284

Award Number: 0076284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. de Souza adesouza@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1698,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A strong component of the drive for K-12 educational reform have been concerns
              about the capacity of Americans to compete successfully in a rapidly changing
              context defined by intense international competition in global markets and
              swift technological change.  The desire to improve American global and
              technological competitiveness has led to calls for enhancements in the use of
              modern technologies at all stages of the educational process.  This development
              coincides with increasing interest in the development of critical thinking
              skills that enable individuals to conceptualize problems, acquire and analyze
              relevant information, and use advanced technologies like geographic information
              systems (GISs) to make effective spatial decisions.  To address these related
              problems, this award will provide partial support for a special study committee
              established by the National Research Council (NRC) to study the use of GIS and
              related technologies and the emerging concepts and principles of geographic
              information science (GIScience) across the K-12 curriculum in the U.S.  The
              review will focus on two related questions:  (1) How can current software
              versions of GIS and theoretical approaches of GIScience be incorporated into
              standards-based instruction in knowledge domains across the breadth of the
              curriculum?  (2) How can cognitive development and educational theory be used
              to design age-appropriate versions of GIS software and age-appropriate
              GIScience curricula?  The project will include a review of knowledge and
              current practice regarding the use of GIS and GIScience in K-12 curricula in
              geography, mathematics, and science.  It will develop guidelines and
              recommendations for pre-service and in-service training programs as well as
              curricula for GIS and GIScience programs.  It also will identify and follow
              through on small-scale, highly focused studies of key issues in pre-collegiate
              GIS and GIScience education, such as the role of collaborative learning models
              in instruction, patterns of GIS use as a function of gender and cognitive
              development levels, and interface designs to facilitate cognitive development. 
              The review will result in a book-length final report, with additional
              information disseminated via the Internet.  The project will contribute to the
              development of application guidelines and outline research needs and strategies
              to meet future needs for student learning, teacher training, and software
              development.  The study will provide short-term guidance for incorporating GIS
              and GIScience into American schools, and it will identify longer-term research
              issues associated with improved design of GISs and enhanced GIScience-related
              instruction.

