Title       : FASEB Conference: Lipid Modifications of Proteins to be held on August 6-11,
               2000 in Copper Mountain, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0076692

Award Number: 0076692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurine Linder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1166,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks partial support for the Federation of American Societies of
              Experimental Biology (FASEB) conference on "Lipid Modifications of Proteins" to
              be held from August 6 to August 11, 2000 at Copper Mountain, Colorado. This
              will be a state-of-the-art exploration of the structure and function of
              acylation, prenylation, and GPI-anchorage, the three major forms of lipid
              modification of proteins in eukaryotic cells, and will provide a unique
              opportunity for workers in these separate but related fields to exchange ideas
              and insights. Lipid modification of proteins is an extremely active field.
              
The focus of research in this area has broadened in the past few years from
              an earlier focus on identification of lipid-modified proteins and structural
              studies, to include elucidation of the physiological role of the lipid group.
              Outlined below are the major themes of the meeting. Signaling. Surprisingly
              high proportions of lipid-linked proteins are key players in cellular signaling
              pathways. These include Ras, Src-family tyrosine kinases, heterotrimeric G
              proteins, and 7- transmembrane spanning hormone receptors. In virtually all
              cases, the lipid modifications are required for function. This focuses
              attention on the specific role of these lipid groups in cellular physiology.
              All lipid modifications can allow association of otherwise hydrophilic proteins
              with membranes. Why are there different lipid modifications? What do they have
              in common, and how do they differ? Recent results on Ras show that modification
              of the same protein with different lipids can substantially alter function. New
              insights into these and other questions can be best answered by discussion
              between people who focus on individual modifications. This is one of the most
              important goals of this meeting. 
Membrane rafts. An important function of
              both GPI anchorage and acylation is to target proteins to cholesterol and
              sphingolipid-rich membrane domains or rafts. The finding that a number of
              cellular signaling events occur in these domains is an exciting development of
              the past two years, and has attracted a great deal of interest. Structure and
              function of rafts, and function of lipid-linked proteins in them, is another
              theme of the conference. Related to this theme are the importance of
              cholesterol in the biogenesis and maintenance of membrane rafts and its
              recently discovered role as a post-translational modification of the cell
              surface signaling molecule, hedgehog. Therapeutic applications of inhibiting
              lipid modifications. A third theme of this meeting will explore how inhibition
              of lipid modification can be used as a highly effective strategy in fighting
              disease. This effort can be divided in two major subclasses. The first is the
              use of farnesyl transferase inhibitors to blunt the function of activated Ras.
              The second target is infectious disease caused by unicellular eukaryotic
              pathogens such as Trypanosoma, Leishmania, and Plasmodium. Most of these
              organisms express extremely high levels of GPI-anchored proteins. Synthesis of
              these complex structures by a multistep pathway requires a number of enzymes,
              some of which are specific to the pathogens and are not shared by mammalian
              hosts. These are key targets for drug design, an avenue that is being actively
              pursued. Pathogen-specific features of myristoylation and prenylation are being
              targeted similarly. Lipid modification and membrane targeting. All lipid
              modifications increase protein hydrophobicity, and all lipid modifications can
              target lipidated proteins to membranes. But how are lipidated proteins targeted
              to different membranes? The specificity of membrane targeting of acylated and
              prenylated proteins is one of the most active areas of current research. The
              emerging picture that acylated and prenylated proteins can follow complicated
              pathways through cells following synthesis will be explored. Lipid-modified
              proteins are integral players in the cellular processes of signal transduction,
              membrane and protein trafficking, cellular proliferation and differentiation.
              
The disciplines of cell biology, genetics, biochemistry, and biophysics are
              all used to understand the biology of protein lipidation. This meeting provides
              the opportunity to integrate the information derived from these approaches into
              a more coherent picture of how lipid modifications contribute to protein
              function. 

