Title       : Acquisition of a High Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope for Materials
               Research at Brigham Young University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0076407

Award Number: 0076407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent L. Adams b_l_adams@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Harb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Howell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy W. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the acquisition, by the Brigham Young University (BYU), of a
              new environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) with a Schottky field
              emission gun (FEG), configured for advanced applications of (automated)
              microdiffraction via electron backscattering patterns (EBSP) coupled with
              energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS). The selected instrument is the Philips
              XL-30 ESEM FEG, with an integrated EDAX Falcon EDS/EBSP system.  Improved
              spatial resolution in both standard contrast and microdiffraction modes,
              environmental capability that facilitates the examination of low-Z and
              non-conductive samples and in sensitive biological samples, and the capability
              to integrate EDS and EBSP analysis in a fully-automated mode
              (feedback-controlled scanning through the digital interface) for studies of
              grain boundaries and interfaces, are some of the features of the proposed
              system that are urgently needed for the advancement of on-going research within
              the Colleges of Engineering and Technology, Biology and Agriculture and
              Physical and Mathematical Sciences.  The digital and environmental capabilities
              of this instrument will also advance educational initiatives within BYU,
              enabling an order-of-magnitude increase in the numbers of undergraduates that
              can be  exposed to structures that require high-resolution imaging. 

This
              grant supports the purchase of an advanced scanning electron microscope for
              it's Electron Optics Laboratory.  This new system is configured for high
              resolution imaging of materials, including sensitive biological samples and
              non-conducting materials.  This breadth of capability is due to it's
              specialized chamber and lens system, which can operate over a wide range of
              environmental conditions.  The new microscope will also be equipped for
              micro-chemistry analysis of samples by traditional energy dispersive
              spectrometry, and for microdiffraction (for crystallite orientation and phase
              determination) using a low-light television camera for viewing electron
              backscattered diffraction patterns. The new instrument has a digital interface,
              capable of providing fully automated studies of the network of grain boundaries
              and other internal interfaces in crystalline materials.  The digital and
              environmental capabilities of the instrument will also advance educational
              initiatives within BYU, enabling much larger numbers of undergraduate and
              graduate students to be exposed to the new insights that attend high-resolution
              imaging of materials and structures.  


