Title       : Acquisition of Equipment to Upgrade a Laser Deposition System for Materials
               Synthesis and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0076305

Award Number: 0076305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60634              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Ross caross@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Aziz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076305
Caroline Ross 

This award will enable the investigators to upgrade a
              Pulsed Laser Deposition system (PLD) which is already established in MIT. PLD
              is a powerful and flexible tool for deposition of materials such as oxides or
              alloys with complex stoichiometries. PLD is particularly useful for materials
              synthesis because of its ability for rapid prototyping of materials and the
              large amount of control which can be exercised over material composition and
              structure by varying the deposition conditions, temperature, ambient gas
              environment and amount of ion bombardment. A PLD system consists of a high
              power excimer laser which is used to ablate a target in vacuum, and the
              resulting flux is collected on a substrate to form a thin film. The PLD system
              at MIT was donated by IBM and is 10 years old. It has eight targets, and
              facilities for introduction of reactive gases, in-situ annealing and ion
              bombardment. However, significant improvements to the laser are needed in order
              to make it useful to a broad base of users over the next decade. The upgraded
              system will significantly enhance the thin film fabrication facilities and the
              educational and training opportunities available to a large, interdisciplinary
              base of users.
***

This award is for the upgrade of a Pulsed Laser
              Deposition system (PLD) which is used for making thin films of various
              materials. These thin films have applications in a range of microelectronic
              devices, for instance in optical devices, gas sensors, and memories. PLD is
              particularly useful for exploring a wide variety of materials, allowing rapid
              proptotyping of new materials and structures to be carried out. The equipment
              will be used by a group of faculty and students from MIT, Harvard and other
              institutions. They will benefit substantially from the enhanced PLD
              capabilities, in terms of performing basic research on film growth and
              evolution, in developing new materials and processes for device applications,
              and in training students in thin film science and technology. 
%%%




