Title       : Reactions of Nitroso and Nitrosyl Groups with Metalloporphyrins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0076640

Award Number: 0076640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George B. Richter-Addo gbrichteraddo@chemdept.chem.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1966,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              George Richter-Addo of the University of Oklahoma is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for  research on the
              reactions of nitroso and nitrosyl groups with metalloporhyrins. The long-term
              goal of the research is to use spectroscopic, spectroelectrochemical,
              structural and electronic properties of X-N=O compounds to increase
              understanding of reactions of such compounds with metalloporphyrins, and of the
              reactions of metalloporphyrins containing X-N=O components. Chemical and
              spectroelectrochemical reactions of metalloporphyrin complexes of nitrosamines
              and nitrosoarenes  will be investigated as well as the chemistry of products
              that result from trans additions of alkyl nitrites and thionitrites to
              porphyrins. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the reaction chemistry of
              the target compounds.

Although N=O is a small molecule it has a complex and
              important chemistry. Compounds of the X-N=O sort are of central importance in
              biological, industrial and ecological systems, among others. The -N=O grouping
              in molecules can participate in a wide variety of diverse chemical reactions,
              depending on the detailed nature of the molecules in which the -N=O group is
              bound. Following up on a successful research effort that has characterized the
              atomic and electronic structures of a variety of X-N=O species, including many
              in which X has been the biologically important porphyrin grouping, the present
              program focuses on the various types of chemical reactivity that are  exhibited
              by the N=O grouping in its compounds, and seeks to elucidate how those 
              reactivity-patterns are influenced by atomic and electronic structure. Progress
              in gaining such understanding would have important consequences for science and
              technology in all the many areas in which X-N=O compounds are involved.
