Title       : Spin-Dependent Transport in Magnetic Tunnel Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0076171

Award Number: 0076171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shufeng Zhang zhangshu@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports theoretical research to explore fundamental physics of
              spin-polarized transport properties in magnetic tunnel junctions.  There are
              two focused areas to the research: to establish and generalize new aspects of
              tunneling mechanisms and tunneling formulations involving magnetic electrodes,
              and to investigate the influence of external defects on the I-V characteristics
              of realistic tunnel junctions.  This research will facilitate the development
              of novel spin electronics, which merge spin degrees of freedom into high
              technologies.

In the first part of the research, earlier theoretical
              formulations will be extended by including the spin-polarized nature of
              tunneling.  Such an extension is not as simple as adding two independent spin
              channels in a trivial manner.  Rather the formulations of spin-polarized
              tunneling differ from those of charge tunneling in a significant way.  The
              fundamental new features to be addressed include the local spin current
              variation near interfaces, spin-dependent electric field penetrations into
              magnetic electrodes, local versus itinerant states near the interfaces, and
              critical length scales involving the polarized tunneling.  Intrinsic electronic
              relaxations of charge and spin, which determines the temperature dependence of
              the spin-polarized tunneling of an ideal junction, will also be investigated. 
              A model system with known electronic stuctures from ab initio calculations will
               be used to test the validity of the theoretical formulations for
              spin-polarized tunneling.

In the second part of the research, applications
              will be made of these formulations to various realistic magnetic tunnel
              junctions.  The main emphasis will be on predicting novel features of
              magneto-transport properties and on interpreting the experimental I-V
              characteristics.  The presence of defects in experimental tunnel junctions
              leads to quite different I-V characteristics and magntoresistance compared to
              ideal junctions.  Suitable Hamiltonians will be developed to model these
              defects.  The magnetotransport properties will be deduced from these model
              Hamiltonians by using quantum transport equations.  In most cases, appropriate
              perturbation methods will be first used to simplify the problem so that
              standard numerical techniques can be used to derive the physical quantities up
              to the point where detailed comparison with experiments can be made.
%%%
This
              grant supports theoretical research to explore fundamental physics of
              spin-polarized transport properties in magnetic tunnel junctions.  There are
              two focused areas to the research: to establish and generalize new aspects of
              tunneling mechanisms and tunneling formulations involving magnetic electrodes,
              and to investigate the influence of external defects on the I-V characteristics
              of realistic tunnel junctions.  This research will facilitate the development
              of novel spin electronics, i.e., "spintronics," which merge spin degrees of
              freedom into high technologies.
***


