Title       : Acquisition of an MOVPE System for Electronic Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0076312

Award Number: 0076312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Redwing jmr31@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076312
Redwing

This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a
              metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) system at Penn State University for
              the epitaxial growth of aluminum-gallium-indium nitride (Al,Ga,In)N alloys. 
              The MOVPE system is designed to facilitate a combination of fundamental studies
              of transport, growth chemistry, nucleation and thin film stress evolution
              within the context of a small-scale production MOVPE tool.  The MOVPE reactor
              is custom designed to incorporate an in-situ optical stress measurement system
              for real time measurement of sample curvature and growth rate.  The instrument
              will permit controlled mixing of Group III and V sources to enable a study of
              homogenous chemistry effects on film properties. The facility will
              significantly enhance research and educational opportunities in electronic and
              photonic materials at Penn State.  It will provide an interdisciplinary
              resource for the education and training of graduate and undergraduate students
              from Materials Science and Engineering, Electrical Engineering and the
              Intercollege Graduate Research Program in Materials. The epitaxial growth
              facility will be used to develop class activities and problem sets for
              undergraduate and graduate courses on electronic and photonic materials
              fabrication and characterization and semiconductor crystal growth.

This
              award provides partial support for the acquisition of a metalorganic vapor
              phase epitaxy (MOVPE) system at Penn State University.  The equipment is
              designed to facilitate a combination of fundamental growth studies within the
              context of a small-scale production MOVPE tool.  It will enable in-situ
              measurements of thin film stress and growth rate using high-resolution laser
              reflectometry. The MOVPE facility will significantly enhance research and
              educational opportunities in electronic and photonic materials at Penn State. 
              It will provide an interdisciplinary resource for education and training of
              graduate and undergraduate students from Materials Science and Engineering,
              Electrical Engineering and the Intercollege Graduate Research Program in
              Materials.  The epitaxial growth facility will be used to develop class
              activities and problem sets for undergraduate and graduate courses on
              electronic and photonic materials fabrication and characterization and
              semiconductor crystal growth.

