Title       : Acquisition of Semi-Immersive Virtual Reality Instrumentation for Multi-Scale
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  2000   
File        : a0076329

Award Number: 0076329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel B. Trickey trickey@qtp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hai-Ping Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Krause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Stanton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              "Semi-immersive" data-visualization technology - steroscopic projection to
              achieve the perception that the viewer is walking through the data - will be
              acquired under this grant.  The instrumentation will provide rapid steroscopic
              virtual-reality exploration of computed data that have several extremely
              demanding properties:  a) high volumes, b) multiple length and/or time scales,
              and c) complicated materials systems as their source.  The major advance
              expected from this instrumentation is qualitative improvement in our ability to
              identify and quantify phenomena and mechanisms that are linked across those
              scales in intricate, non-intuitive ways.
Five major projects, three related to
              NSF-funded KDI effort on "Multi-scale Simulation including Chemical Reactivity
              in Materials Behavior through Integrated Computational Heirachies," will be the
              primary users.  Projects include atomic-level-simulations with millions of
              atoms and detailed electronic structure energetics, development of those
              energetics from first-principles calculations on complicated materials systems
              in low-symmetry geometries, as well as structure, dynamics, and response of
              both of semi-conductor and biomaterial systems.
%%%
Planned educational uses
              include major enhancement of recently initiated courses in 
Simulations and
              Modeling and in Parallel Programming.  Other instructional uses are to support
              student projects (graduate and undergraduate) in the Quantum Visualization
              Studio, incorporation in the new KDI seminary, and training of graduate
              students and post-doctorals for research.
***



