Title       : Development of a Laser Driven Terahertz System to Study Materials and Devices,
               and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a0076296

Award Number: 0076296
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182290             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. James Allen allen@qi.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Rodwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur C. Gossard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth G. Gwinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from Instrumentation for Materials Research Program the
              University of California, Santa Barbara, will develop a Laser Driven Terahertz
              System which will provide new research instrumentation for high-resolution
              linear terahertz spectroscopy of materials, material structures, and devices.
              The instrument will deliver microwatts of tunable radiation up to ~1 terahertz
              (THz).  Above ~1 terahertz the power will be substantially less but more than
              adequate for linear, high-resolution spectroscopy of materials and material
              structures.  Up to 1 terahertz, with suitable methods of excitation and
              sampling, the system will also be used to test the performance of
              state-of-the-art electronics at frequencies that exceed the capability of
              existing network analyzers.  At the same time, the system will provide a test
              bed to explore new non-linear materials and devices for optical difference
              frequency generation of terahertz radiation by photoconductivity and non-linear
              susceptibility. The research and development of this new instrument will
              provide interdisciplinary education and training for postdoctoral researcher
              and to graduate and undergraduate students in physics, materials science and
              solid state electronics.
%%%
With this award from Instrumentation for
              Materials Research program the University of California Santa Barbara will
              develop a Laser Driven Terahertz System which will provide new research
              instrumentation for high-resolution linear terahertz spectroscopy of materials,
              material structures, and devices. The terahertz part of electromagnetic
              spectrum, from 100 GHz to 10 THz, is science rich but relatively technology
              poor.  The Laser Driven Terahertz System will provide new research
              instrumentation for high-resolution linear terahertz spectroscopy of materials,
              material structures, and devices.  The research and development of this new
              instrument will provide interdisciplinary education and training for the
              post-doctoral researcher committed to the project and to graduate student and
              undergraduate researchers who will use the instrument in physics, materials
              science and solid state electronics.  The instrument will deliver microwatts of
              tunable radiation up to ~1 terahertz (THz).  Above ~1 terahertz the power will
              be substantially less but more than adequate for linear, high-resolution
              spectroscopy of materials and material structures. 



