Title       : Protein and DNA from Ancient Bones and Stone Tool Residues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0076299

Award Number: 0076299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lloyd W. Ream reamw@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Lloyd Ream and his collaborators
              will develop a technique to extract and identify DNA preserved on prehistoric
              stone tools which were used to butcher animals. In preliminary work, Dr. Ream
              has demonstrated that microcracks produced during stone tool manufacture trap
              blood proteins and DNA more than 140 microns beneath the tool surface. These
              residues are not removed by surface washing and thus have the possibility of
              preservation for significant periods of time. Sonication can release 60 to 80%
              of the trapped DNA and make it available for identification. The team will
              build on this preliminary research and: 1. Combine into a streamlined procedure
              established methods for recovery and analysis of ancient proteins and DNA from
              stone tools; 2. Test the reproducibility and sensitivity of these methods by
              comparing the results of simultaneous protein and DNA analyses: 3. Correlate
              preservation of DNA and protein in bone, and use these data to infer probably
              condition of residues on stone tools from the same stratum; 4. Determine
              whether protein and DNA from modern sources contaminate associated sediments,
              unmodified stone and stone tools; and 6. Correlate archaeological context,
              deposition rate, and specimen age with preservation of protein and DNA. If
              successful, the project will help to define parameters, including specimen
              handling procedures and requisite control samples important for study of
              protein and DNA residues on stone tools from any archaeological site or museum
              collection. To accomplish this goal the team will analyze both lithics and
              faunal remains from the Bugas-Holding and Hell Gap archaeological sites.
              Together they cover a period from ca. 1,200 to 10,000 years ago and vary not
              only in age but also in depositional conditions. The sites are well excavated
              and provide an excellent context within which to develop these
              techniques.

In many archaeological sites, stone tools constitute the primary
              class of material recovered and researchers therefore expend considerable
              effort in extracting the maximum amount of information from them. It is often
              extremely difficult or impossible based on tool form to determine use and Dr.
              Ream's technique, if successful will allow one to learn whether a specific
              implement was used to hunt or butcher game. It also has the potential to
              identify the species of animal and this is important because faunal remains are
              poorly preserved and often completely destroyed in many sites. If successfully
              developed these techniques will provide archaeologists with a powerful new tool
              which can be used in many time periods and many regions of the world.

