Title       : Acquisition of a STEM Cs Corrector for sub-A Resolution Imaging and Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0076364

Award Number: 0076364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Browning   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yury Gogotsi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Nicholls  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos G. Takoudis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sivalingam Sivananthan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
An award is made to the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) to purchase an
              aberration corrector. The instrument will be installed on an existing scanning
              transmission electron microscope (STEM) at the UIC. The increasing use of
              multi-component semiconductors, oxides and composite systems to exploit exotic
              electronic and chemical properties, makes it crucial to understand the precise
              role an interface or defect plays in controlling a particular device function.
              A fundamental new pathway to a basic atomistic understanding of interface and
              defect properties has recently been developed in the STEM. Scanning a highly
              stable probe of atomic dimensions can generate an incoherent, atomic resolution
              Z-contrast structural image.  As the high-angle detector used to form this
              image does not interfere with the analytical peripherals, the image can be
              utilized to position the electron probe for simultaneous spectroscopic analysis
              on the atomic scale.  The resolution of these comprehensive STEM techniques is
              only limited by the ability of the microscope to form a small electron probe; a
              limitation that is imposed by the spherical aberration of the probe-forming
              lens. The aberration corrector will help overcome this limitation,  improving
              the resolution to below 1. This will open up a much wider range of key
              materials systems, defects and interface structures that can be routinely
              analyzed.  This new capability will be used to investigate grain boundaries in
              electronic oxides, hetero-interfaces in semiconductors, quantum dots, carbon
              nanostructures and heterogeneous catalysts.

This IMR award is for the
              acquisition of an aberration corrector by the University of Illinois at Chicago
              (UIC). The new instrument will be installed into a dedicated scanning
              transmission electron microscope. Such a corrector will allow unprecedented
              spatial resolution (sub nanometer) in the analysis of materials interfaces and
              defects and will support vigorous research programs in such diverse
              technological areas as superconductors, semiconductors, ceramic oxides and
              catalysts.  The PI, co-PIs and users of the instrumentation span a wide range
              of the pure and applied physical sciences and include collaborators from both
              local and national research institutions. This instrumentation will be an
              integral component of an established facility in the UIC Research Resources
              Center, specializing in atomic scale studies of materials.  The expertise of
              the staff in the facility and the stability of the laboratory creates a unique
              opportunity for achieving the desired performance. As with other instruments in
              the UIC facility, this microscope and the support staff will also be made fully
              available to other researchers. The new microscope will also strengthen
              established outreach activities, promoting the benefits, achievements and
              excitement of research to high school teachers, students and parents as well as
              providing valuable experience to graduate and senior level undergraduate
              students.

