Title       : Ushki-1 and the Pleistocene Peopling of America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a0076120

Award Number: 0076120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59357              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank (Ted) E. Goebel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Waters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Ted Goebel and his collaborators
              will conduct one season of archaeological research at the site of Ushki-1
              located in the Kamchatka Oblast, Russia. The site is important and has figured
              prominently in discussions of the peopling of the Americas because of its
              location at the Asian end of the Bering land bridge which connected the New
              World to Siberia at the end of the last ice age The lower deposits contain a
              stone tool industry which includes bifaces and blades which resemble some
              materials in Alaska which date to ca 11,000 years ago. It is also possible, but
              uncertain that there is an earlier level at the site which is dominated by
              large blades bearing some resemblance to materials associated with the New
              World Clovis tradition. The site is said to contain copious faunal and lithic
              remains along with house remains and burials but none of this information has
              been formally reported in the literature. The site has also been questioned
              because of uncertainties about dating and stratigraphy, especially of lower
              levels. Some have argued that the deposits are mixed and that radiocarbon
              materials were contaminated by groundwater penetration. 

Dr. Goebel and his
              colleagues will address these issues. They will excavate a small block within
              the site and conduct multidisciplinary laboratory analyses to determine the
              integrity of Ushki-1 and its multiple cultural components. They will work to:
              establish the age and stratigraphic separation of the lowest components;
              characterize associated lithic industries; determine the presence and degree of
              preservation of faunal and paleovegetational remains; and assess archived
              records relating to previous excavations as the site. These studies will
              further understanding and peopling of Beringia and the Americas, and determine
              whether additional archaeological and paleoecological studies of Ushki are
              warranted.

