Title       : Regulation of the Kinetics of Vesicle Endocytosis in a Central Synapse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0076091

Award Number: 0076091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ling-Gang Wu wul@morpheus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0076091
Wu, Ling-Gang
Abstract for "Regulation of the kinetics of vesicle
              endocytosis in a central synapse"

Neurons talk to each other via synapses,
              where the nerve impulse triggers fusion of synaptic vesicles to the presynaptic
              plasma membrane and release their transmitter content, which in turn acts on
              the postsynaptic target.  To maintain synaptic transmission, fused vesicles
              must be retrieved from the plasma membrane (endocytosis) for re-use. The rate
              of endocytosis is critical because it determines whether the synapse can
              continuously release transmitters.  Endocytosis can be either slow or fast. The
              mechanisms that regulate the rate of endocytosis remain unclear. The
              investigators hypothesize that the rate of endocytosis is regulated by both the
              intensity of nerve stimulation and the intracellular calcium level. This
              hypothesis will be tested at a calyceal synapse, located in the medial nucleus
              of the trapezoid body (MNTB) in the rat auditory brain stem. At this synapse,
              the investigators have recently made it possible to measure endocytosis with a
              time-resolved capacitance measurement technique. This is the first time such a
              technique has been applied to the fast synapse in the mammalian central nervous
              system. With this technique, the investigators will determine whether the
              intensity of nerve stimulation regulates endocytosis by comparing the rate of
              endocytosis following various nerve stimuli that differ in the number and
              frequency of nerve impulses. The investigators will also determine whether the
              intracellular calcium level regulates endocytosis by comparing the rate of
              endocytosis at various intracellular calcium levels. The proposed work will
              reveal the mechanisms that regulate the rate of endocytosis at mammalian
              central nervous system, and improve our understanding on how synapses maintain
              their activity.

