Title       : Electrical Properties of Insulator-Conductor Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0076153

Award Number: 0076153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosario A. Gerhardt rosario.gerhardt@mse.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this project is to investigate the electrical properties
              of insulator-conductor composites using dielectric and impedance spectroscopy
              as the primary experimental tool and finite element modeling as the primary
              computer simulation tool. A series of carbon black-polymer composites with
              varying volume fractions will be fabricated and tested. Once the percolation
              thresholds have been identified, a large number of samples with the critical
              volume fraction of carbon black will be prepared and tested.  Multiplane
              analysis of the dielectric functions (permittivitty, impedance, electric
              modulus and admittance) will also be done and modeled for all samples tested.
              The microstructure of all measured samples will be evaluated and quantitative
              correlations between the electrical data and the microstructural parameters
              will be made (e.g. size, distribution, connectivity).  The microstructural
              results will be used as input for the finite element modeling to further refine
              the interpretation.   It is expected that this project will help determine the
              significance of the percolation parameters as they relate to the actual
              microstructure of materials. This project will train up to 3 graduate students
              in this subject matter.
%%%
Percolation in conductor-insulator mixtures is
              the subject of this project. Distribution of telephone lines in a network helps
              explain percolation. The basic concept is that if all the necessary connections
              are made, a phone call placed in Vancouver will reach Atlanta instantaneously. 
              If any connections are broken or are inoperative, the phone call does not
              complete and the desired communication is broken.  This concept can be applied
              to many other problems in a variety of fields.  In this project, percolation
              will be studied by evaluating the electrical conductivity of mixtures of
              insulating and conducting particles.  Even though percolation has been studied
              for many years, most previous work has only considered direct current behavior.
               The main objective of this project is to evaluate the effect of frequency
              (alternating current) on the percolation behavior.  Both experimental
              measurements and computer simulations of idealized insulator-conductor mixtures
              will be used.  This project will train up to 3 graduate students in this
              subject matter.
***

