Title       : Isotopic Perturbations in Aromatic Character and New Annulene Conformers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0076742

Award Number: 0076742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl D. Stevenson stevenson@xenon.che.ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9229,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore the interplay between conformation and aromaticity in
              annulenes.  Specifically, the morphology of the sigma framework of annulenes
              will be perturbed via replacement of the internal protons with deuterium atoms.
               The changes in pi-delocalization that takes place will be monitored by NMR
              spectroscopy.  Measurements of the relative ring currents in deuterated and
              protiated annulenes and their respective dianions will lead to insight into the
              relative importance of the sigma and pi frameworks in terms of aromatic and
              antiaromatic character.

With this RUI Award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program supports the research of Professor Cheryl D. Stevenson of
              Illinois State University.  Professor Stevenson's research will explore a
              phenomenon known to chemists as aromaticity, referring not to an olfactory
              characteristic but to a circumstance whereby the stability of a particular
              molecule is greater than expected due to a specific arrangement of its bonding
              electrons.  In order to carry out this study, large ring-like molecules known
              as annulenes will be synthesized and an isotope of hydrogen incorporated at
              specific locations within the molecule.  This hydrogen isotope, deuterium, will
              display certain behavior depending upon its location among the bonding
              electrons as well as whether the conditions for aromaticity are met.  A
              molecular-scale MRI known as NMR will be used to probe the deuterium atoms.
