Title       : Dynamics of Local Vibrational Modes in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0076027

Award Number: 0076027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunter Luepke luepke@as.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research program is to elucidate the dynamics of local
              vibrational modes (LVMs) of defect and impurity complexes in semiconductors.
              The research focuses on LVMs in crystalline semiconductors, including the
              stretch-modes of hydrogen- and deuterium-containing complexes in proton- and
              deuteron-implanted Si and Ge, the acceptor- and donor-hydrogen complexes in Si
              and GaAs, and the anti-symmetric stretch-mode of interstitial O in Si, Ge, and
              GaAs. The population lifetime and the dephasing time of the first excited
              vibrational level will be determined using transient bleaching and photon-echo
              measurements. The time-resolved nonlinear-optical studies will be carried out
              with the short-pulse high-power tunable-infrared radiation of the Free-Electron
              Laser at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. A comparison
              between hydrogen- and deuterium-related modes, which have widely different
              interactions with bulk phonons in crystalline semiconductors, will assist in
              identifying the relaxation mechanism. Temperature-dependent studies will be
              performed to elucidate the coupling mechanism between the local modes and the
              crystal's phonon bands. Several important questions will be addressed regarding
              vibrational energy relaxation and transfer channels, the coupling to
              bending-modes, and the role of local structure and crystal site in the
              vibrational relaxation process. This research program provides training for
              graduate and undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary field including
              modern optics, materials science and computational modeling. 
%%%
Hydrogen is
              one of the most prominent impurities in semiconductors. One important property
              of hydrogen in these materials is its ability to improve device performance by
              passivating defects, a process, which today is used routinely in the production
              of integrated circuits such as CPU and RAM for computers. Knowledge of the
              rates and pathways of vibrational energy flow is critical for understanding
              thermally and electronically stimulated defect and impurity reactions and
              migration in these devices. The aim of this experimental research program is to
              elucidate the microscopic dynamics of local vibrations of hydrogen-decorated
              defect and impurity complexes in crystalline semiconductors. These fundamental
              studies require fairly low defect or impurity concentrations to reduce effects
              due to interactions, which often results in low infrared absorbance of the
              material. The short-pulse high-power tunable-infrared radiation of the
              Free-Electron Laser at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility will
              be employed for high-resolution time-resolved infrared absorption experiments.
              A direct comparison between the dynamics of hydrogen and deuterium modes, which
              have widely different interactions with bulk vibrations in these crystalline
              materials, will further support the identification of the energy exchange
              mechanism. The training that graduate and undergraduate students will receive
              while working on this project will prepare them for attractive semiconductor or
              optics related careers in industry, academe, or government.
***


