Title       : Development of NMR and Education for Extreme Conditions: Low Temperature, High
               Field and Field Gradients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0076454

Award Number: 0076454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Halperin w-halperin@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076454
Halperin

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              Program will allow Northwestern University to construct a state-of-the-art
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) facility that specializes in frontier
              technology for ultra-high magnetic fields, ultra-high magnetic field gradients,
              and ultra-low temperatures.  The facility will have a strong educational
              aspect, preparing students, both graduate and undergraduate, for use of
              advanced instrumentation in the Northwestern University ultra-low temperature
              laboratories and at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL).  Nine
              senior investigators, including the PI, will participate and benefit from it,
              including university faculty at Northwestern University, two industrial
              laboratories, and a national laboratory.  A facility for magnetic resonance
              (NMR) will be constructed including a 9 T magnet and dilution refrigerator
              capability at Northwestern University to study properties of materials over a
              wide range of temperature, down to low temperatures.  This facility provides
              the entre to ultra-high field and ultra-low temperature experiments.  Probes
              will be developed to extend the magnetic field scale to as high as 44 T at the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in their new hybrid and other resistive
              magnets.  The instrument will be available to students and NHMFL Experimental
              apparatus for ultra-low temperature NMR measurements will be designed and
              implemented in the Northwestern Ultra Low Temperature Laboratories.   

This
              new capability will enable the study of a wide range of topics such as high
              temperature superconductivity, diffusion in zeolites and polyelectrolytes,
              Li-batteries and for zeolites and other heterogeneous catalysts.  The problem
              of chloride ion diffusion in cementitious materials will also be investigated
              with the improved sensitivity to diffusion using high gradient strength NMR
              techniques. 
  
Northwestern University will construct a state-of-the-art
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) facility that specializes in frontier
              technology, and will extend the domain of sensitivity and resolution to
              unprecedented high levels using combinations of ultra-high magnetic fields,
              ultra-high magnetic field gradients and ultra-low temperatures. The facility
              has a strong educational aspect, preparing students, both graduate and
              undergraduate, for use of advanced instrumentation in the PI's ultra-low
              temperature laboratories and at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
              (NHMFL).  There are nine senior scientist-investigators, including the PI, who
              will participate in the near term functioning of this facility and benefit from
              it, including university faculty at Northwestern University, two industrial
              laboratories, and a national laboratory. 

 


