Title       : Evolutionary Genetics of Host Resistance to Parasites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0076106

Award Number: 0076106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guiyun Yan GYAN@ACSU.BUFFALO.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Parasites are an ubiquitous and important component of biological systems.
              Parasites affect host behavior, population dynamics, species interactions, and
              biodiversity. The effects of parasites on host ecology are often influenced by
              the magnitude of host susceptibility. Previous research has demonstrated that
              resistance to parasites is often a quantitative and genetically determined
              trait. However, little is known about the genetic basis and evolutionary
              constraints of resistance. This project will use molecular markers and gene
              mapping techniques to examine the evolutionary biology of parasite resistance.
              The association between a rat tapeworm parasite (Hymenolepis diminuta) and its
              intermediate host, the red flour beetles (Tribolium castaneum) will be used as
              a model system. Two questions will be addressed. (1) What are the genetic bases
              and inheritance of resistance to parasitism? (2) Are there any fitness costs
              associated with resistance? 

The research is an important contribution to
              evolutionary biology because it examines the genetic basis of resistance and
              common assumptions made about the evolution of resistance. It will affect the
              way that we understand the evolution of host-parasite interactions, and may
              have practical implications to the control of human pathogens.

