Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced Atomic Force Microscope for Research and Education in
               Nanomechanics and Nanotribology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0076413

Award Number: 0076413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Carpick carpick@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076413 
Carpick  

This award will enable the acquisition of a variable
              temperature ultrahigh vacuum atomic force microscope (UHV AFM) devoted to the
              study of mechanics and tribology at the nanometer scale. The long-term research
              goal is to develop an atomic-scale understanding of the mechanics (including
              elasticity, plasticity, rupture, and fracture) and tribology (friction,
              adhesion, wear, lubrication) of novel materials relevant to micro- and
              nano-technology. Specific interdisciplinary research problems that will be
              addressed include fundamental studies of the tribology of micromachine
              surfaces, the dependence of friction upon perovskite thin film surface
              terminations, and mechanical properties of nanocomposites. This instrumentation
              will enable new opportunities to integrate research, education, and training by
              exposing students to cutting-edge AFM techniques applied to the study of novel
              materials. Further education opportunities include student laboratory tours and
              development and dissemination of new classroom and web-based material.
              
***

Although friction is one of the most commonly-experienced physical
              phenomena in nature, it not yet understood in a truly fundamental way. This
              award will enable the acquisition of an atomic force microscope (AFM) which
              will be used to study the fundamentals of friction and related phenomena
              (deformation, lubrication, and wear) for novel materials. The AFM measures
              forces and deformations at the nano- or atomic level. The instrument will
              operate in a pristine vacuum environment at different temperatures to allow
              precise control of the materials being studied. Specific materials to be
              studied include surfaces of silicon micromachines, ceramic thin films, and new
              strong composites made from nano-scale components. The instrument will be
              integrated with several educational efforts. Instrument tours for undergraduate
              and high-school students will be provided, and a web-site showcasing the
              instrument and the current research projects will be created. The training that
              student researchers obtain on this advanced instrument can be readily applied
              to other academic and industrial research problems.
%%%

