Title       : Acquisition of an Optical Parametric Amplifier (OPA) Laser System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0076429

Award Number: 0076429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto D. Merlin merlin@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore B. Norris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roseanne J. Sension  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076429
Merlin, Roberto D

An award is made to the University of Michigan for
              the acquisition of an Optical parametric Amplifier (OPA). The OPA will be used
              to generate a tunable ultrashort optical pulses to probe, and control coherent
              phonons in solids using resonant excitation and to study the interaction of
              photogenerated carriers with phonons.  In particular, quantum dot systems, to
              investigate "phonon bottleneck". The bottleneck is important for unipolar
              intersubband devices such as mid-infrared detectors, since a long excited state
              lifetime enables reduced noise, but detrimental to bipolar interband devices
              such as near-infrared lasers, as it limits the modulation bandwidth. The
              interaction of hot carriers with impulsively generated coherent phonons is an
              additional new area of exploration.  The hot carriers should give rise to
              stimulated phonon emission which may be useful for controlled ultrafast
              tunneling in phonon-assisted-tunneling devices, and for the development of
              "phonon lasers."  The OPA system will also be used for photon echo and
              fluorescence up-conversion measurements in chemical and biological systems,
              particularly reaction centers of photosystem II. Fluorescence up-conversion
              will be used to probe the excited state population in the reaction centers
              directly and test models for the charge separation process.  Photon echo
              experiments will provide important information on the coupling between the
              pigment electronic states and the solvent (protein) bath. The instrument will
              be used in the training of graduate and undergraduate students who will be the
              primary users. Several groups at the University of Michigan will be able to use
              the instrument for their NSF funded research.
***

This is an instrument
              acquisition award to the University of Michigan. The principal investigators
              will purchase an Optical parametric Amplifier (OPA).  When light shines on a
              semiconductor material, electrons which are tightly bound to the atoms in the
              material are "freed up" to move throughout the semiconductor. When the initial
              energy of the electrons is high, they are referred to as "hot" electrons.  If
              the exciting light is in the form of a short (femtosecond) laser pulse, then
              the pulse generates a burst of hot electrons.  These electrons will not stay
              hot, but will rapidly cool down to the crystal temperature by generating
              crystal vibrations, or "phonons."  The cooling process can be controlled in
              sophisticated ways. For example, if the semiconductor contains quantum dots, in
              which the electronic states are discrete, then the cooling rate can be vastly
              reduced.  The study of the reduced cooling rate (referred to as the "phonon
              bottleneck") will be useful for the development of new infrared detectors and
              lasers. The study of this process may lead to new semiconductor device
              concepts. Light shining on photosynthetic proteins in green plants also results
              in electron motion, this time in a protein and across a membrane with the
              potential used to produce oxygen and carbohydrates.  This new instrument will
              be used in this type of research and other NSF funded research at the
              University of Wisconsin. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit
              tremendously by using this instrument and techniques in well designed research
              projects.   



