Title       : Vesicle Trafficking From the Trans-Golgi Network to Prevacuolar Compartment in
               Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0076520

Award Number: 0076520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $685000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natasha V. Raikhel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Some mechanisms of protein trafficking through the secretory system are
              conserved among all eukaryotes; nevertheless, plants possess a highly complex
              vacuolar targeting machinery. The complexity is the result of the diverse
              nature of vacuoles in some cell types. At least two distinct types of vacuolar
              structure have been observed: one with a lytic and one with a storage function.
              Proteins of the secretory pathway are usually first inserted into the
              endoplasmic reticulum before being transported through the endomembrane system
              in small transport vesicles. Vacuolar proteins have signals that sort them to
              vacuoles; if such signals are deleted, vacuolar proteins are instead secreted
              from the plant cell.  The plant vacuolar sorting signals identified to date
              fall into three classes: N-terminal propeptides (NTPPs), C-terminal propeptides
              (CTPPs), and much less characterized portions of mature proteins. A putative
              vacuolar sorting receptor has been identified in pea (BP80) and in Arabidopsis
              (AtELP), and it likely functions in the route taken by the proteins with NTPP
              signals. This putative receptor has been found in the Golgi, trans-Golgi
              network (TGN)-derived vesicles, and in the prevacuolar compartment (PVC).
              Although transport between the TGN and PVC is critical for faithful delivery of
              cargo proteins to the vacuole, very little is known about this process in any
              multicellular organism.  This project will focus on mechanisms that mediate
              transport between the TGN and PVC. 

Experiments to be carried out in this
              project aim at investigating further (1) the mechanisms and diversity of NTPP
              pathway in plants, (2) the in vivo function of the putative vacuolar sorting
              receptor, (3) the PVC, and (4) vesicles that deliver cargo to that compartment.
                Although much work has been done with Arabidopsis, no endogenous vacuolar
              proteins from this plant have as yet been characterized and no reliable
              antibodies against vacuolar proteins are available. Dr. Raikhel will prepare
              and characterize antibodies against vacuolar markers to analyze transport of 
              Arabidopsis proteins to the vacuoles using information available in the
              Arabidopsis EST database and by purifying proteins from isolated vesicles.
              These endogenous markers and her laboratory's well-characterized heterologous
              markers will be used to analyze trafficking in both wild-type and Arabidopsis
              mutants created in the course of this research. 

The putative vacuolar
              sorting receptor, AtELP, is a representative of a small gene family.
              Characterization of the cargo specificity of AtELP has been done only in in
              vitro assays; no proteins that bind AtELP in vivo have been identified. One
              important question is whether AtELP and related proteins  interact with a
              number of different vacuolar sorting signals or only with NTPP-containing
              cargo. Dr. Raikhel will try to answer this question using experimental
              strategies that include reverse genetics, biochemistry, and cell biology.
              

The nature and function of the PVC in plants is not well defined. Unlike in
              yeast, most SNARE proteins that mediate trafficking between the Golgi and PVC
              in plants are represented by small gene families. In addition, the Principal
              Investigator has found that in plants, some SNARE proteins have different roles
              than in yeast. Experiments will address the question of whether this is a
              result of redundancy or functional complexity of plant SNAREs, and structural
              and functional diversity of the plant PVCs. They will also examine the cargo
              and resident proteins of the PVC to see whether only proteins found in the
              AtELP-carrying vesicles are present in the PVC, or whether the PVC is a
              compartment where vesicles taking different routes deliver their cargo.  They
              will use immunoprecipitation experiments followed by a proteomic approach to
              obtain sequence information of cargo proteins from various vesicles and the
              PVC.

This research will provide important insights into the fundamental
              processes of vacuolar sorting in multicellular organisms that may be unique to
              plants and are of broad significance. Beyond its contribution to basic
              knowledge, this work will improve the success rate of sorting novel gene
              products to desired parts of the cell, an important aspect of crop design and
              biopharming.  

