Title       : Acquisition of Solid State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0076356

Award Number: 0076356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory P. Crawford Gregory_Crawford@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Hurt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Suuberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edith Mathiowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Pelcovits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This is an instrumentation for Materials Research Award to Brown University
              for the acquisition of a 'state-of-the-art' solid state nuclear magnetic
              resonance spectrometer. The instrumentation will be extensively utilized for
              five basic research programs: (1) Ordered Polymer Microstructures Formed From
              Molecular and Mesoscopic Self Assembly; (2) Nematic Director Configurations in
              Small Confining Droplets; (3) Basic Studies of Materials for Novel Drug
              Delivery Systems; (4) Micro-Structure in Carbon Material Precursors; and (5)
              Characterization of the Porosity in Microporous Carbon Materials.  Most of the
              studies revolve around the determination and characterization of molecular
              architectures of materials with practical implications in electronic displays,
              electro-optic devices, drug delivery and fuels.  An aggressive outreach program
              will be instituted which will allow other institutions remote access to the
              facility through the Internet in real time to bring this capability to a much
              wider user base in the United States.  The University of Massachusetts and the
              University of Southern Mississippi will serve as beta test sites to develop
              this remote access program.  On the educational outreach front, an on-line
              tutorial will be available for K-12 students, and a training service will be
              developed on-line for outside users of the NMR facility.  There is also a
              strong industrial user base that is composed of both large and small companies.
               Many of the interested companies have existing collaborations with the
              principal investigators.  This industrial interaction is expected to generate
              funds for the upkeep of the facility, significantly enhance current
              industrial/university interactions, and foster new relationships between
              university faculty and the private sector.  

This is an award to Brown
              University for the acquisition of a solid state nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy system. The spectrometer will be used research on a number of
              material systems of current scientific and technical importance: liquid
              crystals, polymers, and carbon materials, with broad application interests in
              displays, drug delivery and fuels.  Solid state NMR spectrometer is expected to
              significantly impact current sponsored research programs by providing
              capability to discover new materials and characterize their underpinning
              physical phenomena, create new pathways to guide synthesis and materials
              processing, and provide a power experimental technique to probe the
              composition, structure, physical properties, and performance of materials of
              technological relevance.  In addition to the proposed research, an aggressive
              outreach program is planned, which would allow other institutions remote access
              to this instrument through the Internet in real time. Two institutions have
              agreed to be beta test sites in a development effort to bring the facility to a
              much wider user base in the United States.  On the educational outreach front,
              an on-line tutorial for K-12 students will be developed as well as an on-line
              training service for outside users.  The investigators have also identified a
              strong industrial user base. This industrial interaction is expected to
              generate funds for the upkeep of the facility, significantly enhance current
              industrial/university interactions, and foster new relationships between Brown
              University faculty and the private sector.  

