Title       : Theoretical Descriptions of Vibrational Energy Transfer in Gas and Liquid Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0076128

Award Number: 0076128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin L. Sibert sibert@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ned Sibert of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to investigate theoretically
              energy flow in polyatomic molecules in both gas and liquid phases, using
              combined classical and quantum techniques.  The primary goal of this effort is
              to develop molecular models of the dynamics that are consistent with
              experimental observations.  This work will highlight and elucidate the
              mechanisms by which a system returns to equilibrium, and permit the sorting out
              of quantum from classical effects in relaxation processes.  Research topics
              include the calculation of rotation-vibration spectra of methane and its
              deuterated analogs using perturbative techniques developed by the PI, the
              detailed study of gas phase relaxation of carbon disulfide and ultimately more
              complex systems via collisions, and the theoretical study of energy flow in the
              condensed phase.  A quantitative analysis of the dynamics in these problems
              involves the accurate treatment of both the molecular eigenstates and their
              interactions with the surrounding environment.  The research outcomes are
              expected to lead to an improved understanding of the competing pathways of
              energy flow in medium-size molecules and of the coupling terms that are
              responsible for these pathways. 

Successful modeling of atmospheric
              phenomena, combustion chemistry, and drug design via molecular simulations
              require accurate knowledge of the forces between the atoms and molecules. 
              Recent experimental advances in ultrafast laser spectroscopy have enabled
              scientists to probe the time evolution of vibrationally excited systems to
              determine the pathways of energy flow in molecules.  Outcomes from theoretical
              and experimental studies of vibrational energy transfer reveal potentially
              important information about the forces that control the above technologically
              important processes.
