Title       : Development of Enhanced Scanning Probe Spectroscopies and Atomic-Scale Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0076422

Award Number: 0076422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Weiss stm@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This instrument development award to Pennsylvania State University, University
              Park is jointly funded by the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program,
              and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities program. New
              atomic-scale spectroscopic probes of materials properties will be developed. 
              These will advance the state-of-the-art in the ability to measure and carry
              chemical fingerprinting of materials surfaces  at this scale.  These will
              impact industrial, government, and academic research both via broad
              dissemination and more directly through extensive network of collaborations and
              beyond.  Specifically, the new tool will allow local measurements to study
              materials in the optical, microwave, and acoustic regimes with unprecedented
              resolution.  These new capabilities will also be exploited to measure one
              particle, molecule, or surface site at a time, so as to elucidate the intrinsic
              materials properties, as distinct from the average properties of heterogeneous
              mixtures. It will be possible to target structures and properties of interest
              for more precise synthesis and separation. The University will make these new
              measurement tools and techniques widely available.  Integral to this
              development effort is training students, post-docs, visitors, and collaborators
              in how to create, to optimize, and to evaluate new instruments of this type. 

              

This instrument development award to Pennsylvania State University,
              University Park is jointly made by the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              Program, and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities program. New
              atomic-scale spectroscopic probes of materials properties will be developed. 
              These will advance the state-of-the-art in the ability to measure and carry
              chemical fingerprinting of materials surfaces  at the nano-scale.  These will
              impact industrial, government, and academic research both via broad
              dissemination and more directly through extensive network of collaborations and
              beyond.  Specifically, the new tool will allow local measurements to study
              materials in the optical, microwave, and acoustic regimes with unprecedented
              resolution.  These new capabilities will also be exploited our to measure one
              particle, molecule, or surface site at a time, so as to elucidate the intrinsic
              materials properties, as distinct from the average properties of heterogeneous
              mixtures. It will be possible to target structures and properties of interest
              for more precise synthesis and separation. These new measurement tools and
              techniques will be made widely available broadly.  Integral to this development
              effort is training students, post-docs, visitors, and collaborators in how to
              create, to optimize, and to evaluate new instruments of this type.  
%%%

