Title       : The Genetic Architecture of Behavioral Development f Foraging Behavior In Honey
               Bees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0076811

Award Number: 0076811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Page repage@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in genetic technology have provided tools for studying the
              genetics of behavior.  These techniques have been applied to studying the
              foraging behavior of honey bees.  Some bees specialize on collecting pollen
              while others collect nectar.  Variation among bees for foraging behavior has
              been shown to be a consequence of at least 3 major genes.  These genes affect
              other behavioral traits as well, such as how bees perceive the taste of sugar,
              the sizes of the pollen and nectar loads they collect, and the age at which
              they begin foraging.  The objective of this proposal is to better understand
              the effects and interactions of the genes that have been identified.  Genetic
              analyses will be performed on strains of honey bees that were selected for
              their differences in foraging behavior.  The genetic relationships between the
              different components of foraging behavior and the development of foraging
              behavior will be determined using DNA and behavioral analyses.

These studies
              will lead to a better understanding of the genetic organization of behavioral
              traits.  Honey bees share many neuro-physiological characteristics in common
              with other animals, including humans.  However, honey bees are much easier to
              study because they can be bred, dissected, probed.  What is learned from honey
              bee behavioral genetics can easily be transferred into the classroom and used
              as a model for a broader understanding of genetics and behavior.


