Title       : Acquisition of Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Ballistic Electron Microscopy
               and Spectroscopy and for Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0076463

Award Number: 0076463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Buhrman rab8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant will provide partial support for the acquisition of a
              variable-temperature, ultra-high-vacuum (UHV) scanning tunneling microscope
              (STM), with modifications to facilitate ballistic electron emission microscopy
              (BEEM) studies of thin film systems of current scientific importance and very
              substantial technological potential.  This instrument will be interfaced to an
              existing UHV sample preparation and analysis system, and modified to enable
              tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy measurements in the presence of applied
              magnetic fields.  This instrument will be used in a graduate research and
              training program that will quantitatively examine, with nanoscale resolution,
              the spin-dependent hot-electron transport properties of ferromagnetic
              multilayer thin films and nanostructures.  A major focus will be the further
              development and application of a new type of magnetic microscopy, based on
              these transport properties, that can image magnetic structure in thin film
              systems with unprecedented, near atomic-scale resolution. 
%%%
This grant
              will provide partial support for the acquisition of a special type of scanning
              microscope that can examine, with near-atomic-scale resolution, the electronic
              transport properties and magnetic structure of ferromagnetic multilayer thin
              film materials and ferromagnetic nanostructures. This instrument will enable a
              new and very powerful type of magnetic microscopy that will be used to image
              and investigate, with unprecedented resolution, the magnetic properties of such
              thin films and nanostructures.  The instrumentation will be used in graduate
              student training and research concerned with the study, understanding and
              improvement of thin film magnetic systems.  Such materials systems are
              currently of major scientific interest, and also have very strong potential for
              technologically and commercially important applications in ultra-high-density
              magnetic information storage systems, and as nanoscale magnetic sensors. 
***
