Title       : Acquisition of Variable-Temperature Scanning Probe Microscope for Nanostructured
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0076593

Award Number: 0076593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongkun Park HPark@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Lieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program, the
              Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Harvard University will acquire
              a Variable-Temperature Scanning Probe Microscope bolt-on module from Omicron
              Instruments. This instrument will facilitate research in a number of areas,
              including a) the phase transitions of individual nanocrystals, b) the electron
              transport through individual molecules, nanocrystals and their arrays and c)
              the electron transport through individual carbon nanotubes and nanorods. The
              VT-SPM system will serve as a major piece of infrastructure for building
              present and future efforts in investigating nanostructures and materials at
              Harvard University and it will serve as a locus for new collaborative efforts
              to fabricate and manipulate nanometer-scale materials and to investigate their
              physical and chemical properties in unprecedented detail.
A scanning probe
              microscope (SPM) coupled with a variable-temperature stage allows
              atomic-resolution imaging of both conductive and nonconductive surfaces as well
              as a variety of chemically derived nanostructures at controlled sample
              temperature. This ability of SPM to image and manipulate nanometer-scale
              structures as a function of temperature opens up many new research fronts in
              chemistry, physics and related interdisciplinary areas of science since it
              allows physical and chemical investigations of nanometer-sized materials as a
              function of the most important thermodynamic variable, temperature. Using the
              SPM will expose students to a central tool for surface science, materials
              science and the emerging field of nanoscience.
***
With this award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research Program, the Department of Chemistry and
              Chemical Biology at Harvard University will acquire a Variable-Temperature
              Scanning Probe Microscope bolt-on module from Omicron Instruments. This
              instrument will facilitate research in a number of areas, including a) the
              phase transitions of individual nanocrystals, b) the electron transport through
              individual molecules, nanocrystals and their arrays and c) the electron
              transport through individual carbon nanotubes and nanorods. The VT-SPM system
              will serve as a major piece of infrastructure for building present and future
              efforts in investigating nanostructures and materials at Harvard University and
              it will serve as a locus for new collaborative efforts to fabricate and
              manipulate nanometer-scale materials and to investigate their physical and
              chemical properties in unprecedented detail. Using the SPM will expose students
              to a central tool for surface science, materials science and the emerging field
              of nanoscience.
%%%

