Title       : FASEB 2000 Summer Conference-The Tetraspanin Superfamily to be held July 4-6,
               2000 in Snowmass Village, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0076785

Award Number: 0076785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Shoshana Levy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial funding for the FASEB 2000 Summer Research
              Conference on Tetraspanins to be held July 4-July 6 2000 in Snowmass Village,
              Colorado.

This is the first conference ever to be dedicated to this
              particular superfamily of proteins. This superfamily includes a large number of
              evolutionary conserved and ubiquitously expressed genes. Tetraspanins have been
              implicated in basic biological processes such as cell proliferation, adhesion
              and motility, and membrane fusion.

This is a relatively new field of
              research, as the first members of this family were identified only a decade
              ago. The interest in the family has been growing rapidly with new members being
              identified in a wide range of species including mammals, nematodes, Drosophila
              and Schistosomes. Moreover, known members are being rediscovered continuously
              by a variety of functional assays. For example, one member of the family has
              been identified last year as the putative receptor for hepatitis c virus. 
              Because of the involvement of tetraspanins in multiple cellular activities,
              researchers in this field come from various biological disciplines. To date,
              communications in this field have been limited to publications, exchange of
              reagents, and to occasional contacts between individual scientists. This
              conference is the inaugural tetraspanin research meeting where all interested
              scientists will meet in person. This will be extremely beneficial for future
              collaborative studies focused on understanding the mechanism(s) of
              functionality of this superfamily of proteins.

The Purposes of the
              Conference are: 
1. To assemble investigators working in this rapidly evolving
              field to meet each other and to present unpublished data and discuss questions
              unique to our field.  One important aspect of the conference is to bring
              together senior scientists who have long-term involvement in the field with
              those who are newcomers to the field because they have encountered tetraspanins
              in unrelated fields of research.  Another important mission of this conference
              is to give an opportunity to junior scientists to present unpublished studies
              via an abstract-driven presentation mechanism.
2. To stimulate future
              interactions amongst investigators from diverse disciplines.
3. To identify
              experimental approaches to unsolved questions in the field.
4. To tackle
              nomenclature issues.
5. To summarize the current knowledge of the field in an
              updated review to be published in
a high profile scientific journal.

