Title       : Development of High-Quality Models for Anhydrous and Aqueous Hydrogen Fluoride
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0076515

Award Number: 0076515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kofke kofke@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0076515
Kofke, D. A.
SUNY @ Buffalo

This project is concerned
              with the development of models that can predict and characterize a broad range
              of properties of hydrogen fluoride (HF) and its mixtures with water.  The
              specific aim of the project is to develop and test molecular models appropriate
              for these systems.  The larger aim in all of this work is the advancement of
              modeling techniques that bridge ab initio quantum chemistry and bulk-phase
              modeling via molecular simulation.  Thus the specific focus of the project
              provides a vehicle for treating a problem of much broader impact.

The
              modeling incorporates as much as possible the fundamental quantum chemistry
              that governs the molecular interactions.  Several approaches are examined.  The
              first approach adopts methods that are currently in wide used for quantitative
              modeling.  Dispersion and repulsive interaction are treated with 12-6 exp-6
              models, and hydrogen-bonding is modeled via a simple electrostatic treatment
              (e.g., point charges).  It is anticipated that this methodology will fail
              because it does not capture important features of HF interactions.  Other
              approaches are considered to include the quantum-mechanical effects present in
              HF that are difficult to capture using an analytic potential.  These include a
              combined quantum- and molecular-mechanics treatment that ahs been applied to
              water, and a treatment that considers three-body effects explicitly coupled
              with a high-quality model for the dimer.  Advances in modeling of HF are then
              introduced to molecular models of water to examine the behavior of HF/water
              mixtures.  It is of interest to test the validity of any HF/water model by
              examining its ability to explain the thermodynamic inconsistency obtained in
              the application of simple models to published experimental HF/water
              vapor-liquid equilibrium data.

All modeling efforts here are concerned with
              the volumetric properties, phase equilibria and heat effects.  The behavior of
              HF in all of these directions is highly anomalous.  Additional components of
              this study are concerned with the effect of intermolecular association on
              surface tension, and on the development of improved molecular simulation
              techniques of associating fluids.  The interest in the former is driven by the
              anomalously small surface tension of HF, which contributes to its ability to
              form aerosols (a significant safety problem), while the motivation for the
              latter is related to the natural inefficiency of simulation when applied to
              associating systems, combined with our interest in studying such systems with
              computationally expensive molecular models.  

