Title       : Local Atomic Arrangements and Phase Stability in Ultrathin Metal Alloy Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0076063

Award Number: 0076063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Asta m-asta@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denis T. Keane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Quintana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this research surface-diffuse-scattering experiments and atomic-scale
              computational modeling are closely coupled in order to investigate the nature
              of the interatomic interactions governing the energetics and thermodynamic
              properties of ultra-thin metal-alloy films. The long-term goal is the
              development of a theoretical framework for predicting how the atomic structure
              and phase stability of specific alloy systems are affected by variations in
              temperature, the composition and thickness of the film, and the chemistry and
              crystalline geometry of the substrate. This experimental effort focuses on the
              investigation of chemical short-range order and local atomic displacements in
              thin-film alloys through measurements of surface x-ray scattering diffuse
              intensities. These experiments are carried out primarily at the Advanced Photon
              Source, ANL.  In order to derive quantitative structural information from these
              experiments it is necessary to measure the diffuse intensity on an absolute
              scale. For this purpose, a number of new techniques are explored for providing
              the intensity of the direct beam for surface diffuse scattering, which is the
              evanescent wave traveling along the surface. Once data is obtained on an
              absolute scale at many points in reciprocal space, chemical short-range-order
              and atomic-displacement contributions to the diffuse scattered intensity of
              ultra-thin metallic alloy solid solutions can be extracted. Such detailed
              structural information provides important insights into the nature of the
              interatomic interactions governing phase stability in thin-film alloys.  The
              theoretical effort focuses on the development of a microscopic framework for
              calculating both chemical and elastic contributions to the energetics of
              ordered and disordered structures in ultra-thin epitaxial alloy films. This
              approach makes use of the results of electronic structure calculations of the
              total energies and relaxed atomic structures of ordered alloy films to extract
              interatomic interaction parameters and force constants from first principles.
              These parameters form the basis for efficient Monte-Carlo simulations from
              which thin-film alloy structural and thermodynamic properties are calculated.
              In order to validate and further guide the development of the computational
              approach, detailed comparisons are performed between the structural information
              obtained from these simulations and from surface diffuse-scattering
              measurements.  
%%%
Bulk composition-temperature phase diagrams provide only
              limited insight into the atomic structures which form in ultra-thin (i.e., a
              single to a few monolayers in thickness) alloy films. In particular, it has
              been observed commonly that two elements, which are immiscible in bulk
              crystalline phases, form stable mixed alloy phases in ultra-thin films.
              Furthermore, it has been demonstrated recently that ultra-thin films consisting
              of alloys of immiscible metals display a unique form of lateral,
              nanometer-scale compositional ordering not observed in the bulk. The
              potentially novel catalytic and magnetic properties associated with these new
              metallic alloy phases have given rise to increasing interest in their atomic
              structures and thermodynamic stability. 
***

