Title       : Effects of Poly(A) Binding Protein on Translational Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0076344

Award Number: 0076344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dixie J. Goss dgoss@hejira.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,1158,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0076344
Goss 
This project seeks to determine the mechanism of stimulation of
              Poly (A) Binding Protein (PABP) stimulation of protein synthesis and to
              correlate the helicase interaction with translational efficiency. A direct
              fluorescence assay for binding and helicase activity will be utilized to
              determine the unwinding activity of these factors. By correlating the rate of
              unwinding with the rate of translation, an analysis can be made of the extent
              to which the helicase reaction is required and if it is rate limiting. By
              examining quantitative binding and kinetics, insight will be gained on whether
              secondary structure that blocks translation results from unfavorable binding
              equilibria or inhibition of rate-limiting steps. Ultimately, translation is a
              highly regulated process that not only has a closely controlled rate, but also
              determines the selection of mRNA. The experiments of this project are among the
              first directed at making detailed connections between helicase activity and
              translational efficiency. This project will use biochemical assays already
              understood as well as new biophysical assays that will lead to detailed kinetic
              analyses of these processes.  Protein synthesis is a highly regulated process
              that allows a cell to respond to changes in the environment rapidly and with
              and economy of material and energy resources.  Protein synthesis is necessary
              for efficient growth and development.  While a great deal of information is
              available about the components necessary and the general pathways for protein
              synthesis, much less is known about the rate-limiting steps and molecular
              details of these processes.  In order to regulate a process, one wants to
              affect the rate-limiting step and identify the crucial differences between
              normal and abnormal protein synthesis.  A better understanding of the molecular
              mechanism of protein synthesis will lead to possible therapeutic targets for
              disease states, increased growth efficiency, possible uses of plants for
              production of vaccines, and anti-viral strategies




