Title       : Planetary Collisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a0076643

Award Number: 0076643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin Canup   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0076643
Canup

Dr. Robin Canup  from the Southwest Research Institute
              will pursue a systematic study of the outcome of collisions between
              planet-sized bodies, i.e. those larger than a few thousand kilometers in
              diameter. In the past decade, it has been established that such collisions are
              the dominant process in the final stages of terrestrial planet formation.
              Current methods for parameterizing such impacts however remain primitive, and
              rely either on broad extrapolations from laboratory-scale experiments or on
              idealistic assumptions, such as completely inelastic mergers. Models of
              terrestrial accretion fundamentally require a better understanding of the
              outcomes of large-scale planetary collisions to advance significantly. 
              Accretion simulations predict that most terrestrial planets experience impacts
              by other planet-sized bodies during their final formation stages, and that the
              specific outcomes of these impacts determine the end characteristics of a
              planet, e.g. its spin, obliquity, and any impact-generated satellites. In
              addition, late-stage accretion simulations performed to date all yield
              terrestrial planetary systems significantly different than our own - most
              notably with too few planets, whose orbital eccentricities are much higher than
              those of the nearly circular orbits of Earth and Venus. All proposed
              resolutions to these discrepancies involve some type of dynamical interaction
              between the growing proto-planets and a background population of much smaller
              debris, which has not yet been included in the late-stage accretion models.
              Such a background population would need to be maintained through the production
              of ejected debris during embryo-embryo collisions; however the efficiency of
              debris ejection is currently unknown.

Dr. Canup will study of collisional
              outcomes of planet-scale impacts utilizing smooth particle hydrodynamics (SPH).
              This will include a directed look at debris production during large collisions
              and an assessment of the effects of fragmentation on the mass and angular
              momentum of colliding proto-planetary embryos. This study will be guided by the
              extensive past work modeling smaller-scale impacts (centimeter to
              asteroid-scale), as well as by studies modeling the specific impact believed to
              have formed the Earth's Moon. Specific parameters to be studied include the
              variation of escaping mass and escaping angular momentum with impactor mass,
              impactor-to-target mass ratio, impact velocity, impact parameter, and
              pre-impact spin of the target and impactor.  This award is made through the
              Planetary Astronomy Program.
***


