Title       : Regulation of Growth in Rice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0076524

Award Number: 0076524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Kende hkende@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Deepwater rice (Oryza sativa L.) is a subsistence crop in areas of Southeast
              Asia that are flooded during the rainy season. Survival of this rice depends on
              its capacity to elongate rapidly when it becomes submerged and to keep part of
              its foliage above the rising waters. This accelerated growth response is
              initiated by the altered internal gas atmosphere in submerged plants. Reduced
              oxygen levels promote synthesis of the plant growth regulator ethylene.
              Ethylene causes a reduction in the level of abscisic acid, which is a potent
              growth inhibitor, and enhances thereby the responsiveness of the plant to the
              growth hormone gibberellin. Thus, the rate of growth may be determined by the
              balance of endogenous abscisic acid and gibberellin. Internodal elongation is
              based on increased production of new cells in the intercalary meristem and on
              enhanced elongation of these newly formed cells.
Experiments outlined in this
              proposal are designed to further elucidate the mode of action of ethylene and
              gibberellin in deepwater rice internodes and to study biochemical and molecular
              reactions that underlie the growth response. 
Expansins are proteins that
              mediate loosening of the plant cell wall and, by this mechanism, are thought to
              cause growth of plants. Transgenic rice plants with increased or decreased
              expan-sin content will be used to elucidate further the function of expansins.
              Until now, the occurrence and role of four a-expansins have been examined. In
              further experiments, the localization and function of seven new a -expan-sins
              will be determined. The soon to be released genome sequence of rice will be
              examined for additional a -expansin genes to complete the study of this gene
              family in rice. Experiments will also be extended to determine the occurrence
              and role of  b-expansins in deepwater rice internodes. Evidence indicates that
              these expansins may be more effective as cell-wall-loosening proteins in
              monocots, such as rice, than are the a -expansins.
A number of
              gibberellin-regulated genes have been identified in deepwater rice internodes.
              One of these encodes a protein (Os-GRF1) that appears to be involved in
              transcriptional regulation. Its function will be further investigated,
              especially with respect to its interaction with other regulatory proteins. Two
              other gibberellin-regulated genes encoding a putative plasma membrane receptor
              (DD3) and a trans-membrane kinase (Os-TMK) will also be studied further with
              respect to their interaction with other cellular components.
The mechanism by
              which ethylene reduces the endogenous content of abscisic acid will be
              examined. The most likely route is the -promotion by ethylene of abscisic acid
              oxidation to phaseic acid. If this proves to be the case, the cDNA encoding ABA
              8'-hydroxylase, the enzyme that mediates oxidation of abscisic acid, will be
              cloned, and the effect of ethylene on the expression of the corresponding gene
              will be determined. These experiments will address the mechanism of ethylene
              action at the molecular level.
The above project on the regulation of growth
              in rice will advance the general understanding of growth processes in plants
              and will serve the education of junior research associates as well as that of
              undergraduate students who have, in the past, written senior theses or term
              papers based on experimental work with deepwater rice. 

