Title       : Native American Ecologies and Sustainable Development: Group Travel for a
               Symposium of the 50th International Congress of Americanists, Summer 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a0076552

Award Number: 0076552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Sluyter sluyter@gis.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2891,5915,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is to provide partial funding for eleven U.S. geographers to
              participate in the symposium on Native American Cultural Ecologies at the 50th
              International Congress of Americanists (ICA) in Warsaw in July 2000.  The
              multinational interdisciplinary group of between thirty and forty experts from
              Europe, North, Middle, and South America who will collaborate in that symposium
              intend to synthesize, reevaluate, and redirect theoretical and applied efforts
              regarding the relationship between sustainable development and the ecological
              knowledges and practices of native peoples in the present and the past. 
              Scholarship on both past and present native ecologies is well advanced and has
              achieved many significant insights.  But without theoretical integration of
              those different strands into a meaningful whole that cuts across study of the
              past and the present to engage contemporary theorization of society, nature,
              space, and their intersection in development and conservation challenges, the
              empirical detail will mount without significant general
              understanding.

Understanding of the relationship between sustainable
              development and the ecological knowledges and practices of native peoples
              remains as intellectually and societally important as it remains controversial
              and unclear.  The notion of "sustainable development" sits at the core of
              addressing the two great challenges of our time -- global poverty and
              environmental degradation.  Those two phenomena are linked in complex ways at
              multiple scales and with increasing globalization will become ever more
              interwoven.  The special symposium will strengthen an international network of
              collaboration and help increase our understanding of the various issues
              associated with sustainable development and native ecologies.

