Title       : Regional Mutagenesis Utilizing Activator (Ac) in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0076892

Award Number: 0076892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1080369            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Brutnell tpb8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Transposable element Activator (Ac) often moves to linked sites, thus limiting
              its use in non-targeted mutagenesis programs.  To overcome this limitation, Ac
              will be distributed at approximately 10 cM intervals throughout the maize
              genome. Each of the approximately 200 non-transgenic 'anchor Ac (aAc) lines' in
              this near isogenic set will harbor a single active Ac element at a unique
              chromosomal locus.  By utilizing an aAc line(s) that maps within 10 cM of any
              mapped gene or EST for directed tagging, these lines will provide an extremely
              powerful tool for gene isolation and functional analysis.

In addition to
              facilitating the cloning of genes, the inbred nature of the population and low
              copy number of Ac elements in the genome will permit identification of subtle
              phenotypic changes in agronomically important traits such as plant height and
              flowering time.  An equally important feature of this system is that multiple
              Ac-induced alleles can be generated from unstable Ac insertions to produce an
              allelic series. Thus, the generation of these aAc lines will provide an
              essential complement to the gene tagging programs currently being developed. 
              This program will not only allow for the identification of novel mutant
              phenotypes, but will also provide a uniform genetic background for examining
              epistatic relationships and establishing genetic hierarchies. 

An important
              consideration in developing this system for general use, will be to determine
              the frequencies with which genes can be tagged relative to the position of the
              aAc.  To address this issue, approximately 10,000 new transpositions will be
              selected from aAc's that have been distributed at roughly 10 cM intervals along
              chromosome 1S.  Plants will be self-pollinated to generate segregating F2
              populations that will be screened in sand benches and in the field for mutant
              phenotypes.  Data from these studies will be used to develop a generalized
              strategy for directed and regional mutagenesis programs.

An essential
              component of this program, is the development of the Emerson Summer Genetics
              Program to be established at the Boyce Thompson Institute and Cornell.  This
              program will provide researchers from the US and abroad with the opportunity to
              utilize the Ac anchor lines while helping to generate the approximately 10,000
              F1 and F2 families described above.  Access to field sites is particularly
              important for researchers who are interested in initiating a maize genetics
              program and for those without access to field sites at their home institutions.
               To help bridge the gap between research and education, undergraduate students,
              high school teachers and a select group of high school seniors will be
              integrated into this program.  Thus, teachers and students will spend up to 3
              weeks in the field as a team with senior researchers from the US and abroad. 
              The interactions and discussions that develop in the field and have long been
              part of the maize genetics tradition will help foster collaborations, increase
              public understanding of science and promote research in this agronomically
              important cereal.

