Title       : A Digital IdeaKeeper For K-12: NSDL Scaffolded Portal Services for Information
               Analysis and Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0226241

Award Number: 0226241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Quintana quintana@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elliot M. Soloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Krajcik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While national organizations such as the AAAS and the NRC can call for K-12
              students to carry out science inquiry activities, students must be provided
              with supports for such challenging intellectual activity.  Digital libraries,
              such as the National Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
              Education Digital Library (NSDL) can be a vital part of science inquiry by
              giving students access to range of scientific information and resources:
              websites, data sets, images, etc.  In reality, NSDL-compliant digital
              libraries, in particular, must go beyond simply services that support students
              in finding information and also provide scaffolded services to support students
              in analyzing and synthesizing the information they find in their searches with
              respect to the driving questions they are investigating in their science
              inquiry projects.   
 
This project addresses the needs to (1) design and
              build the IdeaKeeper, a specialized scaffolded NSDL portal and services for
              K-12 science learners and (2) deploy versions of IdeaKeeper in Detroit middle
              school classrooms to assess the impact of such supportive digital library
              services on learning. IdeaKeeper incorporates scaffolds, or software features
              to support students in analyzing library resources and synthesizing the
              information into arguments addressing their driving questions.  By
              incorporating IdeaKeeper into science curriculum units, IdeaKeeper is
              classroom-tested to assess the effectiveness of the analysis/synthesis
              scaffolds and to articulate new scaffolds and capabilities extending current
              learner-centered digital library projects.   
 
Thus the impact of the
              IdeaKeeper project includes: 
- the specialized IdeaKeeper portal and
              associated services as components for the NSDL for other learners to use and
              other researchers to extend with new functionalities and scaffolds.   
- the
              demonstration of how an NSDL-compliant set of services can indeed support K-12
              science learning.  The impact of the IdeaKeeper scaffolds and functionality is
              assessed and articulated in terms of how well they support students in doing
              information analysis/synthesis and how much students learn about information
              analysis/synthesis.  
- the IdeaKeeper project acts as a guidepost to what new
              services are still needed to more effectively support science inquiry and
              science learning in K-12.  

