Title       : Collaborative Research: TeachEngineering -- Hands On Engineering Resources for
               K-12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0226236

Award Number: 0226236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Mooney mooney@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collections project builds on extensive K-12 engineering curriculum
              developments funded by the NSF GK-12 program with several engineering colleges
              collaborating to create an on-line digital library of engineering resources
              (the TeachEngineering Collection) for use by K-12 teachers and engineering
              college faculty conducting outreach in their communities. Each institution is
              already partnered with numerous local school districts to promote engineering
              as a vehicle for math and science integration. Lessons and activities that
              introduce engineering to K-12 students while serving as integrators of science
              and mathematics concepts will populate the Collection.  The lessons and
              activities in the TeachEngineering Collection relate to everyday encounters in
              the lives of youngsters, thus providing a context for student learning.
              Collections curricula meet explicit minimum quality criteria and are aligned
              with national science, mathematics and technology educational standards. 
              Activities can be constructed at low cost with readily available materials --
              an  "engineering on a shoestring" approach to encourage adoption of the
              Collection. The Collection also provides a portal to several "living
              laboratories" -- structures, facilities and processes instrumented with
              sensors, providing data on-line in real time.   The project team also is
              reaching out to end-users by promoting workshops that train teachers and
              faculty to use the Collection. The American Society for Engineering Education
              involvement guarantees long-term sustainability, with responsibility for
              certification and testing of new curricular components, and nationwide
              dissemination and promotion of the Collection.  The collaborators are designing
              the system architecture, developing the search engine, and refining and testing
              the system and contents, including the "living laboratories" component, in
              collaboration with K-12 teachers. Integration and interoperability with other
              NSDL collections are being addressed. Concurrently, the Collection content is
              being standardized, converting a variety of K-12 engineering curricula into
              searchable, standards-based documents with a common look and feel.  In a set of
              second-level tasks, the team is populating and testing the Collection,
              integrating it into the Tufts Digital Library, completing the loading and
              testing of the initial contents, conducting teacher and faculty workshops, and
              transferring the Collection oversight to ASEE.  Moving K-12 engineering
              outreach curricula from individual sites to a unified and useful library
              provides accessible resources for the K-12 community and stimulates the
              involvement of engineering faculty and professionals in K-12 education. Broader
              impacts of this work are engaging more engineering programs in K-12 outreach,
              providing the expanded opportunities to dramatically increase general STEM
              literacy and expanding the pool of youngsters eagerly prepared for a future in
              engineering.
