Title       : Collaborative Research: A Digital Library Collection for Visually Exploring
               United States Demographic and Social Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0226279

Award Number: 0226279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Beveridge andy@troll.soc.qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project between CUNY and UCLA is a collection of web-based
              materials that will enable depiction and exploration of growth and social
              change in the United States since its beginnings.  It is accessible to students
              from elementary through postgraduate school, library users, the media, and all
              others interested in relating a variety of demographic and other data to one
              another.  It is being implemented so a high level of technical sophistication
              is not required of users to visualize the results in the form of maps and
              charts, to download the data for further analysis, and to relate the data to
              specific issues in the social sciences.

Specifically the following elements
              will be part of the project:
1) Census data and maps at the county level from
              1790 through 2000, which depict the sweeping change.
 
2) Census data and
              maps at the tract level, beginning with the largest cities in 1910 and
              expanding until 1990, when they become available for the entire country.

3)
              Data from the street and road layer of the Census, which are part of the
              national 
map of the United States and used to define Census tracts and other
              Census geography.

4) Available images and text that can be geographically
              located and related to the underlying demography. The images recorded by the
              award winning photojournalist Camilo Vergara, who has documented areas of the
              large cities for the past 30 years, illustrate the demographic material.  The
              demographics, in turn, provide contextual information for his photos.

5) A
              system for visually displaying and manipulating the maps, data, images, and
              texts. This effort draws on several other projects, including, the National
              Historic Geographic Information System (NHGIS), Visualizing and Exploring
              United States Urban and Rural Social Change, 1790-2000 --Interactive Multimedia
              and Web Based Tools (both funded by NSF), and the Great American History
              Machine, as well digitization efforts in New York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia,
              Indianapolis, Chicago and elsewhere.

In short, the digital library serves as
              a demographic, geographic and social grid for the United States. The grid also
              can accommodate the addition of other materials on land use, transportation,
              health care, and the like. Examples are provided, especially for the major
              metropolitan areas of New York and Los Angeles. All materials are developed in
              standard formats and integrated with a dynamic mapping system and an
              interactive multimedia viewer to provide a user-friendly interface.  Materials
              are freely available for interactive use, downloading, sharing and enhancement
              on publicly accessible servers at UCLA and CUNY.  Also, they are being made
              available to other digital repositories. The NHGIS at the Minnesota Population
              Center is distributing the materials, which ultimately will be archived along
              with the NHGIS materials at the Inter-University Consortium for Political and
              Social Research.

