Title       : Limiting Behavior of Queueing Networks and Interacting Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0226245

Award Number: 0226245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maury D. Bramson bramson@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Bramson's main research on stochastic processes continues to be in the
              areas of queueing networks and interacting particle systems. Two major themes
              in the first topic are the stability of queueing networks and their heavy
              traffic limits. A queueing network is said to be stable when the associated
              Markov process is positive recurrent. The heavy traffic limit of a sequence of
              queueing networks is the diffusive limit obtained by applying the usual central
              limit scaling. Results over the last decade have led to a better understanding
              of queueing networks, although a general theory is lacking. The researcher
              plans to investigate the behavior of queueing networks under certain well-known
              disciplines, such as processor sharing and earliest-due-date, first-served.
              Other related topics in queueing theory include dynamic scheduling in heavy
              traffic and the stability of self-managed models for the internet. Interacting
              particle systems consist of systems of many particles that evolve according to
              some interaction law. Such systems are frequently motivated by models from the
              physical and biological sciences. The researcher plans to investigate models
              that have creation and annihilation of mass, as well the stationary measures of
              certain exclusion processes. 

Professor Bramson's current research is in two
              areas of probability theory, queueing networks and interacting particle
              systems. In the first area, one studies the behavior of large systems of
              individuals who proceed from one server to the next, until their needs are
              satisfied and they leave the system. "Individuals" here should be interpreted
              in a general sense, and may be customers waiting to be served (for instance, at
              a bank or at a service counter), jobs in some manufacturing process (such as
              the production of semiconductor wafers) or information packets on the internet.
              In practice, one is often faced with the choice of whom to serve first. This
              choice can substantially affect the efficiency of a system, and sometimes even
              its stability. That is, based on how good a service rule is in a given setting,
              the number of customers waiting in line may typically remain small over
              extended periods of time, or may tend to grow without bound. Work over the last
              decade has shown that such systems can be unstable for unexpected reasons. The
              researcher plans to continue his work in this area and investigate the
              stability of the network under certain well-known service rules. The area of
              interacting particle systems is motivated by models from the physical and
              biological sciences consisting of large numbers of "individuals" who interact
              according to some rule. For instance, individuals might be molecules moving
              about according to some rule or cancer cells spreading along a surface. The
              behavior of these systems can depend strongly on the nature of their
              interactions. The researcher plans to continue his research on certain of these
              models. 

