Title       : Purchase of X-Ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0226402

Award Number: 0226402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Sheridan rss@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Lightner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent J. Catalano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suk-Wah Tam-Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, the Department of Chemistry at the University of Nevada in Reno will
              upgrade an X-ray diffractometer with an area detector for small molecule
              crystallography. This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas
              including the following: a) investigations of metal-metal interactions in large
              cage complexes known as metallocryptands, probing metallophilic interactions
              between simple trigonally coordinated platinum and palladium phosphine
              complexes and heavy metal ions; b) development of ligands for aqueous or
              biphasic organometallic catalysis; c) synthesis and characterization of benzoid
              nanostructures focused on ribbon and helical structures; d) directed synthesis
              of short nanotubes and perfluorinated carbon based materials including
              fullerenes; e) investigations of hydrogen bonding in oligopyrrole species; f)
              studies in metal promoted syntheses; g) development of catalysts for the
              addition of nucleophiles to terminal alkynes; h) construction of metal
              templates for the asymmetric synthesis of chiral phosphiranes and phosphirenes;
              and i) the investigation of structure-order-property relationships in lyotropic
              chromonic mesogens. 
The x -ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
              measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including
              bond distances and angles, and the spatial arrangement of the molecule relative
              to the neighboring molecules. These studies will have an impact in a number of
              areas, including materials chemistry and the preparation of more efficient
              catalysts. In addition, graduate and undergraduate students at the University
              of Nevada in Reno will have a unique and important opportunity to participate
              in a chemical research technique that many will depend upon in their future
              jobs.  

