Title       : Bone craft production in early medieval Ireland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0226739

Award Number: 0226739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pam J. Crabtree pc4@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Supported by the National Science Foundation, James Boyle will undertake the
              examination of bone and antler artifact production from early medieval Ireland,
              c. AD 400 - 800. Irish society, while adopting some aspects of Roman culture,
              most notably Christianity, did not receive an impetus from this contact to
              develop into a unified state. Instead the island remained a decentralized,
              non-urban and mainly pastoral society dominated by numerous competing kingdoms.
              Because of this, Ireland has traditionally been ignored in discussions of
              social complexity and the emergence of urban states after the European "Dark
              Ages." Recent research however suggests that political power was increasingly
              being focused in the hands of secular elites towards the end of this period and
              that Ireland may have been a significantly complex society, yet one that
              differed from its European neighbors. One of the hallmarks of this increasing
              level of social complexity is the diversity and decoration of dress fasteners.
              Irish bronze brooches and pins are recognized as some of the most important
              pieces of Celtic artwork, and during the medieval period these objects would
              have represented the wealth and social standing of the individual wearer. The
              focus of this research will be on bone and antler pins, a largely overlooked
              category of dress fastener. Often considered to be inferior copies of metal
              pins, these personal items have been described as status objects marking the
              lower classes in Irish society. One of the ways early medieval elites
              solidified their power was through the control of the production of status
              objects such as brooches. This project will examine whether the production of
              bone pins was likewise controlled by the upper classes of Irish society.
              

This project will entail the examination of all excavated early medieval
              bone pins and bone working debris from the Republic of Ireland and Northern
              Ireland, UK. Although bone pins have been recognized as unique artifacts of the
              early medieval period since the 1930s, few researchers have ever examined the
              collection of pins held in the museums of Ireland. The data collected in this
              research will be used to construct the first ever typology of Irish medieval
              bone pins. Mr. Boyle will combine the distribution and chronological
              development of these pins with complementary data from other studies of bronze
              brooches and pins to create a comprehensive computerized database of dress
              fasteners in the early medieval period. This project will also determine if the
              production of bone pins is limited to high status sites or whether bone pins
              were the handiwork of the majority of the medieval population. This research
              will be the first examination of the production and distribution of any class
              of bone artifact from the early medieval period and one of the first studies in
              Ireland to incorporate craft production as an element in social development.
              This project will not only inform the debate over the growth of elite power in
              early medieval Ireland, but also demonstrate how overlooked aspects of the
              archaeological record can be utilized in theoretically important ways.

