Title       : ReMarkable Texts: A Digital Notepad for the NSDL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0226216

Award Number: 0226216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andries van Dam avd@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Zeleznik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Targeted Research project is investigating capabilities for an innovative
              pen-based digital notebook to enable users, particularly students, to work and
              interact with NSDL's digital materials in a personalized manner. The main
              features of the system include viewing, taking notes on, annotating (e.g.
              freehand ink, post-it notes, and bidirectional fine-grained hyperlinks),
              organizing, and collaborating on multimedia documents, all with the ability to
              replay the temporal sequence of one's notes in the contexts in which they were
              made. Whiteboarding activities are also supported along with audio facilities
              to capture voice commentary digitally and anchor it to a specific document
              location. The primary targeted device is a lightweight, high-resolution tablet
              computer used in an environment with ubiquitous wireless LAN in frequented
              areas (e.g., on a college campus) and a WAN for other areas. However to ensure
              widespread usage, the system also works on standard desktop and laptop
              computers. Finally, the system includes facilities for personalized
              organization of documents and notes, for example folder and outline views,
              search, and default support for personal spatial hypertext provided by the
              basic annotation and linking facilities.

This research effort extends
              Microsoft Research's DISC project (DIStributed Classroom) in the areas
              of
collaboration, fine-grained hyperlinking, multidocument journaling and
              synchronization, and document
and note organization. In addition to partnering
              with Microsoft, the PI and team are working with other NSDL projects, such as
              Carnegie Mellon University's Threading Information Pathways Through NSDL Video,
              to help integrate the system with the NSDL's existing and future services and
              infrastructure. With the capabilities of this project in hand users of the NSDL
              are much better able to make the available materials of NSDL "their own",
              forming a personalized, hyperlinked portfolio from their digital library
              experience that supports a natural and enjoyable process of learning.

