Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Resource Use, Crop Dispersals, and the
               Transition to Agriculture in Prehistoric Panama: Evidence from Starch Grains
               and Macroremains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0226609

Award Number: 0226609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Ranere ranere@temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Research on paleoethnobotany and the origins of agriculture in Panama will be
              conducted by Ruth Dickau, under the guidance of Dr. Anthony J. Ranere.  Ms.
              Dickau will examine carbonized plant remains (macrobotanical remains) from soil
              samples, and starch grains recovered from stone tools, from a range of
              archaeological sites in Panama.  These sites date from 11,000 to 500 years ago,
              and are located in Western highland Panama and Central Panama.  This temporal
              and spatial range provides an opportunity to examine how the exploitation of
              plant resources by prehistoric people changed over time in different regions.
              Of particular interest is the domestication of a number of plant species, their
              dispersal into Panama, and the transition from an economy based on hunting and
              gathering to one based on agriculture.  Some of the earliest evidence in the
              Neotropics for the use of important crops such maize and manioc has been found
              in Central Panama, dating to ca. 6000-4800 BC.  Other crops, such as arrowroot
              and squash, appear even earlier.  By examining the botanical remains from
              pre-ceramic sites in Panama, the introduction and spread of domesticated
              species can be better understood.   Panama's location between the major
              domestication centers of Mexico and northern South America, and its nature as a
              narrow isthmus, make it an ideal location to study the early dispersal of
              various crop species.
Analyses of macrobotanical remains and starch grains
              compliment previous work done on phytoliths and pollen from this region.  The
              use of multiple lines of evidence is critical in the reconstruction of
              human-plant interactions in the past, particularly in tropical environments
              where preservation of organic material is not always optimal.  Macrobotanical
              remains are particularly useful in identifying tree and palm species that play
              an important role in indigenous tropical economies.  Starch grain analysis is a
              relatively recent archaeobotanical technique that has the potential to
              revolutionize our understanding of agricultural origins in the Neotropics. 
              Many root crops, an important dietary staple of modern tropical peoples, are
              virtually invisible in archaeological sites because the tubers do not usually
              preserve.  However, recent studies have shown that these crops leave diagnostic
              starch grains on the stone tools that were used to process them, and therefore
              can yield important information on the domestication and use of these crops. 
              Combined, these techniques will provide a much more comprehensive picture of
              plant use in the region.
The data collected by these techniques will be used
              to examine questions of resource use in prehistoric Panama and the dispersal of
              domesticated plant species into this region.   The adoption of these
              domesticated plants and the eventual transition from a foraging economy to an
              agricultural economy had profound social, political, and environmental
              consequences.  The research in Panama should contribute to the development of a
              more robust theory of the origins of agriculture in the New World.  More
              broadly, Ms. Dickau's research should enhance our understanding of how people
              interacted with tropical environments over time, and provide further insight
              into the overall nature of human ecology in tropical forests.

