Title       : North Carolina Partnership for Improving Mathematics and Science (NC-PIMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0226877

Award Number: 0226877
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12950932           (Estimated)
Investigator: Verna L. Holoman holomanv@northcarolina.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Iris R. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Bright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose J. D'Arruda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of N C Gen Admin Off
	      PO Box 2688
	      Chapel Hill, NC  275152688    919/962-4557

NSF Program : 1791      MSP-Comprehensive Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The North Carolina Partnership for Improving Mathematics and Science (NC-PIMS)
              is a joint effort between 4-partner institutions of the University of North
              Carolina General Administration (East Carolina University, Fayetteville State
              University, University of North Carolina-Pembroke and the University of North
              Carolina Wilmington) and the University of North Carolina Mathematics and
              Science Education Network (UNC-MSEN) which has centers at three university
              hubs.  School district partners number 17 in proximity to those hubs.  An
              additional partner is the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction.  The
              partner districts have a student population in excess of 200,000 (with over 40%
              classified as minority) and share the common characteristics of being rural and
              poor relative to state averages.  To help the school districts increase student
              learning of science and mathematics while simultaneously decreasing current
              achievement gaps, NC-PIMS has three foci:

1.	To develop Policies and
              District Leadership that support mathematics and science instruction.  Efforts
              include: (a) establishment of a State Advisory Board to align policies and
              improve communication between districts and state agencies; (b) establishment
              of District Leadership Teams to help integrate the project within district
              reform efforts; and (c) STEM professionals who will assist teachers in
              enhancing the depth of content in instruction.
2.	To provide Teacher
              Professional Development and Support.  Activities include: (a) hiring full-time
              Facilitators who will deliver professional development and provide direct
              support to teachers; (b) education of building-level Lead Teachers (designated
              elementary teachers and department chairs of middle and high schools) who will
              become model teachers and provide inservice for peers; and (c) creation and
              delivery of eleven professional development courses in science and
              mathematics.
3.	Implementation of Student Engagement activities that encourage
              students to remain engaged in science and mathematics learning.  Examples
              include: (a) out-of-school student activities to generate motivation in preK-8;
              and (b) information sessions for parents to assist them in supporting
              children's learning.  


