Title       : The Journal of Chemical Education Digital Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0226244

Award Number: 0226244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $930277             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Moore jwmoore@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward W. Vitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa J. Zielinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collections project by the Journal of Chemical Education (JCE) is creating
              the JCE Digital Library.  Four major new collections are being added to the
              considerable digital material already available at JCE Online, the JCE Web
              site.  Each collection is being carefully reviewed to ensure that it contains
              materials that are scientifically accurate.  Reviewers are also requiring that
              materials embody pedagogy supported by the chemical education research
              literature.  Each collection is being categorized using keywords, organized by
              curricular level, and correlated with textbooks to allow quick and easy access
              by teachers from high school chemistry through graduate-level courses.

The
              four collections being developed include:

DigiDemos-digitized text,
              graphics, sound, and video of chemical demonstrations that are enabling
              teachers to learn the most effective demonstration techniques, the latest
              important safety and waste disposal information, and exemplary pedagogy
              involving demonstrations.

Computer Algebra Systems-documents for Mathcad,
              Mathematica, Maple, or MATLAB are being designed to help students learn
              mathematically intensive aspects of chemistry.

JCE WebWare-a collection of
              Web-deliverable animations, simulations, calculations, and other pedagogically
              useful items are being incorporated into classroom presentations to promote
              discussion and interaction among students, and to provide new insights through
              graphic and other non-traditional means.

Resources for Student
              Assessment-Web-deliverable materials including homework, quiz, and examination
              questions with anytime anywhere, feedback and tutoring based on student
              responses, and a variety of new approaches to student assessment are being
              developed.

JCE is providing a paid staff to organize volunteer efforts in
              order to maintain and to update content, and will continue to do so after the
              project ends.  JCE also is providing a well-established review process
              involving more than 4,000 reviewers, many of who already review digital
              materials.  Finally, feature columns edited by volunteers with expertise in
              specific content areas and who can serve as nuclei for additional collections
              materials are available once the JCE Digital Library is established.

JCE is
              ideally suited to develop this Collection of digital materials for chemical
              education as it has nearly 80 years of expertise and experience in chemical
              education and a worldwide reputation.  JCE is where chemistry teachers from
              high school through graduate school look for high quality materials.  This
              Collection is enhancing and improving science education throughout the USA,
              thereby fostering better public understanding of chemistry and science and
              aiding in the recruitment of all kinds of students to careers in science. 
              Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences in recognition of the importance of a digital library for the
              support of the learning of chemistry.
