Title       : The Impact of Leadership Turnover and Regime Type on the Evolution and
               Maintenance of International Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0226926

Award Number: 0226926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alastair M. Smith Alastair.Smith@Yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fiona McGillivray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

In an age of globalization, interactions between states are increasingly
              common. Nations cooperate on many dimensions. For instance, they participate in
              international agreements, they invest in each other economies (Foreign Direct
              Investment) and the lend each other money (sovereign debt). Yet, all nations do
              not participate equally. Although the world appears increasingly cooperative,
              the underlying anarchic nature of the international system remains unchanged
              and no overarching authority exists to enforce agreements. Therefore, the
              ability to cooperate relies upon trust between nations. For instance, nations
              will only lend to a foreign state if they trust it to repay its debts.
              

Traditional liberal theory suggests nations enforce cooperation by
              conditioning future behavior upon current interactions; for instance, by
              refusing to make future loans to a country unless it repays debts today.
              Through the use of such reciprocal punishment strategies, liberal theory
              explains why cooperation is possible, but it fails to account for the great
              variance in the level of cooperation between states. The Principal
              Investigators propose regime type and the turnover of leaders accounts for
              these differences. 

The Principal Investigators propose a theory of leader
              specific punishments in which the responsible leader, not the nation she
              represents, is held accountable for a breakdown in cooperation. By refusing to
              cooperate with this leader in the future, foreign nations create an incentive
              for the citizenry to remove their leader and replace her with a new leader.
              Since foreign nations have no grudge against the new leader, this restores
              cooperation between states. This argument suggests important features in the
              pattern of cooperation between states. First, the turnover of leaders refreshes
              soured relations between states, as the restoration of relations between
              Yugoslavia and western states following the removal of Slobodan Milosevic
              illustrates. Second, regime type affects the extent to which regimes can
              cooperate. Regime type determines the ease of leader removal. In autocratic
              regimes, where the cost of replacing a leader is typically high, the benefits
              of restoring international cooperation are unlikely to compensate citizens for
              the costs of deposing their leader. Leaders in such systems can violate
              international agreements with impunity. In democratic systems replacing leaders
              is much easier. As such, the citizens of democracies can restore halted
              international cooperation by simply replacing their leader. Democratic leaders
              who violate international agreements or norms of cooperation risk losing their
              jobs. This makes them more likely to honor their commitments and makes them
              more trustworthy. 

The Principal Investigators propose testing how regime
              type and leadership turnover affects relations between states in a variety of
              contexts. Events data, such as COPDAB, allow the construct of indices of
              cooperation between states. Using such indices the Principal Investigators
              intend to study how one state reacts to the behavior of another and how these
              relations are moderated by domestic political institutions and leadership
              tenure. The Principal Investigators also propose examining dyadic trade flows,
              sovereign debt, foreign direct investment and the termination of sanctions. In
              addition to compiling numerous existing data sources, the proposed empirical
              research requires substantial updating of leaders data (Bueno de Mesquita and
              Siverson 1995). 



