Title       : The NSDL Math Tools Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0226284

Award Number: 0226284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $853113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Klotz klotz@mathforum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This NSDL Collections project is aggregating mathematical software critical to
              the learning of school mathematics, including software for handheld devices,
              small interactive web-based tools such as applets, and other small modules
              based on software application packages. Specific activities include cataloging
              the math tools so that teachers, students and other users can easily find which
              ones fit their needs; presenting the tools using content strand portals for
              grades K-7 and course subject portals for grades 8-Calculus; and offering
              services to help teachers and students learn to utilize the technology through
              such means as integration into the Math Forum's Problems of the Week,
              facilitation of discussion groups, and provision of manufacturer assistance. In
              addition a special sub-collection of reviewed and relevant mathematics
              education research on the use of technology in learning mathematics is being
              developed. The benefits of these mathematics tools are being promoted through
              the Math Forum's large and active community. Metadata describing the tools in
              the collection is being shared to the larger NSDL via the Open Archives
              Initiative protocols. Development collaborators include personnel from SRI, Key
              Curriculum Press, Texas Instruments, the Shodor Foundation, and Utah State. The
              impact of this collection is very broad, offering much needed support for
              teachers' use of math tools and feedback for developers producing those
              software tools.
