Title       : Second Generation Digital Mathematics Resources with Innovative Content for
               Metadata Harvesting and Courseware Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0226327

Award Number: 0226327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $796689             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Mischo w-mischo@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hassan Aref  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Trott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric W. Weisstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collections project is developing second-generation capabilities for two
              mathematical digital libraries that support mathematics, engineering, physics,
              and applied sciences education and research the
"MathWorld" site at
              http://mathworld.wolfram.com and the "Functions" site at
              
http://functions.wolfram.com. Functional enhancements are being added to
              these two comprehensive and content-rich sites, and collection and item-level
              metadata from these resources are being integrated into the NSDL Metadata
              Repository framework via maintenance of an Open Archives Initiative (OAI)
              server available for harvesting by the NSDL core integration group. The project
              team is also investigating several issues, including the potential for semantic
              search of functions and mathematical content, and the capability of
              characterizing and mapping or adding equations appearing in the physics journal
              literature to the "Functions" site. The project team is comprised of
              investigators at Wolfram Research, Inc. and faculty from the UIUC Library and
              Department of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (TAM). Sample courseware and
              model problems for several TAM applied mechanics courses are incorporating
              content and functional components from the two sites in the collection and are
              being used to assess the utility of the sites in teaching and course
              development.

