Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Exploring the Role of Procedural Equity
               in Siting Controversies in Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0226983

Award Number: 0226983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9953               (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Kasperson rkasperson@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dominic Golding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research characterizes siting conflicts in Japan and evaluates how Japanese
              siting approaches have addressed procedural equity. The research examines the
              view of fairness expressed by different parties involved in siting two
              underground rock laboratories (URLs), one at Mizunami and the other at
              Horonobe. These facilities are designed to study the technical feasibility of
              geologic disposal of high-level nuclear waste. Although neither of the URLs is
              intended to store any radiological materials, local residents have expressed
              strong opposition. By closely examining the siting processes of the two URLs
              through intensive analysis of public documents and in-depth interviews, the
              research will illuminate the role and significance of procedural equity. What
              are the key elements necessary to achieve procedural equity? What are the
              public's major concerns about the proposed facilities and the siting processes,
              and how have implementers and regulators evaluated and responded to these
              concerns? Are concerns different between host and neighboring communities? How
              do the key actors perceive the current institutional arrangements (e.g.,
              compensation packages) that are designed to address procedural equity? How does
              the Japanese process and experience differ from that outside Japan?

These
              case studies will offer new theoretical insights about the role and
              significance of procedural equity. The research will contribute to scholarship
              on risk communication and public participation by refining our und3erstanding
              of the role of equity in environmental and risk decision-making processes.  

