Title       : SGER-Lu-Hf and Re-Os Systematics of the Earliest Crust in Antarctica: The Napier
               Complex of Enderby Land
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0226031

Award Number: 0226031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97229              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel B. Mukasa mukasa@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs, allows a US investigator
              to participate in integrated geochemical and isotopic investigations of an
              unusual suite of ancient rocks from East Antarctica. This project entails a
              Lu-Hf and Re-Os isotopic study of the Archean Napier Complex on the East
              Antarctic Shield using rock samples collected by two Japanese expeditions to
              the remote regions of Mt. Riiser-Larsen and Tonagh Island in 1996-97 and 1998.
              These samples are being made available for a collaborative investigation with
              Japanese scientists. It is imperative that the work in the US and Japan move
              ahead simultaneously. The Japanese team is focusing on rock and mineral major
              oxide compositions, Nd, Sr and Pb isotopic compositions, as well as SHRIMP
              zircon U-Pb dating on aliquots of these samples. The component of the work
              supported by this award focuses specifically on Archean crustal and mantle
              evolution for which the Napier Complex has, potentially, some of the
              best-preserved rocks on Earth. This project will use the Lu-Hf and Re-Os
              approach because of increasing recognition that the Sm-Nd system can be
              perturbed severely by younger metamorphic and metasomatic events. Furthermore,
              presently the number of data for initial Os isotopic compositions of Archean
              mafic-ultramafic magmas worldwide is very small, largely because of
              post-crystallization alteration events and the analytical challenges that have
              only recently been overcome. In collaboration with Dr. Rick Carlson at the
              Carnegie Institution, we will attempt to exploit the freshness of Napier
              Complex ultramafic and mafic rocks and generate Re-Os data on several samples.
              In addition to providing a means of dating rocks that lack zircon, this
              approach will yield data critical to the understanding of Os isotopic evolution
              of the mantle with its implications for the timing and nature of crustal
              recycling, accretion of a late chondritic veneer and possibly core-mantle
              exchange through time.
