Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Prehistoric Resource Depression and
               Intensification on Kodiak Island, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0226397

Award Number: 0226397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie K. Stein jkstein@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              National Science Foundation support will allow Robert Kopperl, an anthropology
              graduate student at the University of Washington, to finish his dissertation
              research: testing the proposition that prehistoric hunter-gatherers had an
              impact on their prey populations which in turn affected their diets and
              ultimately their social organization.   The geographic focus is on Kodiak
              Island, Alaska, where the native Alaskan Alutiiq hunted sea mammals and fished
              for over 7000 years before Russian colonization.  For almost a century,
              anthropologists have proposed that intensive salmon harvesting played a large
              role in the development of socially complex cultures on the north Pacific
              coast, but no cause for this intensification has been determined.  

This
              dissertation research tests the hypotheses that harvest pressure on local prey
              populations caused a dietary shift from larger-bodied sea mammals to a greater
              focus on smaller-bodied marine fish and salmon, and that this shift preceded,
              and therefore may have caused, the development of social complexity on Kodiak
              Island.  Testing these hypotheses will involve a combination of analytical
              techniques, including the examination of animal bones recovered from several
              archaeological sites spanning over 6000 years for evidence of prey choices and
              butchery and carcass transportation patterns by the occupants of the sites. 
              Additionally, paleoclimatic data for the region during this period will be
              examined as another agent that could have affected prey populations.  Finally,
              changes in hunting and fishing tool technology will be explored for the role it
              may have played in changing prey preference.  

Support for these hypotheses
              can be seen in declines in the proportion of sea mammal bone to fish bone over
              time in archaeological assemblages, as well as changes in age structures of the
              individual animals that the bones represent, depending on the behavioral habits
              of each species.  Changes in the parts of carcasses deposited at each site will
              be informative of the distance foragers traveled from the site to hunt and
              fish.  Finally, how long ago these changes occurred will be correlated with the
              known dates of the first evidence of cultural complexity on Kodiak Island,
              approximately 1500-2000 years ago.  The oldest of the archaeological sites
              examined is very poorly dated; therefore charcoal and bone samples recovered
              from the site will be submitted for radiocarbon dating.  

This research
              combines zooarchaeological, paleoclimatic, and artifactual data for the first
              analysis of its kind with this time-depth, examining prehistoric subsistence
              changes on Kodiak Island from shortly after initial colonization over 7000
              years ago until Russian contact.  Testing the proposition that human or
              climatic impacts on prey populations had a causal role in the development of
              cultural complexity will offer a theoretically grounded starting point to
              further investigate the development of prehistoric social complexity on the
              coast.  Additionally, this research has implications for future management of
              certain animal populations by examining their interactions with humans in the
              past.     

