Title       : Workshop: Is Global Climate Change Research Relevant to Day-to-Day Water
               Resources Management?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0226515

Award Number: 0226515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Lant clant@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ari M. Michelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0226515
Lant

The huge temporal and spatial differences in water availability
              and use, the economic inefficiency of trading water long distances, and
              differences in institutions and ecosystems across the United States, have
              traditionally placed water management decisions at a local level.  To reduce
              drought and flood risks, local managers have relied upon infrastructure (e.g.
              dams and levees).  As human understanding of the world's climate variation is
              enhanced, there is the possibility that the extremes of climate can predicted
              with sufficient reliability to make local water resource management decision
              less risky.

Models and information products of global climate change
              research are becoming increasingly available and are being put in forms related
              to water research management decisions.  But how willing and able are local
              decision-makers to incorporate this new knowledge?  Are water management
              decision calendars understood well enough to know how to infuse climate change
              information, in the right form and at the right time, and with sufficient
              reliability to be of use to local water managers?
                
UCOWR is
              proposing to organize a workshop at its 2002 annual meeting in Traverse City,
              Michigan to examine the current state of climate change research and its
              interface with water resources management decision-making, from national, to
              regional, to state, local levels.  The results of the workshop will be
              published as a Water Resources Update issue in 2003.  Workshop participants
              include:
Robert Ward, Colorado State University
Richard Lawford, Program
              Manager, Office of Global Programs, NOAA
Tom N. Chase, Cooperative Institute
              for Research in Environmental Sciences R. A Eugene Stakhiv, Chief, Planning and
              Policy Studies Division, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water
              Resources.
Peter Roger Division of A lied Sciences Harvard University



