Title       : SUNY-Brockport College and Rochester City (SCOLLARCITY) Math and Science
               Partnership: Integrative Technology Tools for Preservice and Inservice Teacher
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0226962

Award Number: 0226962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3385448            (Estimated)
Investigator: Osman Yasar oyasar@brockport.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry J. Peris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Helberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Panoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Helland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Betsy A. Balzano  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brockport
	      
	      Brockport, NY  14420    716/395-2211

NSF Program : 1792      MSP-Targeted Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is proposed by a partnership between SUNY-Brockport, Rochester City
              School District (RCSD) third largest in New York state with the lowest
              achievement scores and Brighton Central School District (BCSD) with similar
              gaps among underrepresented groups yet with one of the highest overall
              achievement rates in the state.  Additional partners are the Shodor Foundation
              and The Krell Institute.  
The primary goal for the partnership is to improve
              student outcomes in mathematics and science in grades 7-12 by creating a multi
              agency approach for the recruitment and professional development of mathematics
              and science teachers. 
A Computational Mathematics Science and Technology
              (CMST) approach to learning science is employed in which students and teacher
              are engaged in fieldwork, laboratory experiments, mathematical modeling,
              computer simulation and visualization.  CMST employs math models to describe
              physical phenomena therefore bringing a new perspective about the usefulness of
              math as a tool in real life.  The method is designed to make science and
              mathematics concepts more easily comprehensible.  A Challenge program
              incorporating CMST is providing tools and motivation for 200, grades 7-12
              students, under the supervision of participating teachers.  The approach in
              addition to teaching science concepts is designed to promote teamwork,
              collaboration and new strategies for problem solving.  
A component of the
              comprehensive professional development program for mathematics and science
              teachers is a four-week summer institute each year serving a total of 240
              teachers. In addition there is a master's degree program for 30 teachers. 
              Preservice education programs at SUNY Brockport are being revised and new
              courses are to be introduced to assure an improvement in the quality quantity
              and diversity of the new teacher workforce.  

