Title       : MetaTest: Evaluating the Quality and Utility of Metadata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0226312

Award Number: 0226312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth D. Liddy liddy@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geraldine K. Gay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This NSDL Targeted Research project is evaluating the use and utility of
              metadata from multiple perspectives. These include the comparison of  the
              subjective quality of metadata that is assigned both manually and automatically
              to learning resources; the comparison of the retrieval effectiveness due to
              metadata that is assigned manually versus automatically to learning resources;
              determination of searching and browsing behaviors of users when engaged in
              information seeking in the digital library; and an analysis of the relative
              contribution of individual elements of the GEM + Dublin Core metadata scheme to
              users' searching and browsing behavior. Teachers, education students and
              professors are participating in the studies, using metatagged learning
              resources from the National STEM Education Digital Library. The investigation
              of these issues is grouped into two sets of experiments. The first focuses on
              evaluating the metadata's quality and effectiveness and uses a standard
              information retrieval scenario to compare precision and recall scores for
              searches done on the manually assigned metadata and the automatically assigned
              metadata. The second focuses on understanding the ways in which subjects
              utilize metadata for information access tasks, be they browsing or searching,
              and which metadata elements are used most frequently as well as the relative
              contribution of each metadata element. The investigating team is using
              convergent methods to assemble a rich picture of user information-seeking
              behavior, considering what the users are thinking, looking at, and doing when
              engaged in their information-accessing tasks. Significant co-funding of this
              project is being provided by the Research on Learning and Education Program in
              the NSF Division of Research, Evaluation, and Communication in recognition of
              the project's key studies on user information seeking and knowledge management
              behavior.
