Title       : Simulation-Based Learning Systems for Science, Technology, Engineering, and
               Mathematics: Issues in Design and Assessment; Washington DC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0226421

Award Number: 0226421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Kelly fas@fas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kay Howell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne F. Bakia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : FAS
	      1717 K Street NW Suite 209
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/546-3300

NSF Program : 1709      CISE EDUCAT RES & CURRIC DEVEL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0226421
Kelly
Federation of American Scientists
"Simulation-Based Learning
              Systems for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics: Issues in Design
              and Assessment"

This project is a one-year effort to examine current uses of
              simulation-based education and training and identify a research framework for
              designing and evaluating advanced simulation capabilities in future learning
              systems.  The project involves: 1) A literature review of the current use of
              simulation-based education and training.  2) A survey of the major
              simulation-based training systems now available in military, commercial,
              colleges and universities. 3) Interviews with educators and experts who are
              implementing simulation-based training systems to determine the number of
              users, cost of development, assessments of effectiveness, new technologies
              under active development, recommendations for future research. 3) A preliminary
              report reflecting the state-of-.the-art in simulation-based education and
              training systems, expectations for future systems, and detailed recommendations
              for future research. 4) A draft research plan for understanding how to use
              simulation-based learning systems, building demonstrations, and evaluating the
              effectiveness of existing and experimental systems. 5) A focused workshop to
              review and discuss the draft research plans, with the goal of reaching
              consensus on research priorities.  Workshop participants will include
              individuals who are experts in learning science and information technologies.
              The Workshop projected date in Washington, DC, is January or February 2003.  6)
              A final report reflecting the state of the art in simulation based learning,
              expectations for future systems, and detailed recommendations for future
              research.  The final report will be published twelve months following receipt
              of funding. This project is relevant to EIA's new initiative in
              Technology-Enhanced Learning.

