Title       : The Moving Image Gateway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0226140

Award Number: 0226140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grace Agnew gagnew@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Mandel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James DeRoest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Moving Image Gateway is a combination Collections and Services project.  The
              Services aspect is developing a web portal for moving images that combines an
              archives directory database with a union catalog to provide access to the
              world's moving image collections.  The Collection aspect involves opening the
              archives of moving images found in the Library of Congress, Cable News Network,
              National Geographic Television, National Library of Medicine, Oregon Health and
              Sciences University, ResearchChannel, and the Smithsonian Institution to STEM
              students, educators, and researchers as well as the general public.  Moving
              image materials that are being selected from these archives represent a wide
              array of science disciplines and a wealth of materials that support all levels
              of education from K-12 through university, postgraduate and continuing
              education.

The Moving Image Gateway is a result of prior collaboration
              between the Association of Moving Image Archives and the Library of Congress
              and is bringing a very flexible but standardized metadata architecture to these
              diverse resources so that moving images are being integrated into the
              information mainstream.  The Moving Image Gateway is offering several
              innovative components, including a searchable directory of international moving
              image archives that will identify the document and generate a dynamic web page
              for each archive and a union catalog that supports portals for customized end
              user searching.  An NSDL portal specifically for science materials is being
              developed as well as an innovative schema-independent union catalog
              architecture that provides export and display in different schemas depending on
              the portal used for searching.  This project is allowing the participating
              organizations to collaborate in describing, preserving, and digitizing these
              unique cultural resources.

