Title       : CAREER: Bayesian Econometric Modeling and Nonparametric Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0226164

Award Number: 0226164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keisuke Hirano khirano@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to introduce and improve methods for analyzing economic data
              and robustly assessing the likely impact of policies, and to develop new course
              material to train graduate students in the analysis of economic data. The main
              approach centers around Bayesian estimation methods applied to large parameter
              spaces, in combination with recent strategies for defining and identifying
              effects of treatments or policies.
The first component of this project will
              develop new methodology for estimation of flexible models for economic data by
              adapting Bayesian methods for inference to handle estimation problems in which
              prior knowledge places only limited restrictions on the range of
              possibilities-nonparametric and seimparametric estimation problems. Bayesian
              methods are attractive because they have risk optimality properties, and
              because they can be used to generate predictive distributions for future
              outcomes that incorporate parameter uncertainty. Previous work by the
              investigator on semiparametric Bayesian inference in models for longitudinal
              data will be extended to allow for additional regressors, binary outcomes, and
              alternative representations of unknown disturbance densities
Many policy
              questions can be framed as questions about treatment effects defined in terms
              of potential outcomes. The second component of this project will apply flexible
              Bayesian methods to estimation problems involving treatment effects, and
              compare this approach to more conventional methods for learning about these
              treatment effects. One part of' this research will consider inference for
              treatment effects with continuous treatments when treatment assignment is
              independent of potential outcomes conditional on a vector of pretreatment
              variables. Another aspect of the research is to extend earlier research on
              parametric Bayesian approaches to causal instrumental variables estimation to
              semiparametric models.
The third component of this project focuses on bringing
              selected recent developments in econometric methodology into the classroom in
              order to better train graduate students in practical, flexible empirical
              methods.

