Title       : The Development and Use of Digital Collections to Support Interdisciplinary
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0226152

Award Number: 0226152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Settle fsettle@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Whaley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Blackmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    540/458-8400

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary purpose of this project is to mentor emerging creators of digital
              collections for educational uses, especially those that are multidisciplinary
              and integrate science and technology with the humanities.  The Alsos Digital
              Library for Nuclear Issues (http://alsos.wlu.edu, DUE Award 0085657) is a
              web-based searchable collection of approximately 500 annotated references to
              multimedia resources that offers a broad, balanced perspective on current and
              historical topics relating to nuclear issues.  The Library, due to its
              relatively small scale, interdisciplinary focus, inclusion of multimedia
              materials, and diverse users make it an excellent example of digital collection
              concepts.  This project is using the Alsos Digital Library as a model for
              educators wishing to develop their own digital collections in the following
              manner.

1.  The Alsos Digital Library model is being disseminated through a
              series of workshops.  The target audience is educators, often content experts,
              who wish to build digital collections associated with courses, and to make
              their collections accessible through credible, digital, searchable, annotated
              references.  Each participant brings an interdisciplinary topic that is to be
              developed during the workshop.  Discussion topics at the workshop include
              collection development, software systems, processes for editing materials,
              integration of collections into courses and curricula, evaluation, and
              dissemination.  Mentorship of workshop participants by the PIs is ongoing
              during the award period.

2.  The software system developed for the Alsos
              Digital Library consists of four interconnected tiers, the user interface, the
              search engine, the database system, and the metadata system, constituting a
              digital resource locator.  Work with this system and training in related
              concepts in the workshops is serving as the creative stimulus and model for
              educators who are creating their own prototype digital collections.

3.  As
              the Alsos Digital Library evolves, issues that deal with assessment,
              maintenance, culling, technology migration, security, collaboration, and
              integration into large digital libraries are being encountered and resolved in
              cooperation with other NSDL collections.

Significant co-funding of this
              project is being provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the
              importance of providing access to digital resources for interdisciplinary
              education that involve the physical sciences.
