Title       : Bioinspired MEMS Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0226373

Award Number: 0226373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Ballarini rxb7@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur H. Heuer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              	Laminated structures comprised of mostly brittle constituents offer promise in
              a wide range of applications of national interest. These include: Hot section
              components in aircraft engines, pavement materials for airfields and roads, and
              electronic packaging.
A combined fabrication, experimental and theoretical
              study of the mechanical properties of bioinspired MEMS (microelectromechanical
              systems) composites will be supported under an SGER award.  The results will
              impact the development of improved synthetic ceramic-based laminates. The
              inspiration for this proof-of-concept effort comes from mollusk shells, which
              are naturally-occurring ceramic/polymer composites, with a very high volume
              content (95-99%) of the ceramic phase, a small quantity of organic
              (proteinaceous) "matrix" (1-5%), and which show impressive and unusual
              strength, toughness, and hardness.
	The microarchitecture of mollusk shells
              will be approximated in MEMS structures by alternating layers of silicon
              carbide (to imitate the ceramic phase in the shells) and carbon (to imitate the
              relatively weak protein interphase). This part of the research not only will
              verify that the experimentally-identified shell microarchitectures and
              fracture/deformation mechanisms can be utilized to make bioinspired strong,
              tough and hard materials, but will also contribute to the development of MEMS
              fabrication technology, and to other electronic devices with superior
              mechanical properties.

	The proposed research involves the following
              tasks:

	Task 1:		Fabrication of model brittle matrix composites with
              bio-inspired laminated architectures.

	MEMS technology will be used to
              design and fabricate a silicon carbide/carbon composite that mimics the
              crossed-lamellar structures of the shell of the giant pink conch, Strombus
              Gigas. The strength and toughness of this structure will be measured
              experimentally to assess how close the biomimetic design is to the natural
              design.

	Task 2:		Theoretical modeling of mechanical response.

	The
              interpretation of experimental results, and determination of the essential
              features of the natural designs that lead to optimization of mechanical
              properties will be supported by micromechanical and global models to be
              developed as part of the research. 


