Title       : Ceph School: A Pedagogic Portal for Teaching Biological Principles with
               Cephalopod Molluscs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0226334

Award Number: 0226334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $924601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip G. Lee pglee@utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This collections track project is developing a new educational interface called
              Ceph School supported by CephBase data. In Ceph School, Cephalopods are being
              used as the model organisms for a number of reasons. Cephalopods (squid,
              cuttlefish, octopus and nautilus) are very different from animals that students
              typically study. They actively, colorfully, and dynamically illustrate all
              major concepts in biology and are bio-medically important. They are animals
              that students are naturally curious about. Ceph School is providing full access
              to all of the current data and also modifying and expanding it by creating an
              entirely new age/knowledge appropriate interface composed of eight new modules.
              The goal, using cephalopods as model organisms, is to have students understand
              basic principles in biology (modules 2,4,5 & 7), observe the methodology of
              scientific research and become familiar with cephalopods (modules 1& 6), and
              also provide student and teacher-specific support (modules 3, 5 & 8). These
              modules are enhanced with web cameras, videos and links to additional data.
              From a distance, students observe living animals in real time, use interactive
              maps to explore their geographical distribution and habitats, learn about their
              anatomy, physiology and behavior, search appropriate bibliographies, locate
              world experts, and observe science in action. Additionally, teachers have a
              quality, data rich tool to help their students get excited about science. A
              regional group of motivated and innovative teachers, who are familiar with
              theresearch center, supply a pedagogue's view of the initial design and
              appearance of the site, and provide critical assessment of the usefulness of
              the modules and finally suggestions for improvement and refinement.

This
              system is structured to provide a type and quality of standard information
              (Textley and Wild 1996) that is customized for high school and university
              students. Ceph School begins with the already successful OBIS (Ocean Biological
              Information Systems) compliant CephBase website (www.cephbase.utmb.edu),
              recognized twice in Science (282:587 and 285:2027). The site includes complete
              taxonomy for all living cephalopods, from phylum to subspecies. It includes
              over 1000 images and 70 video clips depicting behavior, taxonomic traits and
              predator and prey data. It also includes a directory of all the world's
              cephalopod workers, a "frequently asked questions" database, a searchable
              scientific literature database containing 4688 papers on cephalopods,
              geographic distribution maps made in real time, and finally a powerful web
              interface that allows interoperability with other OBIS databases (i.e.,
              FishBase, Kansas Geological Survey and Species 2000).

