Title       : A Digital Library Collection for Computer Vision Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0226273

Award Number: 0226273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64602              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Maxwell maxwell@swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This collections project addresses one of the most difficult problems in
              teaching computer vision, developing good assignments.   The PI is gathering
              the best materials from several institutions into a comprehensive digital
              library collection for computer vision education.  This resource contains links
              to assignments at a variety of institutions and hosts a set of vetted
              assignments, complete with data sets and solutions. In addition, it contains
              educational resources such as lecture notes, links to other computer vision
              courses, and reviews of textbooks, software, and hardware.  The PI is
              accomplishing this objective by collecting materials from computer vision
              educators, developing new materials, and organizing and building a
              comprehensive web site to serve them.   An initial version of the site is
              available at palantir.swarthmore.edu/extra/cved.   He plans to engage computer
              vision educators directly in the collection and review process through a small
              collection development workshop.  The PI plans to use several processes to
              ensure that the collected material is high quality, including a formal review
              mechanism and less formal approaches where workshop participants and course
              instructors prepare and post reviews on his website.   Dissemination activities
              include major efforts to involve a large number of potential users in the
              development of the collection and to promote the site through conference papers
              and presentations, through direct contact with potential users, and by
              cross-linking the web site with course instructors' websites.  The PI's
              institution has agreed to maintain the equipment and the website beyond the
              ending date of the project.

