Title       : Extensions of Global Fields with Restricted Ramification and the Fontaine-Mazur
               Conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0226869

Award Number: 0226869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91903              (Estimated)
Investigator: Farshid Hajir hajir@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his collaborators will investigate certain
"arithmetic
              fundamental groups," that is to say the Galois group of
a global field (finite
              extension of the rational numbers or the function
field of a curve over a
              finite field) with a specified (finite) set of
branch points.  They will
              study, in particular, extensions in which the
filtration of the Galois group
              by higher ramification groups has fixed
bounded length, especially in
              connection with a conjecture of Fontaine and
Mazur.  The proposed activity
              includes a computational component which
seeks to construct infinite
              fundamental groups with extremal properties.  
Such explicit constructions
              give a good qualitative understanding of the
asymptotic behavior of
              discriminant with respect to the degree (number
fields) and genus with respect
              to the number of points (curves over finite
fields).  The latter has
              applications to the efficiency of certain codes
made from number fields and
              function fields.

This is a proposal in number theory, the oldest branch of
              mathematics
where the fundamental question is that of solving polynomial
              equations.
Knowledge regarding solutions of polynomial equations is of
              fundamental
importance in cryptology and coding theory, the science of secure
              and
efficient transmission of data.  Solutions of polynomial equations in
              one
unkown are equipped with a kind of algebraic symmetry and the study
              of
these symmetries is called "Galois theory."  These symmetries are
              encoded
in a mathematical object called the Absolute Galois Group, which
              contains
such a wealth of information about equations in not just one but
              any
number of variables that it is sometimes known as the "Holy Grail
              of
Number Theory."  This proposal is a theoretical and
              computational
investigation of certain aspects of the Absolute Galois
              Group.



