Title       : Viewing the Future: Aligning Internet2 Video to K-12 Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0226323

Award Number: 0226323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia Mardis mmardis@merit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Merit Network, Inc.
	      4251 Plymouth Road
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481052785    313/764-7430

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Collections project, Viewing the Future: Aligning Internet2 Video to K-12
              Curriculum, is using the high quality Internet2 video resources from the
              University of Washington's UWTV and ResearchChannel to build a collection of
              STEM materials for the K-12 community.  These resources are being aligned to
              state and national curriculum standards, including relevant classroom
              assessments.  The project is allowing teachers to attach feedback and
              contexts-of-use, and to place descriptive records for the Internet2 resources
              into Merit Network's widely used and scalable Michigan Teacher Network (MTN),
              and to disseminate further project work through the University of Washington's
              Pacific Lighthouse project.  This project is developing the means to transfer
              curricular material in new and exciting ways and is aiding K-12 educators
              engage in a community of shared practice.

Viewing the Future is building on
              the networking performance of Internet2 for the delivery of video, including
              traditional video as well as simulations, animations, virtual reality movies,
              images with audio sound tracks, remote control of microscopes and other
              instrumentation, and other types of digital media objects.  Access is not
              limited to only those schools with Internet2 capabilities.  For all educators,
              this project is allowing teachers and students to identify and to utilize video
              relevant to learning needs.  Even with the most exciting multimedia
              enhancements to learning resources, K-12 educators must still respond to state
              and national teaching and learning standards in order to prepare students for
              high-stakes assessments.  This project is moving beyond solely generating rich,
              item level descriptions of Internet2 video based on IEEE/LOM metadata toward
              making available previously uncollected and uncategorized Internet2 video
              resources.  The project is scaffolding additional use of Internet video by
              capturing teacher feedback and contexts-of-use, is supporting classroom
              integration of resources through online professional development, is using
              existing dissemination initiatives to reach many K-12 educators, and is
              adhering to standards and protocols of the ever-increasing NSDL
              environment.

Viewing the Future is building capacity in all partner
              organizations to collect, describe, and support innovative teaching resources
              on a sustained basis.  By leveraging existing Internet2 connectivity
              applications to serve all K-12 users, the proposed project is also forming the
              basis for increasing priority and use of broadband connectivity and
              applications in teaching and learning.

