Title       : Support for the Secretariat of the International Human Dimensions Programme on
               Global Environmental Change (IHDP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0226818

Award Number: 0226818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $730000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Jaeger jaeger.ihdp@uni-bonn.de  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Bonn
	      
	      Bonn, GE      /   -

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Concerns about changes in the world's environment have led scientists from many
              different nations to collaborate on a broad range of research and training
              activities.  Many of these activities are coordinated by one or more of three
              major international organizations: the World Climate Research Program (WCRP),
              which is overseen by the World Meteorological Organization; the International
              Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), which is overseen by the International
              Council of Science (ICSU); and the International Human Dimensions Programme on
              Global Environmental Change (IHDP), which is overseen by the International
              Council of Science (ICSU) with cooperation from the International Social
              Science Council (ISSC).  The objective of the IHDP is to initiate, coordinate,
              and find support for research on the human dimensions of global change.  IHDP
              also places strong emphasis on developing research capacity on this topic and
              on strengthening national and international research networks.  A major
              emphasis of IHDP activities is the development and conduct of core projects. 
              Projects already established by IHDP deal with Land-Use and Land-Cover Change
              (LUCC; co-sponsored by IGBP), Institutional Dimensions of Global Environmental
              Change (IDGEC), Global Environmental Change and Human Security (GECHS), and
              Industrial Transformation.  This award will provide support for the IHDP
              Secretariat, which coordinates IHDP at the University of Bonn in Germany, and
              for activities undertaken by the Chair of the IHDP Scientific Committee and by
              its major coordinating committees.  Core support for the IHDP and its
              Secretariat is provided by NSF on behalf of agencies participating in the U.S.
              Global Change Research Program.

Through support of the IHDP, a solid
              investment is made in the infrastructure that fosters broader and deeper
              international, interdisciplinary collaborative networks.  This further
              strengthens scientific inquiry across a range of topics and projects, thereby
              helping to enhance fundamental knowledge about very important topics and
              issues.  Through its capacity-building activities, especially support for
              activities that education and involve more scientists from developing nations,
              the IHDP also facilitates a strengthening and diversification of the
              international scientific workforce.

