Title       : Earth Exploration Toolbook: A Collection of Examples of Educational Uses of
               Earth System Science Tools, Datasets and Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0226199

Award Number: 0226199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $755898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamara Ledley tamara_ledley@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Barstow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathryn A. Manduca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating the Earth Exploration Toolbook (EET), a collection of
              step-by-step examples, called chapters, to guide educators at both the
              pre-college and college levels on how to use, in an educational context,
              various Earth system tools and datasets that were developed and archived by and
              for scientists. The examples provide the educators with enough experience with
              and in-depth knowledge of these resources to be able to use them in other
              contexts, and to help their students use them to explore and investigate issues
              in Earth system science. Use of the EET is being promoted through teacher
              workshops and presentations at professional meetings. The EET is a Web site
              housed at the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton College. The
              EET is accessible from the DLESE Community Center Web site. The EET is
              integrated into DLESE, with the EET Web site, each of the EET chapters, and the
              associated resources being cataloged in DLESE. A search within the DLESE
              Discovery System brings up both the chapter and the resources used,
              facilitating an educator's use of those resources. In addition, the review
              process is using the DLESE Community Review System. Entry to the DLESE
              Community Review System appears in each EET chapter, facilitating educator
              input after testing and eventual acceptance of the EET chapter into the DLESE
              Reviewed Collection. In addition to developing the EET chapters, the EET team
              is also developing a template that serves to facilitate the contribution of
              additional EET chapters by members of the DLESE community, and ensure the
              growth of the EET after the conclusion of this project.  Significant co-funding
              of this project is being provided by the Division of Earth Sciences in the NSF
              Directorate for Geosciences in recognition of the importance that this
              collection of Earth system datasets and tools has on K-12 teachers and
              undergraduate faculty.
