Title       : Evaluation of Mesoscale Convective System Rainfall Predictability in the Upper
               Midwest Considering System Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0226059

Award Number: 0226059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281996             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Gallus wgallus@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moti Segal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Prediction of warm season convective rainfall remains a challenge, particularly
              for systems occurring in the absence of orographic or strong larger-scale
              forcing.  Under a prior award, the Principal Investigator focused on improving
              numerical model Quantitative Precipitation Forecast (QPF) guidance for summer
              convection.  The present research provides a continuation of this research,
              with a goal of improved use of mixed-physics ensemble guidance, while examining
              also physical processes associated with mesoscale convective system (MCS)
              morphology and evolution in the Upper Midwest.

The Principal Investigator
              will explore MCS evolution and morphology, with primary emphasis on differences
              between systems with trailing stratiform regions and those with leading
              stratiform regions, by analyzing the outputs of fine grid spacing versions of
              the NCEP Eta and WRF (Weather Research and Forecasting) models.  The use of
              different models and convection-related physical parameterizations will allow
              the following two goals to be pursued.  First, careful analysis of observed
              MCSs and comparison with the different mixed model/mixed physics ensemble
              members will improve understanding of physical processes important in system
              evolution.  Also detailed spatial and temporal investigations of the realism of
              the simulated MCSs will be pursued.  Second, it is suggested that mixed
              model/mixed physics ensembles will be one of the most direct means of improving
              warm season mesoscale QPF.  This approach will assist in improving QPF,
              particularly because the emphasis on different MCS morphology will reveal
              strengths and weaknesses within model parameterizations of physical processes
              important in the development and evolution of the different MCS modes.  This
              analysis will additionally help improve understanding of the origins of
              diversity in model forecasts, which should assist in design of optimal
              mixed-physics ensembles.  The researchers also will run selective
              cloud-resolving scale simulations for each case to which physical processes and
              QPF will be compared with the runs using parameterized convection.

The
              Principal Investigator will implement new strategies for verification of high
              resolution models that will improve understanding about verification/evaluation
              of rainfall on refined spatial and temporal scales. 

Completion of the
              proposed research will improve understanding of the development and evolution
              of convective systems in the Midwest.  In addition, the research will
              facilitate future advances in mesoscale meteorology by establishing the most
              beneficial uses of refined resolution ensemble guidance for warm season
              convective system forecasting.

