Title       : BioSciEd Net (BEN) Collaborative: Cycle 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0226185

Award Number: 0226185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yolanda S. George YGeorge@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy L. Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jason Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristine Snow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha L. Matyas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Biosci Ed Net (BEN) Collaborative is continuing development of a portal site
              and six (6) digital library collections.  The BEN Collaborative is composed of
              12 professional societies and coalitions for biology education with an interest
              in transforming the teaching and learning of undergraduate biology.  The BEN
              portal provides users with seamless access to accurate and reliable
              undergraduate biology resources   In this phase of the project activities
              include:

1)  Enhancing the BEN portal site to increase security, the content
              and services offered to users, and to support the anticipated increase in
              contributors/users, collections Partners, and resources..

2) Modifications
              to or development of the concurrent collections six (6) BEN Partners.  These
              Partners include American Physiological Society (APS), Ecological Society of
              America (ESA), American Society for Microbiology (ASM), American Society for
              Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB), the Human Anatomy and Physiology
              Society (HAPS), and Science's Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment (STKE).
              These developments and modifications are being done in a manner that is
              consistent with BEN and NSDL specifications. In addition, some Partners are
              developing digital library features that will be adopted by other BEN Partners
              and useful for other NSDL projects.

3) Increasing the number of learning
              objects in collections and in the BEN catalog, either through acquisition of
              existing collections or submissions.

With prior support of the NSDL program
              members of the BEN Collaborative have:
a) Developed one portal, two web sites,
              and two digital collections, including: (1) the prototype of the BEN portal,
              http://www.biosciednet.org/portal/; (2) the BEN documentation site,
              http://www.ben.e-guana.net/ ; (3) the BEN announcement site,
              http://www.biosciednet.org; (4) the ESA digital collection,
              http://www.ecoed.net/index.php; and (5) the APS digital
              collection,
http://www.apsarchives.org/main/index.asp. In addition, the
              existing ASM digital collection,
www.MicrobeLibrary.org, was modified for
              resource harvesting.

b) Six hundred and eighty (680) resources have already
              been harvested or cataloged from APS, ASM, ESA, NABT, STKE, and SOT.  In Cycle
              2, we expect to harvest at least another 2,500 resources from another 8
              collections or sites. These 8 collections or sites include Access Excellence,
              ASBMB, HAPS, Heal Education Asset Library (HEAL) at UCLA, Evolution and the
              Nature of Science Institute at Indiana University, International Association of
              Medical Science Educators (IAMSE), the National Biological Information
              Infrastructure (NBII), and the Human Genome Project Information Web site at
              Oakridge.

Collectively about 10,000 monthly visitors used the digital
              collections or web resources of BEN Partners.  By 2004, we expect 20,000
              monthly visitors to use the BEN digital collections.

