Title       : ComPADRE: Communities for Physics and Astronomy Digital Resources in Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0226129

Award Number: 0226129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Mason   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack G. Hehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren W. Hein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredrick M. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susana Deustua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc of Phys Tchrs
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403845    301/209-3300

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT), the American Physical
              Society (APS), the American Institute of Physics/Society of Physics Students
              (AIP/SPS), and the American Astronomical Society (AAS) are creating an
              interconnected set of digital collections of educational materials and
              providing specific learning environments accessible to learners and teachers
              from elementary school through graduate school.  The initial collections
              include resources for introductory astronomy, quantum physics, pre-college
              physical science teachers, undergraduate majors or prospective majors in
              physics and astronomy, and informal science education.  These topics were
              chosen for their impact, diversity, breadth of audience, extent of discoverable
              materials, and interest of groups within the societies.

To develop and
              maintain the collections, the project is utilizing the expertise of the
              societies' members as editors, content experts, reviewers, and professional
              technical staff.  Physicists and astronomers add value to existing learning
              materials through selection and organization, annotation, review, and feedback
              on their use.  The project supports these collections through technical,
              publication, and librarian services. A dynamic, database-driven Web services
              solution provides template-based delivery of the collections for flexibility,
              rapid development of sites, and user-enabled maintenance.  The different
              topical collections employ a unified interface and link their resources
              wherever appropriate.

ComPADRE's services include the discovery and
              collection of resources, and helping authors and collections with
              standards-compliant meta-tagging.  The project is working closely with existing
              resource collections--e.g., online journals, astronomical databases, university
              courseware, student sites, and public science information sites, as well as
              other digital library projects to share collections and tools.  The resulting
              set of high-quality collections will have an impact on members of the
              professional organizations, the broader community of science, technology,
              engineering, and mathematics educators and students, and the public at large.

