Title       : An Active Object-Based Digital Library for Microeconomics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0226344

Award Number: 0226344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699996             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Cox jcox@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Austin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hsinchun Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Swarthout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students from a variety of disciplines take Microeconomics courses to learn how
              various types of markets function and how enterprises and consumers make buying
              and selling decisions in these markets. As such, Microeconomics education plays
              an important role in preparing future business leaders and practitioners and
              serves as part of general business and social sciences training for students in
              other fields of study. Currently, Microeconomics courses are typically taught
              in a traditional lecture format. Recent developments in economic theory and
              electronic commerce, however, call for significant innovations in course
              content design and delivery. An emerging trend is to allow the students to
              actively participate in economic decision-making through various market
              institutions, including recently emerging Internet-based online market
              institutions, to gain hands-on experience and acquire economic insights.
              Constructivist learning theory supports this educational approach.  It promises
              to revolutionize the way in which Microeconomics courses will be taught in this
              new Millennium. Although several efforts have been initiated to create online
              Microeconomics contents, including experimentation tools and software, they
              have been developed in a system development and content collection paradigm
              that is closed and therefore cannot scale. In this project we are creating a
              Digital Library (DL)-based, open approach to deal with the challenges of
              developing an extensible and scalable collection of Microeconomics related
              contents. 
(a) From the perspective of the application domain, i.e.,
              Microeconomics, we are making contributions in creating new types of digital
              contents, including simulated IT-enhanced market institutions and intelligent
              trading systems implemented as software agents. These agents are emerging as
              part of the IT-enhanced electronic market institutions that have the potential
              of greatly reducing economic transaction costs and improving the quality of
              economic decision-making. 
(b) From the viewpoint of the National STEM Digital
              Library, we are creating an Open Archives Initiative (OAI)-compliant collection
              of Microeconomics education contents that incorporates experimental software
              and automated e-commerce agents. A major DL research task that we are
              undertaking is the development of a metadata representation of active objects
              such as software modules (e.g., economics experimental software). This research
              has the potential of being applied in other DL collections involving software
              and simulation environments. 
(c) From the educational viewpoint, we are
              developing new integrated Microeconomics curricula leveraging the developed
              active objected-based DL. We are studying the impact of these new curricula,
              and investigating related changes in course management and teaching
              methodologies. We are combining research, teaching, and evaluation expertise
              and resources from several academic departments and labs at the University of
              Arizona. Four key contributing entities are: (1) the Economic Science Lab, a
              premier institution on experimental economics methodology and applications, (2)
              the Artificial Intelligence Lab, a leading institution on DL, Internet
              computing, and software agents, (3) the Hoffman E- Commerce Lab, an
              instructional and research facility focusing on e-commerce teaching and
              research, and (4) the University Faculty Center for Instructional Innovation, a
              teaching evaluation facility with emphasis on the impact of IT on education. 

