Title       : Research Starter Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0226455

Award Number: 0226455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos E. Crocker ccrocker@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,1227,1228,1683,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The stress related to prolonged aquatic submergence is the focus of this
              research proposal.  This work attempts to quantify levels of circulating
              catecholamines in chronically submerged freshwater turtles and will provide
              useful background information for future studies on diving in
              turtles.
Freshwater turtles typically employ one of two well-documented
              physiological homeostatic mechanisms for surviving submergence in water for
              long periods.  First, 'thin-skinned' turtles (softshells; Apalone spinifera,
              musk turtles; Sternotherus odoratus, and painted turtles, Chrysemys picta) that
              overwinter in streams, ponds, or shallow lakes, rely on extrapulmonary
              mechanisms of gas exchange to provide sufficient oxygen for metabolism and
              carbon dioxide excretion.  In essence, these turtles can remain aerobic
              throughout the winter by exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide via
              extrapulmonary gas exchange sites that include the buccal cavity, the cloacal
              bursae, and the thin skin near the proximal aspect of the limbs.  When
              metabolic demand for oxygen is low, (e.g. during winter submergence when water
              temperatures are near freezing) oxygen demand can be met by these comparatively
              'low capacity' gas exchange sites.  Another strategy for operating cellular
              machinery during long-term aquatic submergence is to burrow into the anoxic
              substrate (mud) and produce ATP anaerobically.  This second strategy presumably
              minimizes access to turtles by predators and ectoparasites, but usually results
              in severe metabolic and ionic disturbances.  Nevertheless, turtles that dive
              underwater for long periods, and employ either strategy, experience apnea. Thus
              they do not breathe using their lungs, and the success of either strategy
              depends upon the interactions among abiotic factors (i.e. water temperature,
              dissolved oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, and perhaps water pH) and biotic
              factors related mostly to anatomical correlates (i.e. thickness of skin,
              presence of cloacal bursae, cardiovascular and respiratory adjustments). 
              
Apnea, with or without hypoxia or anoxia is a stressful experience and
              catecholamines are released into the blood stream as a result.  Release of
              stress hormones in response to 'stressful' situations can be adaptive, but
              chronic production and secretion of stress hormones (epinephrine and cortisol)
              usually leads to immunosuppression, morbidity and ultimately, mortality.  This
              research will track the changes in stress hormone concentrations during
              normoxic and hypoxic/anoxic exposure.
These data on stress hormone levels will
              be interpreted in the context of additional data concerning the effects of
              long-term submergence on cardiovascular function (including systemic,
              pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and renal blood flows) in freshwater turtles,
              which will be gathered in these studies as well.  This project will produce
              qualitative and quantitative data that will be instrumental in helping
              biologists understand aspects of cardiorespiratory physiology in diving
              reptiles, particularly turtles. 

