Title       : Digital Library Service Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0226075

Award Number: 0226075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Bieber bieber@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              IL Im  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yi-Fang Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The investigators are developing a Digital Library Service Integration (DLSI)
              infrastructure to provide a systematic approach for integrating digital library
              collections and services.  With this infrastructure, digital libraries will be
              able to share relevant services within a seamless, integrated interface.  The
              project is integrating relatively simple services that may be used without
              modification.  It is also exploring giving access to services that require
              customization, such as peer review, to a particular collection or community. 
              Other contributions include incorporating collaborative filtering for
              customizing large sets of links, and developing advanced lexical analysis
              tools.  Digital library collections and services generally will require minimal
              or no changes to plug into the DLSI infrastructure.

With DLSI in place,
              users will see a totally integrated environment.  They will use their digital
              library system just as before.  But in addition, they will see supplemental
              link anchors, and when they click on one, they will be presented with a list of
              relevant links.  The DLSI infrastructure will also filter and rank-order this
              set of generated links with respect to the user's preferences and current
              task.

Digital library collections and services will gain several benefits
              from using DLSI:  (1) Users will have direct access to related collections and
              services; this benefit, in effect, enlarges the feature set of a given
              collection or service.  (2) Collections and services will gain much wider use,
              because DLSI linking will lead other users to them.  (3) Users will become
              aware of a service or collection from seeing its links included in DLSI's list
              of links when using other collections and services.  (4) DLSI will give the
              user direct, context-sensitive access to the features that a particular
              collection or service provides.

