Title       : GOALI: Combining Discontinuous Molecular Dynamics and Chemical Process
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0226532

Award Number: 0226532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156459             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Richard Elliott dickelliott@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan Massey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              J. Richard Elliott, University of Akron

"GOALI: Combining Discontinuous
              Molecular Dynamics and Chemical Process Simulation"

Molecular modeling will
              be integrated with a chemical process simulation package to provide a complete,
              rigorous, and accurate framework for physical property prediction and
              correlation. Chemical process simulators are becoming the primary interface for
              industrial chemical knowledge. The PI has recently discovered that perturbation
              theory is much more accurate than previously appreciated, especially for
              polyatomic molecules. Discontinuous molecular dynamics (DMD) simulation
              combines with perturbation theory and the virial expansion to provide a basis
              for highly leveraged computational effort in all aspects of molecular modeling.
              An existing DMD program will run the minimal number of simulations necessary
              with reasonable speed on low-cost microprocessors. The resulting segmental
              potential models will act as molecular scale group contributions, analogous to
              conventional engineering group contribution models. The PI implement methods of
              calculating transport properties like viscosity, thermal conductivity, and
              diffusivity in addition to the equilibrium and coexistence properties that he
              has computed in the past. This research will use pre-tabulation of the
              essential simulation data for reference fluids, with detailed perturbation
              calculations to be performed with high efficiency at later times. The accuracy
              of this fundamental methodology will be evaluated in comparison with existing
              semi-empirical methods by comparison to a large database of experimental
              values. The PI will establish the degree to which the perturbation perspective
              can provide similar leveraging in the estimation of transport properties, as
              well as equilibrium properties. This work will be performed in collaboration
              with The University of Akron and the technical staff from ChemStations, Inc.
              

The resulting product will be an internet site which clients can access for
              zero cost up front and relatively low hourly fees varying according to the
              intensity of the server side computation requested. Services provided will
              include molecular modeling of transport and equilibrium properties like vapor
              pressure, activity, water solubility, octanol partition coefficients,
              viscosity, and the ability to infer knowledge about one property from
              measurements of other properties through a common molecular model. Within the
              range of options will be a comprehensive collection of semi-empirical methods
              with estimates of the accuracy of each property. The scope of this project
              includes a thorough evaluation of the accuracy of semi-empirical models and the
              molecular based models against a database of approximately 1800 compounds. Also
              included will be flowsheeting and process simulation based on shortcut unit
              operation models. The sensitivity of the process capital and production costs
              to the estimated physical properties will be a menu option. The shortcut model
              will serve as a precursor for rigorous process simulation directly within a
              web-based environment.

The broader impacts of the proposed research will
              include integrated research and education and integrated diversity. As the
              co-author of a leading text on Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, the PI has
              already integrated results of related previous NSF support. The PI is now
              involved in teaching Chemical Process Design, a course that should evolve to
              include product design requiring extensive molecular insight. In the near term,
              the role of physical property estimation in traditional design can be used as a
              springboard for introducing many of the tools of molecular based design while
              directing applications to physical properties like viscosity and volatility.
              The predecessor to this proposal is currently supporting one female graduate
              student full-time and one male and one female who are alternating between
              teaching and research assistantships. The PI expects to maintain this balance
              throughout the remainder of the project.

