Title       : Natural Disasters Roundtable
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0226189

Award Number: 0226189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Anderson wanderson@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
The mission of the Natural Disasters Roundtable is to facilitate and enhance
              communication and the exchange of ideas among scientists, practitioners, and
              policy makers in order to identify emerging issues related to natural
              disasters.  The Roundtable is a forum for examining urgent and important issues
              related to natural disaster reduction.  It emphasizes the exchange of ideas and
              facilitates personal working relationships between the federal agencies and
              experts in related fields.  In the "roundtable" format, federal officials
              participate fully as members, thus engaging them more closely in the process. 
              
The Roundtable convenes three times a year to provide a forum for discussion
              on issues related to the understanding and mitigation of natural disasters.  It
              brings together experts in the scientific and technical fields related to
              natural hazards and the relevant social and policy sciences to identify,
              discuss, and advance issues that require national or regional attention. The
              Roundtable is a neutral meeting ground for scientists, practitioners, and
              policy makers to exchange information and ideas.  
The Roundtable members
              identify topics, create agendas, recruit expert speakers, and assemble
              information for discussion for open meetings.  Open sessions are carefully
              structured to feature appropriate presentations and discussions relevant to
              scientific developments and timely policy issues related to natural disasters. 
              
Government officials who serve as ex officio members are incumbents of the
              sponsoring federal agencies that have program responsibilities in pertinent
              aspects of the issues before the Roundtable.  A steering committee of
              approximately 13 members (5 appointed members and 8 sponsoring members) set the
              agenda for the meetings, which are all open and free to the public.  The forums
              result in summary reports which are posted on the National Academies website.
              


