Title       : Linking Pedogogy, Resources and Community Interaction to Support Entry-Level
               Undergraduate Geoscience Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0226243

Award Number: 0226243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathryn A. Manduca cmanduca@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Savina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy J. Merritts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the development of a thematic collection and specialized
              portal for faculty teaching entry-level geoscience to college students and is
              exploring some of the ways that the NSDL can catalyze improvement in
              undergraduate teaching.  The project has two major components: 1) Creation of a
              thematic collection that contains the full suite of resources needed to support
              faculty teaching at the entry level including teaching resources (e.g.,
              visualizations; field, lab and classroom activities; problem sets), information
              on effective teaching methods, and examples of successful teaching in the
              geosciences. 2) Development of a portal designed specifically to support
              faculty and graduate teaching assistants teaching entry-level geoscience. The
              portal presents resources from the collection in thematic views or modules that
              link pedagogic and content resources and place them in the context of a
              specific issue in teaching entry-level geoscience. Supporting a virtual
              community of faculty will be an integral aspect of the portal. The collection
              is being developed around four priority issues: inquiry based laboratory and
              field experiences, using an Earth system approach, effective pedagogical
              approaches, and teaching quantitative skills. This project is drawing on
              resources in existing NSDL collections including several DLESE collections, the
              Math Forum, the Learning Matrix and the Gender and Science Digital Library
              demonstrating the power an integrated library holds for sharing among the
              disciplines. Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the
              Division of Earth Sciences in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences in
              recognition of the importance that this collection of digital resources on
              teaching entry-level geoscience courses has for graduate students and
              undergraduate faculty.
