Title       : Teachers' Domain - Physical Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0226184

Award Number: 0226184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $874276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Korf michele_korf@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collections project is allowing WGBH to expand its current Teachers Domain
              Digital Library into the content areas of the Physical Sciences and
              Engineering.  The overarching intent of the Teachers Domain Digital Library
              project is to get the high-quality, multimedia resources of WGBH out of their
              vaults and into the hands of teachers and students in a form that is directly
              targeted to their teaching and learning needs.

The Teachers Domain Digital
              Library, with its focus in the Life Sciences, is a mission-driven initiative
              that is harnessing the extensive broadcast, video, and interactive programming
              resources of WGBH to support standards-based teaching and learning at the K-12
              level.  The product is a searchable, web-based repository of contextualized
              multimedia materials that teachers are easily accessing for their own
              professional development as well as to enrich classroom activities for
              students.  As is the case of the original award, the Physical Sciences and
              Engineering materials are being organized to reflect alignment with commonly
              taught classroom units and with the performance standards currently applied at
              both state and national levels.  These multimedia assets are being metatagged
              and presented with extensive contextual information to allow for practical,
              effective use.  Annotations, background essays, standards correlations, and
              curriculum integration supports accompany each archival resource, and features
              such as personalized resource bins and keyword search capacity enable ease of
              use and maximum impact.

This project is the result of the longstanding
              commitment of WGBH to the support of educational reform efforts nationwide, a
              commitment most common in the subject area of science.  Science programming,
              including such series as NOVA, A SCIENCE ODYSSEY, BUILDING BIG, and EVOLUTION,
              is recognized to be among the finest on television and is used to support
              classroom teaching across the country.  These shows collectively represent
              thousands of hours of programming and contain real world applications of
              abstract concepts, classic science experiments, case studies, primary source
              interviews, animations, and historical footage.  Much of these materials have
              supporting teacher guides and companion web sites that extend their educational
              impact.  In addition, WGBH has produced numerous, high-quality K-12 teacher
              training resources.  Many of these video-based materials, including
              INVESTIGATING CLASSROOMS, SCIENCE FIRST, TEACHERS AS LEARNERS, LEARNING THAT
              WORKS, and PHYSICS BY INQUIRY have been developed with NSF support.  These
              programs, designed to promote both teacher education and student learning, are
              usually accompanied by print and on-line supplements to facilitate use and
              maximize effectiveness and address methodological issues as well as pedagogy
              and content mastery.  The WGBH  archives are rich with high-quality, multimedia
              assets, especially within the subject area of science. Significant co-funding
              of this project is being provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of
              the importance of a digital library collection of video-based resources for
              K-12 teachers, particularly in the physical sciences.

