Title       : Harvard-Smithsonian Digital Video Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0226354

Award Number: 0226354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $929992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Schneps mschneps@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collections project is assembling and managing an extensive collection of
              STEM digital video materials produced by the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for
              Astrophysics.  The Center's collection of digital video materials supporting
              STEM education reform has been developed over the past decade and a half at a
              cost of some $15 million, and includes source materials for well-known
              television programs such as A PRIVATE UNIVESE along with professional
              development materials created for Annenberg/CPB.  The collection consists of
              some 3,500 hours of video footage, archived in digital form and indexed through
              a searchable database.  Materials in this collection span a variety of topics
              and formats and include high-quality, case-study footage showing teaching in
              action, rare and difficult to create materials documenting children's ideas in
              science and math, interviews with internationally prominent researchers in STEM
              learning, and computer animations and other costly visualizations of STEM
              ideas.  This project is establishing a library of 350 hours of digital video
              materials supporting STEM education that will be available through the
              NSDL.

Project personnel are reviewing the entire collection for materials of
              value in supporting standards-based learning.  Appropriate materials are being
              tagged according to their applicability to these standards, the collection is
              being culled to a manageable and useful size, and catalogued so teachers and
              teacher educators are able to search the collection by STEM discipline, age
              level, or content area.  The project is making these materials broadly
              accessible on a web platform while archiving a full-resolution master copy as
              part of the Harvard Library.  The web interface is linking the collection to
              NRC National Science Education Standards, AAAS Benchmarks, and state and local
              standards.  The project is working with advisors from the NSDL Core Integration
              program to ensure metadata and formats conform to related efforts of the NSDL. 
              It is also paving the way for the use of video in education while providing
              educators broad access to vital materials supporting STEM education reform. 
              Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences in recognition of the importance that this collection of
              digital video resources on the nature of science learning has for K-12 teachers
              and undergraduate faculty.

