Title       : UMEB: Travel to Animal Behavior Society Annual Meetings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a0226726

Award Number: 0226726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilia P. Martins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Duane M. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peggy S. M. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ABS
	      Indiana University
	      Bloomington, IN  474082603    812/856-5541

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1135,1160,1228,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A variety of programs have been developed with the intent of increasing the
              number of undergraduates from underrepresented groups entering graduate schools
              and later pursuing research careers in science.  While minority participation
              has increased in some fields of science, other fields have seen little change. 
              No one knows all the factors contributing to the low participation of groups
              underrepresented in the field of animal behavior, but issues include a lack of
              knowledge of career opportunities and the image of the field.  For example,
              bright students from traditionally underrepresented groups are often steered
              towards careers in health sciences if they show an early interest in biology. 
              They may have never seen in textbooks, or heard of through the electronic
              media, anyone pursuing a career in animal behavior that actually looks like
              them.

The objective of this project is to increase the number of
              undergraduate students from historically underrepresented groups pursuing
              graduate degrees in the field of animal behavior.  This goal will be pursued
              through encouraging their active participation and networking with majority and
              minority undergraduates, graduate students and professionals in the field at
              the Animal Behavior Society's annual meeting.

Under this four-year grant,
              about 15 undergraduate students per year will receive Diversity Travel Awards. 
              They will be selected on the basis of statements indicating financial need,
              potential to increase diversity at the ABS meeting, how animal behavior fits
              into their future career plans, and what they hope to gain by attending the ABS
              meetings.  Travel awards will be given only to students who agree to stay for
              the entire meeting, and priority will be given to students who will present
              their own research.

A two-tiered mentoring program will be developed. 
              Students receiving travel awards will be paired with faculty members or
              graduate students who will help to orient the undergraduates to the meeting and
              maintain correspondence with them afterwards.  In addition, all undergraduates
              attending the annual meeting will be given the opportunity to select mentors at
              an opening dinner for students and mentors, and roundtable discussions on such
              topics as preparing for graduate school will be organized for all
              undergraduates attending the annual meeting.

The ABS will advertise the
              opportunity by a poster at the annual meeting, by advertising in the meeting
              programs of organizations of minority scientists, by sending printed
              invitations to institutions and programs with large enrollments of minority
              undergraduates, by sending e-mail to all members, and through its Web site. 
              The meeting registration form will have a line on which potential mentors can
              indicate their interest.

This grant is awarded under the National Science
              Foundation's program of Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology, which
              is designed to enable academic institutions and their partners, as well as
              professional societies, to enhance access to careers in environmental biology
              (broadly defined) for undergraduate students, particularly those from
              underrepresented groups.
