Title       : Conference: Sixth International Symposium On Cytochome P450 Biodiversity, to be
               held in Los Angeles, California, August 20-25, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0226565

Award Number: 0226565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Schuler maryschu@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The cytochrome P450 monooxygenase superfamily of heme-containing enzymes
              contains a wide
range of monooxygenase activities that make them critically
              important to virtually all
life forms. In recent years, they have been shown
              to be important in human growth and
development because they are involved in
              steroid biosynthesis and also in many
pharmacological areas because they are
              critical for the activation and/or detoxification
of drugs in human and
              vertebrate models. In a rapidly and ever-expanding area, they have
been shown
              to be important in insect and plant growth and development because of
              their
involvement in biosynthetic pathways for insect and plant hormones and
              in agricultural
areas because they mediate the metabolism of herbicides,
              insecticides, fungicides and
environmental pollutants.

Realizing the
              growing importance of this area of plant and insect P450 research,
              the
organizing committee for the International Symposium Series on P450
              Biodiversity branched
from the more classical area of vertebrate P450 research
              represented in the Symposium
Series on Microsomes and Drug Oxidations to
              create an independent and focused series
devoted to microorganisms, plants and
              insects. For the Sixth International Symposium on
P450 Biodiversity:
              Functional Biochemistry & Molecular Biology of P450 Cytochromes
              in
Microorganisms, Plants and Insects, the organizers have endeavored to
              continue the
examples set in the five previous meetings in this series by
              providing platforms for the
presentation of approaches for expression analysis
              of model P450s as well as functional
analysis of the numerous P450s existing
              in these non-vertebrate systems. The goal is to
provide a forum for discussing
              leading research in the field through a single lecture
series of 48
              presentations interspersed with scheduled poster presentations and ample
              time
for informal discussions. With this goal in mind, funds are requested to
              help support
travel expenses for competitively identified advanced predoctoral
              and postdoctoral
students.

The International Advisory Board and Scientific
              Organizing Committee for this Series
contains representatives from seven
              different countries including eleven from the United
States. The meeting will
              be held August 20-25, 2002 at the Conference Center on the UCLA
campus and
              hosted by Armand J. Fulco, Professor of Biochemistry at the University
              of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Dr. Fulco's research has focused on
              characterization of
bacterial cytochrome P450s through a variety of world-wide
              collaborations. It is expected
that attendance at this meeting will be
              approximately 200 with participation from the
United States, Europe and the
              Pacific Rim in approximately equal proportions.
