Title       : SGER: Development of an Interactive Virtual Environment for Delivery of
               Rehabilitative Intervention to Children with Social Cognitive Deficits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0226850

Award Number: 0226850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Y. Trepagnier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project explores issues in the application of virtual reality environments
              to assist pre-school-aged children newly diagnosed with autistic spectrum
              disorder.   The PI will develop and evaluate a tool that integrates virtual
              reality display with eye-tracking and sensing of other physiological and
              intentional signals in an appealing non-restrictive play environment, in order
              to deliver a rehabilitative intervention.  The system to be developed is driven
              both by empirical findings and by theory.   The literature reports a high
              degree of success for discrete trial training with some autistic children, with
              greater success the younger the age at which intervention is begun.  
              Computerized implementation of discrete trial technology may improve its
              effectiveness, since eye-tracking and other sensors will record target
              behaviors more precisely and displays will deliver immediate contingent rewards
              more reliably than human trainers can accomplish.   The theory that informs our
              approach is that failure to establish social attention in infancy is a key
              factor in the autistic developmental syndrome.   The intervention, therefore,
              uses the discrete trial methods to teach social attention and other basic
              social skills that the typically-developing child acquires (without training)
              in the first year of life, and that children with autism lack.  A Virtual
              Playmate will share enjoyable experiences with the child (music, interactive
              games, and "rides" in the motorized chair in which the child is seated) as
              rewards for gains in target behaviors such as visual fixation on the playmate's
              eyes, vocal response to the playmate's expressions of emotion, joint attention
              (looking where the virtual playmate is looking), and other social skills that
              are vital to social interaction.   Training for skill maintenance and
              generalization will incorporate virtual versions of toys and models of
              individuals from the child's actual environment.   A successful outcome to this
              project will ultimately improve autistic children's ability to take part in
              peer social interactions and move them closer to a typical developmental path
              so that they can become participating members of society.

