Title       : SGER: Use of Phase Imaging in Atomic Force Microscopy for Measurement of
               Viscoelastic Contrast in Polymer Nanocomposites and Molecularly-Thick Lubricant
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0226066

Award Number: 0226066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharat Bhushan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) 
Use of Phase Imaging in Atomic
              Force Microscopy for Measurement of Viscoelastic Contrast in Polymer
              Nanocomposites and Molecularly-Thick Lubricant Films

	In the proposed work
              our goal is the development of a technique for quantitative imaging of
              viscoelastic properties across polymer nanocomposite bearing surfaces and
              surfaces lubricated with ultrathin films.  This would be an important
              technological advancement that would provide a tool for measurement and
              optimization of polymer nanocomposites and a tool for measurement of lubricant
              film uniformity.  Such a tool would be particularly important for MEMS and
              magnetic storage.  So this project has a very high potential payoff.  Although
              this is a high risk project (because such a technique has never been developed
              before), we have seen promising results in our preliminary experiments.  Much
              more work must be carried out however.
	Preliminary studies of phase contrast,
              using an atomic force microscope (AFM) in both tapping and force modulation
              modes have shown that different regimes exist.  Different AFM cantilever/tip
              vibration amplitudes and tip-sample surface separation distances give different
              phase contrast images.  We believe that hard tapping conditions, i.e. high
              cantilever/tip vibration amplitude and low tip-sample surface separation, give
              phase images that emphasize viscoelastic properties, which are important in
              polymers.  In commercial magnetic particulate tapes and polymer films with hard
              embedded particles, high phase contrast is found.  The hard particles give
              lower phase lag than the surrounding polymer at hard tapping conditions, as
              expected.
	In the proposed research we will develop the technique with phase
              contrast measurements.  We will make simultaneous measurements using several
              well-established AFM techniques:  friction force (for contrast based on
              differences in lubricity among materials), force modulation (for contrast based
              on stiffness differences), and Kelvin probe (for contrast based on surface
              potential differences) microscopies.  These should provide insight into the
              results of the phase contrast technique that is being developed here.
We also
              seek to quantify results.  We will attempt to relate phase data from the AFM
              for thin polymer samples to viscoelasticity data obtained for these samples by
              another proven technique known as dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA).  In the
              DMA thin polymer samples are subjected to tension/compression strain cycles and
              the corresponding stress is measured.  The phase lag between the stress and
              strain is then found.  If the AFM is truly measuring viscoelastic properties
              then it should be possible to find a correlation between loss tangent from the
              DMA and phase lag from the AFM.  In order to quantify, it will be necessary to
              understand the physics of the contact.  To this end we will develop a vibration
              model that accounts for the repulsive and attractive forces between the tip and
              the dissipation caused by the viscoelasticity of the sample.
An award would
              support one graduate student and partially support one postdoctoral researcher.
               This would provide an opportunity to recruit and fund a minority or woman. 
              The PI and his department have made efforts to attract such students in recent
              years.  The department regularly invites, and provides travel grants for,
              students, particularly women and minorities, from other schools to attract them
              for graduate studies; we have had some success in this.  Undergraduate students
              would work on the project as well.  Projects like these provide hands-on
              opportunities for undergraduate students in a high-tech lab.  Past
              undergraduates in the PI's lab have actually coauthored articles for technical
              journals.  This project will provide additional material for the PI's course on
              tribology and in soon-to-be-developed nanoscale courses.

