Title       : Early experience and neurocognitive development: Socio-economic variables.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0226060

Award Number: 0226060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Farah farah@cattell.psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Early Experience and Neurocognitive Development: Socioeconomic
              Variables

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Farah
              will conduct a one-year study attempting to begin to characterize the cognitive
              outcomes of childhood poverty in terms of the framework of Cognitive
              Neuroscience.  Dr. Farah aims to partition the known cognitive disparities,
              previously assessed with the relatively blunt instruments of IQ tests and
              school achievement measures, into 7 key neurocognitive systems using selective
              behaviorally-based neurocognitive tasks.  These tasks are as follows:
              Dorsolateral prefrontal/working memory, Ventromedial prefrontal /reward
              processing, Anterior cingulate/conflict monitoring, Parietal/spatial,
              Occipito-temporal/pattern vision, Temporal/memory, and
              Fronto-temporal/language.    This partitioning may isolate the neurocognitive
              system or systems that are most sensitive to the effects of experiential
              factors related to socio-economic-status (SES).  If such systems can be
              delineated, then researchers may be in a position to discover the potentially
              causal factors in the family and home environment, from a wide array of factors
              previously measured with the low SES participants, from somatic factors such as
              lead levels to psychological factors such as parental depression and
              stress.

The primary goal of this proposal is to address the question: Given
              that SES has been shown to affect cognitive development, what underlying
              systems of the developing mind and brain are impacted by the complex bundle of
              experiential factors that constitute SES?  Brain development involves a complex
              interplay between innate and experiential factors.  Our understanding of the
              role of experience comes from animal and human evidence. Experimental
              manipulation of the environment of young animals has demonstrated profound
              effects of environmental stimulation and the presence of stressors on brain
              health.  Studies of children raised under conditions of extreme deprivation,
              such as Romanian orphanages, have found measurable differences in brain
              development.  What has not been established is the effect of differences in
              early experience within the normal range for our society.  One dimension on
              which normal children's experience may differ is related to their family's
              socioeconomic status (SES).  Furthermore, SES is known to impact a wide range
              of measures of cognitive development, from IQ tests to school achievement.  The
              present project begins with the assumption that these SES disparities in
              cognitive development are not to be explained in terms of innate differences
              between families, but are instead due to some of the many experiential
              differences that correlate with SES.

