Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Sources of Power among Mapuche (Araucanian) Chiefdoms in
               South-Central Chile (A. D. 1500-1900)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0226779

Award Number: 0226779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Dillehay dilleha@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Tom D. Dillehay, Mr. Ricardo Fernandez will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will survey and conduct limited
              excavations in the Palguin River Valley, a small locale in south-central Chile.
              The purpose of this investigation is to locate and recover the archaeological
              signatures for the emergence and development of prehistoric power and authority
              among the Mapuche people during the period from A.D. 1500 to 1900.

The
              Mapuche, or Araucanians, are virtually unique in the New World for their long
              and successful resistance to foreign invasion. From the early 1500s to the
              1880s, the Mapuche not only managed to resist the advance of Inka, Spanish, and
              Chilean armies, but actually expanded their own influence over large areas of
              Argentina. Moreover, this period witnessed the development of an independent,
              culturally thriving Mapuche political entity. Concomitantly, this period was
              characterized by powerful, wealthy chiefs rising to and consolidating their
              power.

Recent investigations suggest that in pre-industrial societies,
              chiefly political power could be obtained from military, economic, and/or
              ideological sources. The Palguin valley, an area of approximately 30 km, offers
              an excellent opportunity for investigating the archaeological signatures of
              chiefly power and authority. Ethnohistorical documents and preliminary
              archaeological investigations suggest that in this small locale, some local
              Mapuche chiefs achieved their powerful positions as war leaders, others as
              ritual administrators, and others as promoters and beneficiaries of intense
              commerce and trade. Not yet known are the timing and circumstances of these
              individuals' rise to power.  To investigate these issues, an archaeological
              survey of the valley will be executed, combined with a surface collection of
              artifacts and limited excavations of selected sites. It is expected that this
              will result in the location and dating of mounds, associated ceremonial fields,
              and elite burials, bearing the marks of ideological sources of power. Likewise,
              it will result in the identification and dating of forts, look-outs, and
              perhaps mortuary evidence of military sources. Furthermore, it will document
              the statistically significant differential distribution of exotic and other
              prestige materials in both domestic and burial contexts, suggesting the use of
              economic sources of power. In addition, the temporal and contextual evidence
              for the use of these sources of power will be revealed. This will demand
              comparing and contrasting archaeological evidence to ethnohistorical and
              ethnographic data, as well as precise radiocarbon and thermoluminiscence
              dating. Eventually, this will suggest  when chiefs began to obtain power and
              authority, how this process  developed, what the sources of power were, and
              under what circumstances  were they selected, combined, or
              abandoned.

Besides illuminating the emergence and development of chiefly
              power and authority at the local level, this study may reveal the broader
              circumstances under which Mapuche political authority and power developed in
              similar areas throughout south-central Chile. At a more general level, this
              research will allow anthropologists and ethnohistorians to gain a better
              understanding of similar processes that may have been at work in prehistoric
              and early historic intermediate-level societies elsewhere in the Americas.

