Title       : Marine Mammal Commission Digital Library of International Environmental and
               Ecosystem Policy Documents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0226195

Award Number: 0226195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $459076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Arthur Berkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This collections track project is implementing a sustainable single-source
              digital collection of international environmental and ecosystem policy
              documents that facilitates knowledge discovery, supports a "rich learning
              environment" and benefits researchers, teachers, students, diplomats and
              decision-makers throughout society from global to local levels. Materials for
              this collection are provided by the Marine Mammal Commission based on their
              comprehensive five-volume Marine Mammal Commission Compendium of Selected
              Treaties, International Agreements, and Other Relevant Documents on Marine
              Resources, Wildlife, and the Environment . Architecture of this digital library
              is harnessing the exponentially expanding complexity of international documents
              with automated technology based on the patented Information Management,
              Retrieval and Display Systems and Associated Methods from EvREsearch LTD. The
              template for this digital library is the Antarctic Treaty Searchable Database
              (http://webhost.nvi.net/aspire). To facilitate knowledge discovery "parent
              documents" are broken into "finite elements" that are tagged with information
              about their: (a) unique hierarchal location in the digital library; (b) year of
              adoption; (c) signatory nations; and (d) regime classification. This increased
              granularity, with tags inserted directly into the finite element, enables
              comprehensive database searchability. The search results are displayed in
              user-defined expandable-collapsible hierarchies. 

An advisory board is
              providing oversight and guidance for the digital library: (a) design and
              implementation; (b) evaluation strategies, including the design of the
              questionnaire; (c) dissemination strategies, including website links as well as
              CD-ROM distribution with and without cost-recovery; and (d) management in a
              manner that fosters long-term sustainability. This project involves
              collaborations with the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE),
              Digital Library for Water in the Earth System (DWEL) and American Society of
              International Law. The digital library is hosted and managed in conjunction
              with the award-winning website at the Byrd Polar Research Center in a manner
              that ensures its continuous uninterrupted availability. Dissemination of the
              digital library involves website links to governmental, non-governmental and
              academic websites, with a particular focus on the "Model United Nations"
              audience that is represented by more than 30,000 websites on the internet.
              Additionally, the digital library is distributed from the Byrd Polar Research
              Center and the Marine Mammal Commission on a CD-ROM that runs automatically
              without installation. This digital library facilitates knowledge discovery of
              international environmental and ecosystem policy documents, and provides
              long-term benefits for education activities, resource management and the basic
              infrastructure of our society.

