Title       : Collaborative Project: Managing Authority Lists for Customized Linking and
               Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0226234

Award Number: 0226234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Golam S. Choudhury sayeed@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander S. Szalay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative project with Tufts University (Award No.
              0226304).

This project is developing Services for a Customizable Authority
              Linking Environment (SCALE) to support all levels of reading in the National
              STEM Education Digital Library (NSDL).  In particular, the project is
              developing two broad classes of service.  First, the investigators are
              providing automatic linking services that automatically bind key words and
              phrases to supplementary information.  Such services help students,
              professionals outside a particular discipline, and the interested public to
              read documents full of unfamiliar technical terms and concepts.  For example,
              astronomy students and curious amateurs may need to see expansions of
              acronyms--e.g., MACHO (massive compact halo object)--or pictures of "Kuiper
              belt objects"; or the student struggling with research papers on
              bioluminescence may need to locate information about particular chemical
              processes or relevant species of echinoderms.  Second, the investigators are
              basing automatic linking on authority control of names and terms and on links
              among different authority lists such as thesauri, glossaries, encyclopedias,
              subject hierarchies, and object catalogues.

Activities in the project
              include:

* creating and maintaining authority lists of technical terms and
              concepts harvested from Open Archives Initiative (OAI) metadata, extracted from
              full text, and imported from existing authority lists;

* extending current
              automatic hypertext capabilities to embed glosses of technical terms and links
              to related passages within HTML, PDF, and XML documents in the NSDL;

*
              providing term detection and document linking through Simple Object Access
              Protocol (SOAP)-based Web services;

* evaluating the interface to and
              functionality of SCALE in cooperation with the National Virtual
              Observatory;

* customizing SCALE through explicit user configuration and
              adaptive learning of preferences; and

* collecting annotations on the
              quality of links to improve precision and provide a training set for future
              systems.

Much of the work at the Tufts University Perseus Digital Library
              Project (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/) and the Johns Hopkins Digital Knowledge
              Center (http://dkc.mse.jhu.edu/) has already focused on exploiting various
              kinds of authority lists (gazetteers, biographical dictionaries, dictionaries,
              glossaries of technical terms, and name authority files) for the automatic
              generation of hypertext links and for visualizations such as automatically
              generated dynamic maps and timelines.  Such link generation complements the
              current practice of automatic identification and aggregation of citations.  The
              current project augments and transfers the existing technology for managing
              authority lists, converting this from a research effort to an institutionalized
              service serving a wider community.

