Title       : Collaborative Research: Health Education Assets Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0226132

Award Number: 0226132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon E. Dennis sdennis@lib.med.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This collections track project is expanding the prototype of the Health
              Education Assets Library (HEAL), created in 2000 with funding by the NSF's
              National Science Digital Library (NSDL) program. The mission of HEAL is to
              become the premier digital library of health science education resources
              supporting all levels of teaching, including K-12, undergraduate, professional
              health science education as well as patient and consumer education. The
              foundation upon which the HEAL digital library is built includes a metadata
              schema for health science educational materials, a test collection of
              multimedia, and a suite of applications for searching, and contributing
              educational resources. In addition, partnerships with two health science
              institutions have been forged: the National Library of Medicine and the
              Association of American Medical colleges, both of which strongly support HEAL's
              mission. These partnerships have facilitated the formation of a rapidly growing
              network of institutions that have expressed interest in collaborating with
              HEAL-either by donating teaching resources to the HEAL collection or by
              allowing bridges to their collections. Also, HEAL is conducting a national
              study to identify the obstacles that would need to be removed in order to
              foster a climate of free exchange of educational tools. The outcomes of this
              study are instrumental in articulating a collection development strategy and
              strongly suggest the adoption of a peer-review process.

HEAL is dramatically
              increasing the number of teaching resources that can be accessed through HEAL,
              while at the same time adhering to strict quality assurance principles.
              Specifically, the project is providing: 1) access to tens of thousands of
              resources through incorporation of existing collections as well as building
              bridges to specialized libraries of health sciences materials; 2) customized
              interfaces for specific health science education constituencies (teachers,
              students and life-long learners); 3) a process assuring the high quality of the
              materials (including peer review) and compliance with Federal regulations; 4)
              tight integration within the NSDL by adopting Core Integration (CI) services,
              such as metadata harvesting, and by collaborating with other life science
              collections; and 5) a plan for continuing growth and sustenance of HEAL. With
              HEAL expanded to a full-fledged library, health science teachers and learners
              can access learning-teaching materials through one powerful search utility and
              at the same time judge their quality and usability. 

