Title       : Advanced Placement Digital Library for Biology, Physics and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0226317

Award Number: 0226317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Datla Siva Kumari skumari@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geneva Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Johanek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Rice University, in collaboration with the College Board, is creating an online
              digital library for high school Advanced Placement (AP) students and teachers
              of Biology, Physics and Chemistry (BPC). The AP program, administered by the
              College Board, is accepted both nationally and internationally as a demanding
              undergraduate level curriculum taught in high schools. In a two-phased process,
              the Advanced Placement Digital Library (APDL) is building a collection of
              educationally valid Internet resources. In Phase One, educational resources
              directly related to BPC topics and concepts are researched and collected by
              project personnel, reviewed and validated by master AP teachers and college
              faculty, and cataloged and organized by the topics and concepts taught in these
              three courses. In Phase Two, the collection opens to AP teachers and students,
              and through their input, APDL serves as a valuable source of dynamically
              updated resources. 
APDL serves as a reservoir of resources where teachers and
              students can educate themselves about BPC concepts, at their own pace, at a
              time and place of their choosing, and take individualized knowledge-building
              paths based on interest and needs. 

APDL is collecting resources for these
              three subjects through a collaborative construction process using a content
              panel for each subject. The review panel consists of several AP constituents: a
              higher education faculty member who has in-depth knowledge of the AP curriculum
              and holds leadership positions to influence change; five AP teachers with
              considerable experience in teaching students and their peers; an undergraduate
              student who is studying the subject at the university level; and two project
              content experts. The panel selects only those resources that support advanced
              study of the topic. A collection created through such a broad review is then
              opened to the larger community of AP teachers and students for their use and
              input. Peer-review of both teachers and students is visible to the users. The
              end result is a body of resources aligned to AP topics in BPC and searchable by
              concept. For each course, teachers find a topic outline of that is hyperlinked
              to the collected resources.

AP teachers are informed about APDL via the more
              than 60,000 College Board professional development conferences that occur
              nationwide. The College Board is committed to housing the collection on their
              official site, AP Central, with over 50,000 registered users. While students
              and teachers of advanced science courses are the targeted audiences for this
              collection, we expect it to be useful to others such as, a large body of Pre-AP
              teachers, high school teachers and students taking non-AP courses,
              undergraduate students and higher education faculty teaching introductory
              courses in these subjects.

Significant co-funding of this project is being
              provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate
              of Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the importance of a
              digital library collection of learning resources for students in the
              disciplines of biology, chemistry and physics.

