Title       : Scaling the Peer Review Process for National Stem Education Digital Library
               Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0226269

Award Number: 0226269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard L. Hanley ghanley@calstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Flora McMartin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calif St Univ, Trustees
	      400 Golden Shore
	      Long Beach, CA  908024209    310/985-4275

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the primary goals of STEM digital libraries, as well as the NSDL itself,
              is to enable users to identify potentially useful digital learning materials
              and information from a wide range of collections. Faculty, instructors and
              student users of STEM digital libraries are often presented with numerous
              results from a search query where they then face the challenge of searching for
              only those that serve their educational purposes. STEM undergraduate educators
              expect and need digital libraries to provide them with the information and
              tools to evaluate the quality of content of learning materials, their potential
              efficacy in teaching and learning, their usability and stability, and the
              adaptability of these materials for their educational needs.

How best to
              develop, implement and scale up effective, efficient and reliable peer review
              systems plagues both mature and newly developing STEM digital libraries.
              Differences in what is reviewed (journal articles vs. learning materials) and
              the purpose of the materials (advancing knowledge vs. promoting learning) help
              compound the situation. Another factor affecting peer review processes for
              digital libraries stems from users. From their standpoint, the ultimate goal of
              peer review is to help them select the learning materials. In this case, they
              are not interested in advancing knowledge in a particular field or helping
              authors improve their articles (the purpose of peer review for online
              journals). Effective  systems require STEM digital collections to expend
              significant resources to recruit, train and support large numbers of reviewers
              who evaluate materials by applying a set of criteria that requires expertise in
              the integration of technology with pedagogy, cognitive science and
              content.

In collaboration with its partners, NEEDS (a Digital Library for
              Engineering Education, and HEAL) the Health Education Access Library, this
              project is developing one solution to the problems associated with implementing
              and scaling peer review systems for NSDL collections, namely, the high costs
              associated with face-to-face training, retention of reviewers, and the
              inability of reviewers to keep pace with the rapidly increasing size of the
              collections. This work builds on the foundation of the MERLOT peer review
              process. To encourage adaptability by other NSDL collections there is an
              adaptable online professional development processes for implementing both peer
              and Premier reviews that is designed as a channel adaptable to the framework
              uPortal (the software selected by the NSDL-Core Integration development team to
              create the initial NSDL Main Portal). The main outcome of this collaborative
              project is a professional development module for training peer reviewers,
              designed for NSDL collections (and others) to effectively and efficiently
              implement and sustain peer review of their collections. The adaptable module,
              training and mentoring processes save NSDL collections significant time, effort
              and funds in their implementation of valid and reliable peer review processes.
              

