Title       : The Articulation of Political Strategies and Regional Structure in the
               Teuchitlan Tradition of Western Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0226918

Award Number: 0226918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 22,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22751              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher S. Beekman cbeekman@carbon.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christopher Beekman will conduct
              one season of archaeological fieldwork in the Jalisco region of Western Mexico.
              He will focus on sites which relate to the Teuchitlan Tradition which spans a
              1,200 year period from ca. 300 BC to 900 AD. Sites are characterized by a
              distinctive form of public architecture and ceramic models of these features
              indicate they were used for feasting activities, marriage ceremonies and ritual
              purposes. Also associated with these structures are specialized workshops
              (which produced, among other items, obsidian jewelry), and shaft and chamber
              tombs. Excavations at one such shaft tomb yielded a wide variety of imported
              offerings suggesting an elite burial. Over the course of its history the
              Teuchitlan polity varied in both size and in degree of political
              centralization. Dr. Beekman notes that the emphasis on elites symbols varies as
              well. During the period of maximum centralization evidence of items associated
              with an elite class are relatively rare but in other periods when central
              control appears replaced by factional confrontation such markers are common.
              Dr. Beekman suggests that inter group competition spurs the emergence of
              claimants to elite status as individuals vie for political control and
              followers. Once a structured hierarchy is established such status markers are
              no longer necessary. This interpretation contradicts commonly accepted theory
              and therefore has generated considerable interest. With National Science
              Foundation support this pattern, which to date is based on preliminary
              evidence, will be examined in detail. In this first stage of the research Dr.
              Beekman and his colleagues will test excavate a number of sites which sample
              different time periods and he will then analyze the objects collected. A
              chronologically sensitive ceramic sequence is necessary to order sites
              correctly and the pottery excavated from stratigraphically secure contexts will
              be analyzed to provide time sensitive markers.

     Although it exhibited
              the social complexity which characterized many other parts of Middle America,
              the prehistory of Western Mexico is poorly known. Dr. Beekman's research will
              not only shed new light on the mechanisms which underlie the development of
              stratified societies but will also provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists.

