Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Warfare and Political Development in
               the Prehispanic Northwest Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0226741

Award Number: 0226741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11438              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Stanish stanish@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Stanish, Elizabeth Arkush will complete the
              analysis of data for her doctoral dissertation. She will use the NSF award to
              obtain radiocarbon dates for a suite of archaeological sites in southern Peru
              near Lake Titicaca.  These sites belong to the Colla culture, a group that
              thrived in the Late Intermediate Period, around 1000 - 1450 AD, just prior to
              the Inca conquest of the Andes.  The sites are all fortified, and they
              constitute some of the most marked evidence for warfare in the region from any
              time period.  Ms. Arkush's project takes the extensive, heavily fortified
              region of the Collas as a test case to illuminate how premodern warfare shaped
              regions politically.  Her doctoral research has involved the identification of
              about a hundred fortified Colla sites using air photos, survey of forty-five of
              these sites, and small-scale test excavations at ten sites.  The goal is to
              clarify the effects of intense warfare on pre-state political power through an
              examination of the sequence of fort-building, site occupation, and site
              abandonment in Colla territory.  Because the pottery sequence for the northern
              Titicaca Basin is poorly defined, radiocarbon dating is the best means to date
              these sites and others with similar pottery.  

Recent archaeological studies
              have revealed the surprising prevalence of warfare in prehistory, and
              anthropologists are now recognizing that warfare was a centrally important
              factor in power relations and social change throughout the long story of human
              societies.  However, its effects were complicated and unpredictable.  Pre-state
              warfare sometimes resulted in the emergence of complex, centralized polities,
              and sometimes prevented the political and cultural integration of regions. 
              Both scenarios happened in the Andean highlands: empires like that of the Incas
              were built on conquest warfare, while in the hiatuses between these empires,
              chronic warfare often fragmented regions politically and socially. The
              proliferation of fortified sites and the breakdown of long-range trade networks
              in Colla territory suggest that here, warfare caused fragmentation.  But other
              details from Ms. Arkush's research point to a more complex story, especially
              the sheer variety of fortified sites, from lightly defended to massively
              walled, from small, barely occupied refuge posts to near-urban centers with
              streets, residential compounds, and cemetery sectors.  There is also evidence
              in the contact-period documents and in the data from this project that the
              Colla region was eventually politically unified.  If so, the story of the
              Collas will be that of how a defensive stalemate was overcome, and how warfare
              became a basis for consolidation rather than fragmentation.

Additional
              benefits will result from this research.  It will fill in gaps in the regional
              ceramic sequence with carbon dates, benefiting future studies.  It records many
              previously unpublished sites that are quickly falling prey to looting and the
              expansion of agricultural areas. Finally, it will do much to clarify the
              prehistory of a very poorly understood region.

