Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Modeling Somerset Monongahela Village
               Organization Within a Chronological Framework Developed Through AMS Dating of
               Curated Organic Remains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0226785

Award Number: 0226785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9885               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Carr christopher.carr@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Bernard K. Means will determine
              the ages of a dozen American Indian village sites located in the rugged
              Allegheny Mountains region of southwestern Pennsylvania. The American Indian
              farmers who built and lived in these villages vanished long before the first
              Europeans settled this area.  How these people maintained vital and vibrant
              farming communities in this sometime hostile terrain, and for how many
              centuries, remain mysteries.  Direct knowledge of their ring-shaped village
              communities-which consisted of a ring of  houses built around a central open
              plaza-is limited to what can be determined through archeological research. 
              Most of these villages were excavated by federally-funded work relief projects
              during the Great Depression.  Mr. Means has examined records and artifacts from
              these 1930s excavations in museum collections.  He found that these
              Depression-era archeologists used relatively modern techniques that compare
              favorably to those used today.  Dr. Carr and Mr. Means will use their combined
              expertise in modern archeological techniques and scientific tools to build on
              the legacy of these earlier village excavations.  Site maps for these
              ring-shaped villages will be examined using new anthropological models and
              computer-assisted spatial analysis to address a number of questions: 1. Did
              villagers arrange their houses to enhance cooperation and minimize conflicts?
              2. Did families work independently while farming or did some families regularly
              combine their efforts? 3. Did families gather into clan-like groups that each
              owned part of a village? 4. Was each village separated into two larger social
              divisions that perhaps competed in games, performed group ceremonies, and
              buried each other's dead? 5. Were later villages more efficiently planned,
              reflecting lessons learned by earlier generations of villagers? These questions
              cannot be answered without knowing the ages of the village sites.  

With
              National Science Foundation funding, each village site will be dated using
              accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) applied to the burned remains of past meals
              discovered still clinging to pottery-vessel fragments found by Mr. Means in
              museum collections. This research is important for several reasons.  It will
              help archaeologists working in the Northeastern U.S. to understand the changing
              relationships between village lifeways and farming. There is a tenuous
              understanding throughout the region regarding the timing of the first
              appearance of farming villages and what material and social changes resulted.
              This research will also demonstrate that new concepts and methods can be
              applied to stored museum collections to answer questions undreamt of by their
              original excavators.  This will generate a greater understanding of the past
              and highlight the importance of maintaining collections for future study.

