Title       : (NSDL) Advanced Technology Environmental Education Library (ATEEL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0226116

Award Number: 0226116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen J. Kabat Lensch ekabat@eicc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern IA CC District
	      306 West River Drive
	      Davenport, IA  528011221    563/336-3300

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collections project is developing the Advanced Technology Environmental
              Education Library (ATEEL) to serve the environmental information needs of
              environmental technology students, educators, and technicians as well as
              individuals with an interest in or a knowledge requirement of environmental
              issues.  Project partners include the Advanced Technology Environmental
              Education Center (ATEEC), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
              Partnership for Environmental Technology Education (PETE), and the Davenport
              Public Library.

Environmental technology education requires access to
              reliable and up-to-date information with the demand focused in two distinct
              areas: 1) college programs that offer degrees in various aspects of
              environmental technology (e.g., hazardous materials, natural resources
              management, pollution prevention, energy management, etc.); and 2)
              environmental education required across nearly all technical fields (e.g.,
              health care workers, manufacturing technicians, computer/electronics repair
              technicians, agriculture, etc.).  Federal and state regulations change
              routinely and often, and there are new discoveries and technologies that change
              the nature of the skills and knowledge required of technicians.  In the
              environmental area, large amounts of non-proprietary materials are available on
              the Internet through federal and state government agencies, as well as
              thousands of non-profit agencies with an interest in environment issues. 
              However, access to this network for many students, teachers and technicians
              often finds them lost in an ocean of data - much of which has no relevance to
              their job function or skill development.  Digital library technologies are
              ideal for providing access to and managing these rich sources of
              information.

This ATEEL project is serving the environmental community by
              establishing an infrastructure to support a comprehensive, interactive
              environmental technician education digital library that is serving the
              environmental education needs of community college students, instructors,
              technicians, and citizens across a broad range of technical fields.  ATEEL is
              creating specific resources focused on providing links to comprehensive,
              up-to-date regulatory information.  In partnership with MIT, it is also
              creating an environmental research-scanning function to support the integration
              of environmental technology research into the classroom and community.

