Title       : Mathematical ACTS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0226948

Award Number: 0226948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Hamos                          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4919570            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Cardullo richard.cardullo@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela S. Clute  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              DeWayne A. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Rettig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Bocian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1792      MSP-Targeted Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical ACTS: Achievement and Collaboration for Teachers and Students is a
              project that focuses an existing University of California - Riverside (UCR) and
              Jurupa Unified School District partnership involving pre-service and in-service
              education of teachers to an emphasis on student mastery of Algebra I content. 
              In this new effort, the partners will establish a spiral of instructional
              training for upper elementary and middle school mathematics teachers.  Embedded
              in a research paradigm, Mathematical ACTS will examine the main effects of
              preservice education, professional development and/or extended learning
              opportunities on student achievement in mathematics and on teacher career
              growth.  As the project scales up, the partners will analyze students of
              teachers with or without Mathematical ACTS professional development
              experiences, and with or without a pre-service candidate available to
              facilitate re-teaching.

The partner school district has a student population
              of over 19,000 students of whom 57% are Hispanic and 5% are African American. 
              Further, the district has sizeable English Learner (24%) and Free/Reduced Price
              Meals (52%) student populations.  Among the secondary school mathematics
              teachers, only 52% have a mathematics major or mathematics teaching credential.
               Through Mathematical ACTS, partners will tackle issues of teacher credentials
              through 150 annual hours of training lead by district and university faculty
              with an emphasis on addressing gaps in student mathematical skills and mastery.
               Extended learning opportunities in the classroom, after-school, and in the
              summer will be available for remedial and advanced students.  Research results
              on the scalability of reform will be disseminated in conjunction with
              district-wide adoption and structural changes in UCR's teacher education
              program.  


