Title       : Storm-Induced Spawning by the Atlantic Menhaden
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1992       
File        : a9296148

Award Number: 9296148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 16,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Checkley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Prior research led to the hypothesis that the Atlantic menhaden,               
              Brevoortia tyrannus, spawns during storms in water upwelled near             
              the western wall of the Gulf Stream.  This hypothesis is based on              
              inference from the sizes and birth dates of surviving larvae.  A               
              rigorous test of this hypothesis, and investigation of its                     
              adpative significance, requires studies of recently spawned eggs               
              and the resultant larvae.  Methods must be developed to                        
              facilitate such studies.  In particular, the ability of an                     
              optical particle counter to distinguish and count eggs needs to                
              be evaluated.  The optical counter may also distinguish yolk sac               
              larvae of the Atlantic menhaden in natural assemblages of the                  
              zooplankton.  Tests will be done in the larboratory, with live                 
              eggs and larvae of the Atlantic menhaden from a captive spawning               
              stock, and at sea during a seven day cruise, deploying the                     
              optical counter with a CTD on a towed body.  The ability of a                  
              radio tracked, surface drifter to follow a patch of Atlantic                   
              menhaden eggs and larvae will also be tested.  A small group of                
              scientists with expertise in meteorology, physical, chemical and               
              biological oceanogaphy, and theory will meet to plan a rigorous                
              investigation of weather effects on the spawning and egg and                   
              larval ecology of the Atlantic menhaden.  The work will provide                
              results valuable for the Atlantic menhaden and also other                      
              organisms with pelagic eggs and/or larvae.  Such organisms                     
              typically exhibit large variation in recruitment.                              
              %%%
