Title       : ROW: Robust Adaptive Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9296073

Award Number: 9296073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 18,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anuradha M. Annaswamy aanna@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
              The aim of robust adaptive control is to realize                               
              satisfactory performance in adaptive systems when                              
              various classes of perturbations are present.  Examples of                     
              such perturbations include bounded disturbances, time-                         
              variations in plant parameters, and unmodeled dynamics                         
              in the plant.  While the behavior of adaptive systems in                       
              the presence of bounded disturbances is currently well                         
              understood and powerful results have been derived,                             
              robustness in the presence of parameter variations and                         
              unmodeled dynamics has been established only under                             
              assumptions that are quite restrictive.  The proposal                          
              addresses robustness in the presence of the latter two                         
              perturbations and is aimed not only at relaxing these                          
              assumptions but also at developing a general set of                            
              conditions under which the adaptive system exhibits                            
              satisfactory behavior.  In the discussion of each problem,                     
              the current status of research is first stated, followed by                    
              the approach that is proposed and the adaptive                                 
              procedure that will be employed.  In each case, a global                       
              analysis of the underlying nonlinear system will be carried                    
              out and attempts will be made to derive sufficient                             
              conditions for global boundedness of solutions as well as                      
              conditions under which the system can have unbounded                           
              solutions.  The aim of the research is to develop better                       
              methods for the design of practical adaptive controllers                       
              which can meet stringent performance requirements.
