Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award: Computational Geometry/Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1993    
File        : a9296056

Award Number: 9296056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. B. Mitchell jsbm@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Mitchell has been studying a variety of problems in computational          
              geometry that arise in robotics, computer-aided design, and computer           
              vision.  One problem of general interest is that of finding very               
              efficient algorithms for building shortest path maps and Voronoi               
              diagrams in two and three-dimensional obstacle spaces.  He has                 
              examined this problem with many different distance measures                    
              (Euclidean, link distance, "weighted regions", and others) and is              
              currently implementing some of these algorithms. Another major problem         
              area is that of computer vision, in which one desires a best fit               
              between a known object model and a given noisy image.  This leads to           
              questions of how to compute the "distance" between two arbitrary               
              shapes, where distance can have many different meanings and shapes can         
              be described in various ways (from point sets to arbitrary                     
              multiply-connected regions).                                                   
                                                                                             
              Many of his research problems have very simple visualizations. Imagine         
              a small mobile robot trying to get from point A (in the living room)           
              to point B (in the kitchen).  There are many obstacles in the way,             
              some of them known in advance (if, for instance, the robot is equipped         
              with a floorplan) and others unknown (such as the pet dog on the               
              floor).  The objective is to find a good path from A to B. This                
              "shortest path problem" is fundamental in robotics, for if a robot is          
              to be automated to be able to plan tasks on its own, it must find              
              feasible paths (this is the "motion planning" problem) which, ideally,         
              are shortest according to some sense of optimality.
