Title       : Regulation of Intracardiac Shunting in Chelonians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9296274

Award Number: 9296274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce L. Umminger                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14588              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Hicks JHICKS@UCI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Turtles (chelonians) exhibit the remarkable ability to survive long            
              periods without breathing.  For example during diving in aquatic               
              turtles, breatholds for 1 to 2 hours have been observed.  The organ            
              that plays a critical role in the turtles remarkable breatholding              
              ability during diving is the heart.  The heart of the turtle is                
              comprised of only 3 chambers (as compared to the 4 chambers of mammals         
              and humans).  The unique anatomy results in the potential for the blood        
              returning from the body to either circulate through the lungs or to            
              bypass the lungs.  When the blood bypasses the lungs it is referred to         
              as a right-to-left intracardiac shunt.  Previous scientific                    
              investigations have reported that the amount of blood bypassing the            
              lung is often coupled with ventilatory patterns, with the right-to-left        
              shunt increasing during breatholding.  In contrast, during breathing           
              the amount of blood circulating to the lungs increases and the right-          
              to-left shunt is reduced.  While a large right-to-left shunt would             
              produce harmful results in mammals and humans, the ability of reptiles         
              to bypass the lungs may play several important roles during                    
              breatholding.  These include reducing the energy expenditure of the            
              heart, the "metering" of oxygen from the lung (analogous to a scuba            
              tank) and maintaining the balance of fluids between the lung and blood.        
              However, the precise process by which the heart of turtles can                 
              accomplish varying levels of blood shunting have been controversial and        
              not well understood.  The study proposed by Dr. Hicks will utilize a           
              combination of sophisticated radiological techniques, blood flow               
              measurements and injections of tracer gases to image the heart and             
              determine blood flow patterns through the heart during a variety of            
              physiological conditions.  These techniques and the experiments                
              outlined in Dr. Hicks' proposal will determine if the process of blood         
              shunting results either from factors external to the heart (i.e.               
              regulation by the lung) or factors intrinsic to the heart to                   
              understanding the evolutionary development of the cardiovascular               
              system in vertebrate animals.  His elucidation of the mechanism of             
              blood shunting in reptiles will help to answer the question of what            
              functional role blood shunting plays in this ancient but important             
              group of animals.
