Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Electronic Properties of Low Dimensional
               Materials.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9296077

Award Number: 9296077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97867              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lieber cml@cmliris.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9227,
Abstract    :
              This Presidential Young Investigator Award project is in the                   
              general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the                    
              subfields of solid state chemistry and surface science.  There are             
              two major thrusts in this experimental program.  The first                     
              focusses on the synthesis and characterization of low-dimensional              
              inorganic materials.  Of particular interest to this research is               
              the development of an understanding of how the electrical,                     
              optical, and magnetic properties of these materials are controlled             
              by factors such as metal-metal coupling and solid state structure,             
              as well as how these factors can be manipulated synthetically.                 
              The second research thrust centers on the use of scanning                      
              tunneling microscopy for the in situ study of surface adsorbates.              
              Initial studies will focus on the structure and bonding of                     
              transition metal catalysts on metallic supports and the                        
              structures of important biological molecules adsorbed on metal                 
              surfaces.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The research activities that are enabled by this Presidential                  
              Young Investigator Award could give rise to the discovery of                   
              strategies for the design and preparation of materials with                    
              predictable electrical, optical, and magnetic properties.                      
              Additionally, these studies should yield insights into the                     
              dynamics of interfacial processes that are of importance to                    
              catalysis and bioprocesses.
