Title       : New Metal Catalyzed Organic Transformations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1991  
File        : a9296055

Award Number: 9296055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 13,  1991  
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119900             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Barry Sharpless sharples@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program supports the work of Dr. K. Barry                
              Sharpless.  Sharpless, Prof. of Chemistry at MIT, continues his                
              pioneering investigations of new reagents for organic                          
              synthesis.  His current work is, in part, directed towards                     
              examining how metals complex to existing groups in a molecule                  
              to direct new reactions to a particular site.  Notable new                     
              directions include trying to develop methods that do not                       
              require an existing tether to direct the chemistry.                            
                                                                                             
              Sharpless's group continues to investigate the mechanistic                     
              details of ligand-accelerated catalysis of reactions, and how                  
              this leads to the remarkable enantioselectivity observed for                   
              the reactions. As part of his mechanistic investigations he has                
              recently discovered a process for dihydroxylating an isolated                  
              alkene bond without prior binding of the reagent to the                        
              substrate.  This discovery opens a whole new arena for                         
              scientific enquiry, and has great potential for synthetic                      
              chemists.   His group is trying to also understand the origins                 
              of this process.  Sharpless will "comb the periodic table"                     
              looking for new reagents to add to the arsenal already                         
              available to the synthesis chemist.  Initial scrutiny will be                  
              given to finding unique metal/ hydroperoxide combinations to                   
              carry out asymmetric epoxidation to isolated alkenes.  A unique                
              assay system, analgous to that used for screening for                          
              bioactivity of molecules, will be employed to examine large                    
              series of reactions.
