Title       : Theoretical Studies of Star Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9296096

Award Number: 9296096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Stahler sstahler@astro.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The theoretical study of how stars form from collapsing stellar gas            
              clouds is fraught with difficulties because of the array of                    
              physical processes that affect the collapse.  One such process is              
              the interaction of rapidly infalling gas onto the star and its                 
              surrounding circumstellar disk.  The Principal Investigator (PI)               
              will compute hydrodynamic models of this infall, and the reaction              
              of the disk to it.  The expected results are that the infall energy            
              will be converted to reradiation disk heating.  Ultimately, this               
              heating will stop the infall entirely.  These results will be used             
              to determine how massive a collapsing star can be.  The PI also                
              will determine the effects of the nuclear detonation of deuterium              
              (heavy hydrogen) within the proto-star, which will lead to revised             
              estimates of the luminosity distribution of protostars.  Finally,              
              the PI will determine the distribution of masses of young stars,               
              working backwards from the observed distribution of luminosities               
              of stars in young clusters.  All these computations will aid in the            
              interpretation of the rapidly growing core of data on young stars              
              and will clarify the physical processes involved as young                      
              "protostars" collapse into visible stars.
