Title       : AIT-CCNAA Cooperative Research: Altitudinal Variation in Metabolic Physiology of
               Brown Frogs, Rana sauteri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9296095

Award Number: 9296095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34562              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren W. Burggren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 5924      TAIWAN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a two.year collaborative research project                              
              between Dr. Warren Burggren, University of                                     
              Massachusetts, Dr. Daniel Townsend, University of                              
              Scranton and Professor Lin Yao.Sung, National                                  
              Taiwan University supported by the AIT.CCNAA                                   
              Cooperative Science Program.  This proposal plans to                           
              study the potential role of physiology in                                      
              reproductive isolation between closely related                                
              species.  They plan to use brown frogs, Rana sauteri,                      
              collected from three distinct altitudes in Taiwan                              
              to examine the potential role of physiology in                                 
              reproductive isolation to elucidate the relationship                           
              between speciation and reproductive isolating                                  
              mechanisms.  This proposal addresses an important                              
              problem in ecology and evolutionary biology.  The                              
              findings can have significant implications in                                  
              evolutionary theory and can advance our understanding                          
              of general mechanisms of speciation.  The                                      
              experimental design is simple and the species                                 
              identified is uniquely appropriate to serve as an                              
              animal model for this study.  Taiwan is an excellent                           
              site for this study, since this is one of the few                              
              places where brown frogs are found distributed over                            
              such a large area and at different altitudes.
