Title       : Molecular Actions During Early Drosophila Embryo Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1992 
File        : a9296260

Award Number: 9296260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 11,  1992 
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Ma jun.ma@chmcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Childrens Hosp Res Found
	      
	      Cincinnati, OH  45201    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ma's long term goal is to understand how genes are turned on               
              and off during early Drosophila embryo development and how gene                
              activities govern the processes of embryonic pattern formation.                
              He will focus on the maternal gene bicoid, which organizes the                 
              anterior pattern of the Drosophila embryo. The specific aims of                
              this project are: 1)Further study of the bicoid protein segments               
              that are conserved among other proteins involved in embryonic                  
              pattern formation in both Drosophila and other organisms, 2)                   
              Understand how bicoid protein turns gene(s) on and off and                     
              thereby specifies the anterior structures of the embryos, 3)                   
              Determine whether the only essential function of bicoid protein                
              during early embryo development is to stimulate the expression of              
              the hunchback gene, 4) Understand how modification of bicoid                   
              protein affects its activity, 5) Isolate and study of Drosophila               
              genes that modulate the activity of bicoid protein and genes                   
              whose expression is controlled by bicoid protein. A combination                
              of biochemical and genetic methods will be used. To facilitate                 
              the study, Dr. Ma will continue to use the powerful techniques                 
              of yeast genetics: various derivatives of bicoid protein will be               
              generated and analyzed in yeast cells, and new Drosophila genes                
              will be isolated using the yeast genetic system. The bicoid                    
              derivatives will also be tested in Drosophila embryos either by                
              injecting the in vitro synthesized mRNA into the embryos or by                 
              introducing the genes into the Drosophila chromosome.                          
              %%%                                                                            
              How genes are turned on and off during embryo development and how              
              regulation of gene expression in turn directs embryonic pattern                
              formation are essential question in developmental biology. This                
              study exploits the powerful molecular genetic capabilities of                  
              yeast combined with that of Drosophila to address these questions              
              with respect to the initial establishment of the anterior-                     
              posterior axis of the organism.
