Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award: Robustness and Feedback Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9296058

Award Number: 9296058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 4,  1991     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kameshwar R. Poolla poolla@jagger.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              His future research plans fall into three broad areas and are outlined         
              below.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              I.  Parallel Algorithms.  His principal objective here is to develop           
              efficient multiprocessor algorithms for the solution of large, sparse          
              Lyapunov and Riccati equations.  Such equations typically arise in the         
              control, stability analysis and model reduction of large flexible              
              structures for which high order, banded, sparse finite element models          
              are often available.  The development of efficient Lyapunov and                
              Riccati solvers would facilitate obtaining low order approximations to         
              these complex models.  These simplified models would play a key role           
              in the context of simulation and feedback control of flexible                  
              structures.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              II.  Adaptive Robust Control.  Physical plant models are inherently            
              inaccurate and incorporate both parametric and dynamic modelling               
              uncertainty, often involving a large number of parameters.  In many            
              circumstances it may be possible to fragment the set of possible plant         
              models into smaller, more manageable "operating points" for which              
              locally robust LTI controllers may be readily designed using, for              
              instance, H  -optimal control methods.  The entire problems of                 
              controlling the plant then reduces to adaptively "gain-scheduling"             
              between these robust controllers.  In this connection he has provided          
              an adaptation scheme that uniformly input-output stabilizes the                
              uncertain plant.  Much work, however, remains, especially in the               
              context of obtaining acceptable transient responses and disturbance            
              rejection.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              III.  Nonlinear Feedback.  The research here is motivated by                   
              fundamental questions such as:  What can and cannot be accomplished by         
              the use of (arbitrary) nonlinear feedback?  When are nonlinear                 
              controllers significantly better than linear ones?  Answers to these           
              questions are vitally important because they would allow control               
              system engineers to select or eliminate broad classes of design                
              methodologies for specific design problems.  His principal research            
              goals are to develop quantitative techniques that offer guidelines on          
              actuator-sensor reconfiguration and the choice of an appropriate               
              feedback synthesis methodology.
