Title       : Field Study of Mammalian Behavioral Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1992     
File        : a9296051

Award Number: 9296051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay E. Holekamp holekamp@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Smale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Holekamp and her colleagues are continuing their field study               
              of behavioral development in the spotted hyena.  Spotted hyenas                
              live in complex, primate-like societies, called "clans," with 5                
              to 100 members.  Whereas female hyenas remain in their natal                   
              clans for life, all young males eventually emigrate.  Each hyena               
              clan is structured by a rigid, linear dominance hierarchy, or                  
              "pecking order."  Spotted hyenas differ from most other mammals                
              in that females are socially dominant to males among adults.                   
              Coalitions in which one animal joins an aggressor against a third              
              individual occur frequently and may function importantly in the                
              development and maintenance of rank relations in hyena societies.              
                                                                                             
              This phase of the research has three goals:  (1) to document the               
              development, causes, and consequences of coalitionary behavior;                
              (2) to determine why males emigrate from their natal clans, how                
              they become integrated into their new social groups, and how                   
              dispersal influences their social rank; (3) to elucidate the                   
              mating system in the study population.                                         
                                                                                             
              The 80 hyenas being studied comprise one large clan in the Masai               
              Mara National Reserve, Kenya.  The age, social history, and kin                
              relations of each clan member are known from previous study.  The              
              researchers are using radio tracking, behavioral observation, and              
              molecular-genetic analysis of paternity.  The research will help               
              elucidate (1) the causes and consequences of mammalian dispersal               
              behavior, (2) the development and maintenance of social                        
              dominance, and (3) the social biology of large carnivores.
