Title       : PYI: Millimeter Wave and Microwave Remote Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1995    
File        : a9296066

Award Number: 9296066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247452             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasuo Kuga kuga@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Electromagnetic wave scattering by random media is important for many          
              areas including remote sensing and target identification.  Although            
              considerable progress has been reported on the wave propagation and            
              scattering in random media, there are many unanswered problems                 
              including the backscattering enhancement effect in the millimeter wave         
              and microwave regions.  To understand the interaction of the                   
              electromagnetic wave with medium, it is important to have experimental         
              data obtained under controlled environments.  We propose to conduct            
              the carefully controlled experiments using random media of known               
              statistical characteristics in the millimeter wave and microwave               
              regions.  In the surface scattering study we will construct surfaces           
              of known mean heights and correlation distances and measure both               
              bistatic and backscattering cross-sections.  The backscattering                
              enhancement effect by rough surface will be carefully investigated.            
              In the imaging study we will build a special chamber and investigate           
              the reconstructed image quality for different particle characteristics         
              and distributions.  The proposed project will enhance our                      
              understanding of how the electromagnetic wave is scattered by random           
              media, and will have important practical applications in the                   
              microwave, millimeter wave, and sub-millimeter wave remote sensing.
