Title       : Mathematical Sciences: New Invariants for Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1991 
File        : a9296022

Award Number: 9296022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 23,  1991 
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Robert Meyerhoff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Three-dimensional manifolds appeal to us at a very basic                  
              level, but they are very difficult to understand.  There are many              
              ways to construct examples of 3-manifolds, but the simplest sorts              
              of questions about the constructed manifolds often cannot be                   
              answered.  For example, it is very difficult to tell whether two               
              construction schemes yield the same or different manifolds.                    
                   What is needed is a computable collection of invariants                   
              which distill the vast amount of information contained in the                  
              three-manifold into a usable form.  The standard invariants -                  
              Euler characteristic, homology, fundamental group - either                     
              contain almost no information, or are very difficult to work                   
              with.                                                                          
                   Hyperbolic 3-manifolds are the most important - and most                  
              complicated - class of geometric 3-manifolds.  Hyperbolic                      
              manifolds have the same metric properties as the non-Euclidean                 
              geometry discovered by Bolyai, Gauss, and Lobachevsky in the                   
              1820's.  The metric can be used to carry out measurements.  In                 
              particular, such invariants as the volume (the size of the                     
              manifold) and the length spectrum (the set of all lengths of non-              
              trivial closed geodesics in the manifold) can be used to study                 
              these 3-manifolds.  Subtler geometric invariants can be defined                
              as well.                                                                       
                   Recent research indicates that these invariants may be very               
              useful in helping us to understand 3-manifolds.  This project                  
              involves extensive machine computation in an approach to                       
              understanding these invariants.
