Title       : REU: Social Structure and Male Parental Care in a MonogamousPasserine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1992    
File        : a9296118

Award Number: 9296118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tarri M. Joyner                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy T. Burley ntburley@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Evolutionary biologists are concerned with understanding the              
              diversity of mating systems found in the animal kingdom and the                
              factors that affect those systems.  One important factor that                  
              influences the mating system is the amount of parental care that               
              males give.  This in turn is influenced by a male's confidence of              
              paternity; that is, a male should not willingly care for                       
              offspring if there is a reasonable probability that they were                  
              fathered by a different male.  Thus, paternity confidence is an                
              important question in species that are monogamous and have high                
              levels of male parental care.  Although this question has                      
              interested scientists for some time, technological advances (DNA               
              fingerprinting) have only recently made exploration of the                     
              question feasible.  This research explored this question for the               
              zebra finch, a bird native to Australia that has long-term, often              
              life-long, pair bonds and substantial male care.  The species is               
              ideal for study because it is possible to combine experimental                 
              (non-invasive) laboratory studies (in Illinois) with                           
              investigation of free-living birds (in Australia).  This project               
              will increase our understanding of animal social organization.                 
              Findings of this study will be integrated with those of other                  
              species, resulting in generalizations that should increase our                 
              understanding of the process of social evolution in humans --                  
              which also have high male parental care -- as well as other                    
              species.
