Title       : Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Investigations of Low- Dimensional Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1992     
File        : a9296038

Award Number: 9296038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lieber cml@cmliris.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There is currently considerable interest in understanding the                  
              structure, electronic properties, and reactivity of metals and                 
              semiconductors since these materials figure prominently in many                
              important technological areas including microelectronics and                   
              catalysis.  To understand the macroscopic behavior of such                     
              systems requires knowledge of the structural and electronic                    
              properties at the molecular level.  The overall objective of this              
              study is to characterize with atomic resolution the structural                 
              and electronic properties of low-dimensional materials that                    
              exhibit interesting structural, electrical, and catalytic                      
              behavior.  A the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) will be used              
              to probe these key properties directly in real-space.  Specific                
              materials that will be investigated with the STM include tantalum              
              disulfide/ diselenide, chemically-modified tantalum disulfide                  
              (i.e., metal-substituted, anion-substituted, and intercalated                  
              materials), and graphite intercalation complexes.  Emphasis will               
              be placed on characterizing in detail the structure and                        
              electronic properties of the charge density wave (CDW) phases in               
              the metal dichalcogenide materials and on correlating changes in               
              the CDW phases with the chemical modifications.  The studies                   
              will provide systematic atomic-resolution data that will be                    
              compared with theoretical models to develop a better microscopic               
              understanding of the structural and electronic properties of                   
              these interesting low-dimensional materials, and to understand                 
              how these properties can be varied through chemical modification.              
              This award is jointly funded by the Solid-State Chemistry Program              
              of the Division of Materials Research, and by the Analytical and               
              Surface Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.
