Title       : Structure, Function and Developmental Regulation of the T. brucei ATP Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1992    
File        : a9296047

Award Number: 9296047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keia' L. Thompson                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noreen Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Research Foundation
	      P. O. Box 9
	      Albany, NY  122010009    516/246-7935

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research is to analyze the developmental                 
              regulation of mitochondrial ATP synthase biosynthesis and                      
              function in the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma brucei during its              
              differentiation from mammalian to insect (tsetse fly) host                     
              specificity.  This differention is accompanied by mitochondrial                
              biogenesis, derepression of the mitochondrial genome, and a swith              
              from glycolytic to respiratory energy metabolism; and is                       
              advocated as a model system for mitochondrial biogenesis in                    
              eukaryotes.  The subunit structure of the enzyme, and its                      
              regulation by inhibitor or activator proteins, will be examined                
              in different developmental forms of the trypanosome.  These                    
              experiments will be accompanied by cloning and structural                      
              analysis of enzyme genes and gene transcripts, and a test of the               
              possibility that editing of these transcripts occurs in some                   
              developmental stages.  It is intended that the combined result of              
              these studies will reveal the molecular basis and regulatory                   
              mechanism of the developmental shift in ATP synthase activity                  
              that occurs in this system.  In addition, this research has                    
              potential to contribute generally to knowledge of regulation of                
              polysubunit enzymes in differentiating systems.
