Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Studies of Time - Dependent Fundamental
               Surface Phenomena.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1993  
File        : a9296105

Award Number: 9296105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87507              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. George georges@spot.Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9227,
Abstract    :
              This Presidential Young Investigator Award project is in the                   
              general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the                    
              subfield of dynamic surface processes.  The emphasis of the                    
              research activities that are enabled by this award is on the time-             
              dependence of fundamental surface phenomena.  Surface diffusion,               
              surface relaxation kinetics, desorption dynamics, and vibrational              
              and electronic energy relaxation on surfaces are the main areas                
              of investigation.  These studies are being performed on well-                  
              characterized metal, semiconductor, and oxide surfaces that are                
              relevant to heterogeneous catalysis, electronic device                         
              fabrication, and photochemical energy conversion.                              
                                                                                             
              In order to measure surface diffusion and surface reaction                     
              kinetics, Professor George is utilizing laser-induced thermal                  
              desorption (LITD) techniques.  Of particular interest is the                   
              ability of LITD techniques to explore the effects of surface                   
              additives such as carbon and sulfur on the surface kinetics of                 
              catalytically relevant processes.  He is also using LITD                       
              techniques to investigate the surface kinetics of processes that               
              are important in semiconductor processing.  Additionally,                      
              Professor George is exploring chemical bonding and reaction                    
              kinetics on silicon surfaces using transmission Fourier transform              
              infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) as a vibrational spectroscopic probe              
              of these surface processes.  He is also seeking to characterize                
              the interactions and electronic energy transfer between                        
              chromophores on dielectric oxide surfaces using laser induced                  
              fluorescence (LIF) techniques that provide both structural and                 
              time-dependent information with sub-monolayer sensitivity.
