Title       : Ontogeny of Hemodynamics in Anuran mphibian Larva
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1992        
File        : a9296052

Award Number: 9296052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren W. Burggren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The cardiovascular system is the first organ system to function in             
              vertebrate embryos, and as such is critical to the development of all          
              subsequent tissues and organs.  Yet, the development of embryonic              
              cardiovascular physiology remains very poorly understood for any               
              vertebrate, including birds and mammals.  This project will investigate        
              the development of cardiovascular physiology in amphibian larvae, which        
              are highly appropriate as a model for vertebrate embryos in general.           
              Measurements will be made of heart rate, cardiac output, blood pressure        
              and peripheral resistance.  The experiments will be designed to                
              determine the onset of, and subsequent developmental changes in, the           
              basic heart functions (heart rate, arterial blood pressure, cardiac            
              output, peripheral resistance) of the immediate post-hatch anuran              
              larva.  Once basic hemodynamics have been measured, then the                   
              development of the ability of the heart to regulate its own function           
              will be described.  This study will be the first comprehensive                 
              investigation of the development of cardiovascular function in any             
              lower vertebrate.  Amphibian development traditionally has served as a         
              general model for vertebrate development, and consequently the                 
              physiological studies will have broad applicability to both vertebrate         
              physiology and developmental biology, particular in the absence of             
              substantial published data on either bird or mammal embryos.
