Title       : Polynomials Orthogonal on the Unit Circle in Numerical Analysis & Signal
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1992    
File        : a9296167

Award Number: 9296167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4470               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lothar Reichel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University Fdn
	      
	      Kent, OH  44242    /   -

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Numerical analysis is of importance in an increasing number               
              of areas, owing in part to the ever - expanding role of                        
              computation in the mathematical sciences.                                      
                   Many algorithms in numerical analysis use polynomials                     
              orthogonal on (a subset of) a real interval.  These algorithms                 
              include schemes for polynomial least squares approximation,                    
              Gaussian quadrature, and the Lanczos and conjugate gradient                    
              methods.  It is planned to develop analogous algorithms that use               
              polynomials orthogonal on the unit circle, also known as Szego                 
              polynomials.  Szego polynomials are related to approximation by                
              trigonometric polynomials, similarly as polynomials orthogonal                 
              on an interval are related to approximation by (algebraic)                     
              polynomials.  Szego polynomials satisfy a recurrence relation                  
              with few terms.  This makes them attractive to use in                          
              computations.  They have already been applied successfully in                  
              algorithms for computing eigenvalues of unitary matrices, a                    
              problem that arises in certain frequency estimation methods in                 
              signal processing.
