Title       : A Distributed Computing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9024600

Award Number: 9024600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $653100             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hopcroft jeh@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred B. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Birman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Constable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This infrastructure award is for the construction of a                    
              distributed computing facility.  The network consists of desktop               
              workstations connected over a medium speed network to back-end                 
              computation and data-storage servers on a high-speed network.  The             
              back-end resources consist of mid-speed compute servers, shared                
              memory parallel multiprocessors, and massively parallel machines.              
              The research supported by this infrastructure includes work in                 
              applied logic using the constructive type theory supported by                  
              Nuprl; in scientific computing in developing algorithms that                   
              effectively utilize distributed and massively parallel computing               
              resources; in modeling and simulation for robotics applications;               
              and in software for distributed computing.                                     
                   Many problems in experimental computer science require peak               
              resources not available on a single workstation.  These resources              
              could be computation cycles or memory.  An emerging solution to                
              this problem is to utilize idle processors in a network of                     
              workstations and compute servers.  The realization of this solution            
              still requires much research into mechanisms for breaking problems             
              into pieces so as to minimize communication overhead while                     
              distributing the computation to make best use of the available                 
              processors.  The distributed computing researchers at Cornell                  
              University will use their distributed computing facility as a                  
              testbed for distributed algorithms.  Three active areas of research            
              at Cornell will especially benefit from this facility.  The applied            
              logic group uses a system called Nuprl developed at Cornell to                 
              support constructive reasoning.  With the use of this tool, open               
              questions in combinatorics and programming language have already               
              been answered.  The scientific computing group is already involved             
              in the construction of a software package called LAPACK for linear             
              algebra routines that involves constructing new algorithms for                 
              parallel and distributed machine architectures.  Finally the                   
              modeling and simulation group requires substantial computational               
              resources to enable them to use the computing resources as an                  
              experimental testbed allowing designs to be tested without the                 
              expense of constructing a robot.
