Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on the Physics and Mechanics of
               Dehydration Embrittlement in Gypsum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9024577

Award Number: 9024577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teng-fong Wong wong@horizon.ess.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5950      SWITZERLAND
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              0510703   Rock Fracture Mechanics                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1574,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Teng-fong Wong and a graduate                    
              student and post-doctoral associate to collaborate in experi-                  
              mental and theoretical geophysics research with Professors                     
              Kenneth Hsu and David Olgaard of the Geological Institute of the               
              ETH, Zurich, Switzerland.  These investigators share an interest               
              in the fundamental physics and mechanics of the process of                     
              dehydration embrittlement in gypsum.  They propose to perform a                
              systematic study of the dehydration rate, permeability and                     
              porosity change in gypsum under controlled conditions of                       
              temperature, pore pressure, stress and strain rate.  They will                 
              quantitatively characterize the evolution of the decomposition                 
              reaction and pore structure using x-ray and electron microscopy                
              techniques.  Also, they will analyze theoretically the relation                
              among the dehydration reaction, the porosity and the permeability.             
              Ultimately, this experimental and theoretical work will enable                 
              them to compute numerically the degree of weakening and embrittle-             
              ment at the bottom of an overthrust formation such as the Jura                 
              mountains in Switzerland.  The results of such modelling will of               
              course be compared with actual geological observations in the                  
              field.  The collaborators bring complementary expertise and                    
              facilities to this work that guide the division of labor.  The                 
              high temperature, high pressure deformation experiments and the                
              x-ray analysis will be conducted at ETH.  The microstructural                  
              observations will be done at ETH and SUNY at Stony Brook.  The                 
              permeability measurements and theoretical analysis will be                     
              performed at Stony Brook.                                                      
                                                                                             
              It has been recognized from field and laboratory observations                  
              that the deformation and metamorphism of rocks are closely                     
              linked.  However, most of this work has been done on low porosity              
              crystalline rocks for which the inelasticity and failure behavior              
              are sensitively linked to temperature, pressure and strain rate.               
              These factors are insufficient to explain the behavior of porous               
              rocks, such as gypsum, or rocks that have undergone metamorphism.              
              The decomposition or compaction of water-bearing (hydrous) phases              
              during prograde metamorphism may lead to embrittlement and                     
              weakening.  There are further differences in behavior as the                   
              porous rock is dehydrated.  The proposed  research will investigate            
              these changes in both "drained" and "undrained" configurations of              
              gypsum.  The results will contribute substantially to understanding            
              the tectonics of sedimentary rock formations.
