Title       : Improving Human-Computer Interaction in Locational Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1991     
File        : a9024278

Award Number: 9024278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99810              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Densham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The selection of combinations of sites at which to locate                 
              facilities has long been an important issue within the theoretical             
              domain of geography and related scientific disciplines; site selection         
              also has an immense range of practical applications for businesses,            
              governmental agencies, and other organizations.  Critical limitation on        
              the development of more sophisticated location decision-making                 
              procedures have been capacity constraints on computational systems.            
              With large numbers of possible combinations to be explored, the storage        
              and processing capacities of even the largest computers quickly are            
              exceeded.  Other limitations on the development of practical locational        
              decision-support systems have been difficulties in developing clear,           
              effective, and accurate displays of the results of computational               
              procedures.  Even when procedures succeed, users frequently must wade          
              through enormous tables in order to obtain the information on which a          
              decision ultimately is based.  This project will try to diminish both          
              sets of limitations.  One line of inquiry will consist of the                  
              development and testing of new algorithms that will allow use of               
              parallel computing systems for the solution of locational decision             
              problems.  The second line of inquiry will focus on the development of         
              more effective visual displays of data and solutions through the use of        
              object-oriented programming techniques.                                        
                   This project will test the use of parallel computing architectures        
              for the solution of complex locational decision problems.  Although            
              concentrating on combinatorial site-selection problems, the results of         
              this research will provide insights into the utility of parallel               
              structures for solution of a much wider range of computational                 
              problems.  The project also will significantly enhance understandings          
              of the efficacy of object-oriented programming methods for more                
              effective visualization of the results of locational decision-making           
              processes.  In doing so, broader issues of visualization of computer-          
              generated data and solutions will be addressed.
