Title       : Parasites of Mammals of Bolivia: Phylogeny and Coevolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9024816

Award Number: 9024816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Funds are requested for three years to continue a survey of               
              parasites of mammals of Bolivia begun in 1984.  Collections will               
              concentrate on parasitic nematodes but will include other                      
              helminths, ectoparasites, and protozoa.  Specimens representative              
              of various taxa will be collected and preserved using standard                 
              methods.  Collections will include formalin-preserved alcohol-                 
              stored specimens for standard morpho-taxonomy and identification               
              and frozen specimens for molecular analyses.  The primary                      
              objectives of the proposed research include: 1) Secure data                    
              (specimens) for both morphologic (taxonomy) and molecular analysis             
              (systematics) that would otherwise be lost or not be preserved                 
              adequately for these analyses; 2) Obtain additional materials and              
              data for comparison and inclusion in ongoing studies of host-                  
              parasite coevolution; 3) Continue collaboration with workers and               
              students in Bolivia on studies of the parasite fauna of Bolivia                
              and to encourage Bolivian students to study in the USA; 4) Provide             
              access to researchers interested in parasites of neotropical                   
              mammals by processing and accessing into the UCD Nematode                      
              Collection those samples of Helminths collected in Bolivia since               
              1984; 5) Enter these data into the micro-computer database of the              
              UCD Nematode Collection in a form compatible with the GIS system               
              presently being implemented at the American Museum to allow fast               
              and easy access to information on parasites and their hosts.                   
                   The diversity of the mammalian fauna of Bolivia is poorly                 
              known; thus, the parasites of this region are even less will known             
              (eg. less than 30 references exist concerning parasites of wild                
              animals of Bolivia).  Funds are requested at this time for work on             
              the parasites of mammals in Bolivia partly because of the window               
              of opportunity afforded by the presently funded NSF grant to                   
              Anderson, Yates, and Cook (BSR-8408923) for continuation of their              
              survey of the mammalian fauna of Bolivia in the Valles and Yungas              
              regions.  These researchers have established a protocol of time-               
              frames and collection areas.  The areas in which the expedition                
              will travel are biologically unknown, and funding of this proposal             
              will allow unique and irreplaceable data on diversity of parasites             
              of these mammals to be accumulated, processed, stored, and accessed            
              in an efficient manner.  In addition, inclusion of material                    
              obtained from geographic areas that were not visited in 1984-1987              
              will allow further tests of hypotheses of coevolution and                      
              zoogeography.
