Title       : Checklist of the Lope-Okanda Game Reserve, Gabon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9024745

Award Number: 9024745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon D. McPherson gordon.mcpherson@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Lope-Okanda Game Reserve, in central Gabon, is set in one of               
              the most species-rich tropical rainforests in the world, yet the               
              Reserve, in which is located the Station d'Etude des Gorilles et               
              Chimpanzes (SEGC), is virtually unknown botanically.  A knowledge              
              of the flora of this Reserve is important to the research on                   
              gorillas and chimpanzees and to general conservation work in the               
              Reserve.  This project will produce a checklist of the plants of               
              the area.  The project involves intensive collecting in the Reserve            
              during four periods of three months over two years.  This strategy             
              will ensure coverage of all phenological periods.  Because of the              
              network of roads within and near the Reserve, activity would be                
              concentrated in two portions of the Reserve; along the western side            
              on the many roads and trails associated with the SOFORGA lumber                
              company's work, and along the trail system radiating from the SEGC             
              research station near the northeastern corner of the Reserve.                  
              Field-collected specimens would be dried at the National Herbarium             
              of Gabon in Libreville and identified there as well as at the                  
              herbaria of the Missouri Botanical Garden and the Laboratoire de               
              Phanerogamie, Paris.  Information obtained from the Reserve                    
              specimens will be added to the TROPICOS botanical database at the              
              Missouri Botanical Garden, and a checklist will subsequently be                
              derived.  The database, the checklist, and associated specimens                
              will be of particular value in the production of Flore du Gabon,               
              commenced in 1961 by the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle,                 
              Paris, and now only one-third complete.
