Title       : CRB: Mutation Load and the Viability of Small Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9024977

Award Number: 9024977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Lynch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1113,9282,
Abstract    :
                   Small population sizes characteristic of endangered species               
              have several genetic consequences that can magnify the                         
              probability of extinction.  This proposal is concerned primarily               
              with the loss of fitness due to the  accumulation of mildly                    
              deleterious mutations.  The effectiveness of natural selection in              
              eliminating such genes is reduced when a population declines in                
              size, and the consequent build-up of mutation load can cause a                 
              further reduction in population size.  This synergistic effect                 
              between chance effects of small population size and deleterious                
              mutation leads to an extinction process called a mutational melt-              
              down.  Preliminary theoretical results demonstrate clearly that                
              such a process can greatly increase the vulnerability to                       
              extinction within a fairly narrow time frame.                                  
                   Dr. Lynch proposes to pursue the theory further in a number               
              of directions:  the influence of the mode of density-dependent                 
              regulation of population size, the form of the fitness function,               
              the consequences of fertility vs. viability mutations, melt-downs              
              in organelle genomes, and the additional contribution of mutation              
              load in the base population.  This work should greatly enhance                 
              understanding of processes at the interface of population                      
              dynamics and population genetics, an area of  special relevance                
              to conservation biology that has scarcely been touched in                      
              previous studies.                                                              
                   Application of the theory to specific problems will require               
              quantitative information on the recurrent mutation load, which to              
              date is only available for Drosophila.  Such data are difficult                
              to acquire, but are obtainable from self-fertilized lines                      
              maintained by single-seed descent.  Dr. Lynch will perform a                   
              series of very large, long-term experiments to acquire data on                 
              the input of mutations for fitness characters, using the rapid-                
              cycling plant Arabidopsis as a model system.  The statistical                  
              theory for the analysis of data and for the optimal design of                  
              experiments has been developed.
