Title       : U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research in Solid State Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9024715

Award Number: 9024715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13900              (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Sethna sethna@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1761,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor James P. Sethna and members of                   
              his research group at Cornell University to collaborate in                     
              applied physics research with Professors Karsten W. Jacobsen                   
              and Jens Norskov, Laboratory of Applied Physics, Technical                     
              University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.  In this Danish                        
              laboratory, major theoretical and experimental efforts are                     
              being pursued to explore ion and molecular scattering at                       
              surfaces.  Professor Sethna is developing an interactive,                      
              modular system for studying molecular dynamics and scattering                  
              on surfaces.  Together with his hosts in Denmark, Professor                    
              Sethna will generalize his molecular dynamics package to be                    
              useful in the new experimental systems at the Danish                           
              laboratory.  In addition, he is working on a user interface                    
              for electronic structure calculations.  This is an area where                  
              the Danish group is also quite active, and where joint effort                  
              will be productive and mutually beneficial.  Dr. Sethna will                   
              also collaborate with Professors John Hertz, Alan Luther and                   
              others at Nordita (The Nordic Institute for Theoretical                        
              Physics, located in Copenhagen) on a variety of topics in                      
              condensed matter theory, including critical phenomena of                       
              disordered and glassy systems.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Professor Sethna's research for the past few years has been                    
              primarily in the area of liquid crystals and glass transition.                 
              His research plans for his sabbatical will expand his work                     
              more actively into surface phenomena.  The enhanced and                        
              bench tested software programs he hopes to complete in                         
              partnership with Danish collaborators will have wide                           
              applications in a variety of laboratory settings.
