Title       : Cultural Change and Modern Islamic Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1992  
File        : a9024912

Award Number: 9024912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64823              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Rosen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An important area of sociolegal research is the study of the ways              
              in which law and culture interact in structuring how people make               
              sense of their world.  While cultural systems constantly change and            
              affect legal systems as well as the everyday assumptions of people             
              who deal with them, opportunities are rare to study the nature and             
              sources of change and whether these changes reflect indigenous                 
              influences or more global developments.  This study of Islamic law             
              aims to make such a contribution.                                              
                                                                                             
              The project itself will be centered on the legal and social system             
              of Morocco where Islamic law is distinctive for the judge's                    
              reliance on a set of common sense cultural assumptions.  The                   
              research design calls for examining data on Islamic law collected              
              in the 1960's in comparison to contemporary data.  It is                       
              hypothesized that common sense cultural conceptions of causation,              
              probability, and intent are manifested in legal interactions where             
              there is a necessity to manipulate and debate these terms                      
              explicitly.  Thus, by studying legal proceedings and conversations             
              about such proceedings, it will be possible to detect gradual                  
              transformations in the culture as a whole as well as in the nature             
              of law in Moroccan society.  Intensive interviews, courtroom                   
              observation, and conversational analysis will be used to consider              
              how conceptual changes are developing and how indigenous                       
              alterations affect social relations, assessment of land tenure                 
              disputes, and modes of characterizing other person's states of                 
              mind.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This study, by comparing discourse and action across time, provides            
              a unique opportunity for exploration of the roots of sociocultural             
              change and the impact of the conceptual changes on legal systems.              
              The research also promises to have important implications not only             
              for understanding the changes which have occurred in the societies             
              of North Africa in recent decades and but also for what is occuring            
              now.  As such, the project will contribute to basic knowledge and              
              theories in both law and social science and cultural anthropology.
