Title       : State, Time and Velocity Resolved Photofragment Translation-al Spectroscopy of
               Organic Iodides in the Gas Phase and in Solvated Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1993     
File        : a9024289

Award Number: 9024289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa A. El-Sayed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program                 
              of the Chemistry Division, photodissociation of isolated and                   
              solvated molecular iodine and organic iodides will be studied,                 
              and the dynamics will be analyzed in three sets of experiments.                
              The first set will involve the development of a one-dimensional                
              projection technique to determine the velocity distribution of                 
              the iodine fragment from the dissociation processes.  The                      
              second set will involve femtosecond pump-probe techniques to                   
              measure the kinetic energy of the photofragments as a function                 
              of excess energy above the dissociation limit to gain                          
              information on the shape of the dissociating potential energy                  
              surface.  The third set will involve the study of solvated                     
              iodine ions which are photodissociated and examined using                      
              mass-selected ion kinetic energy spectroscopy, from which the                  
              fragmentation dynamics are deduced.                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              The study of photodissociation processes of polyatomic                         
              molecules, that is, the fragmentation of molecules with many                   
              atoms using light, can reveal a great deal about the electronic                
              forces which shape the behavior of the molecules.  In                          
              particular, the lifetimes of the molecules in an excited                       
              electronic energy state as well as the partitioning of the                     
              excess energy among the fragments when an electronically                       
              excited molecule decomposes can be determined.  This                           
              information in turn can give a detailed picture of the                         
              potential energies which govern the behavior of dissociating                   
              fragments, which in turn can be related to the behavior of the                 
              species in condensed (liquid or solid) phases.  Such                           
              experimental spectroscopic studies of the photodissociation of                 
              polyatomic molecules are the goal of the current project.
