Title       : A Conspectus of the Vascular Plants of Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9024749

Award Number: 9024749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288650             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Schatz schatz@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Porter P. Lowry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A collaborative research effort by institutions in the U.S.,                   
              France, and Madagascar will result in a modern conspectus for the              
              flora of Madagascar.  Current information on the flora of                      
              Madagascar is incomplete and/or dispersed, and inadequate for                  
              addressing critical conservation needs.  Utilizing the TROPICOS                
              database system developed at the Missouri Botanical Garden,                    
              investigators will compile a checklist of all the vascular plants              
              indigenous to and naturalized in Madagascar.  The computer database            
              will include place of publication, accepted synonymy, typification,            
              overall distribution and distribution within Madagascar by province            
              and protected area, habit, and vernacular names, all vouchered by              
              specimens tied, to as great a degree as possible, to latitude and              
              longitude, and hence, directly available to a GIS-based                        
              biodiversity inventory and planning center in Madagascar.  Capture             
              of data for the conspectus will involve: 1) extraction from all                
              known literature at each of the collaborating institutions; 2)                 
              verification of type material, principally located at the Museum               
              National d'Historie Naturelle (P) in Paris, and secondarily so at              
              Kew (K) and the British Museum (BM) in London; 3) exhaustive                   
              inventory and computerization (and therefore annotation) of the                
              existing collections in Madagascar at the Parc de Tsimbazaza (TAN)             
              and FO.FI.FA. (TEF) herbaria in Antananarivo, as well as those at              
              the Missouri Botanical Garden (MO), which, along with type                     
              material, will form the basis of vouchered distributional                      
              occurrence.  Data from each of the collaborating institutions will             
              be collated at MO, where investigators from the Malagasy                       
              institutions will receive training in botanical data collection and            
              management, and its direct application to pressing conservation                
              imperatives.  A complete checklist of the vascular flora of                    
              Madagascar will serve to stimulate and facilitate further taxonomic            
              work, while immediately providing critical data on the current                 
              conservation status of one of the world's richest, most unique, and            
              highly threatened floras.
