Title       : Insect and Arachnid Biodiversity in Southern South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9024566

Award Number: 9024566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman I. Platnick platnick@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall T. Schuh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1129,
Abstract    :
              This award enables a broad-based, multiple-investigator survey of              
              insect and arachnid biodiversity in southern South America.  The               
              arthropod fauna of Chile and Argentina requires this immediate and             
              detailed attention for at least three reasons.  First, just as with            
              the rain forests of much of the New World tropics, south temperate             
              forests are currently being destroyed at an alarming rate, and the             
              fauna must be sampled, rapidly and exhaustively, while such studies            
              are still possible.  Second, the fauna includes many taxa of                   
              special phylogenetic significance; the most primitive members of               
              many taxa are already known to be endemic to the area.  And third,             
              the fauna is of special significance to biogeographers, for whom               
              the interrelationships of south temperate biotas in general have               
              constituted a major focus of interest and effort for over a                    
              century.  The survey will allow accurate identification of the                 
              smallest areas of endemism within Chile and Argentina, and thereby             
              help separate those forests which need to be maintained in as                  
              pristine a state as possible from those which can best be used as              
              sustainable resources without endangering unique elements of the               
              biota.  The award will fund one graduate student and two                       
              postdoctoral fellows as well about 118 person-weeks of field work.
