Title       : Scaling Dynamics in Biological Signals and Systems Analysis-Faculty Awards for
               Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9024077

Award Number: 9024077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Banu Onaral onaral@cbis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1360,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The research goal is to mount a concerted effort to facilitate            
              the introduction of scaling concepts into amenable topics in system            
              theory in general and biological signals and systems in particular.            
              The research is an extension of the fractal systems concept which              
              originated in our efforts to model the dynamics of the polarized               
              metal-solution interfaces using methods of system theory enhanced              
              by notions of scaling.                                                         
                   The research will explore resonant systems with complex                   
              singularities arranged in scaling patterns in the s-plane and                  
              uncover their link to continuous but non-differentiable functions              
              of the Weierstrass kind.  The rich dynamics displayed by such                  
              systems demand further theoretical elaboration and simulations.                
              A natural extension is the study the non-minimum phase and non-                
              positive real systems with an eye for modelling l/F-type noises                
              ubiquitous in physiological systems.  Recent evidence concerning               
              the genesis of such noises by certain categories of chaotic                    
              difference equations will be explored.                                         
                   The design of the new-generation data acquisition,                        
              manipulation, and processing schemes aimed at general classes of               
              scaling systems and signals is long overdue.  The objective will               
              be to adapt, whenever feasible, existing methods of digital signal             
              processing such that scaling data over broad dynamic ranges can be             
              analyzed effectively and economically.                                         
                   Multifractal theories have been promoted in recent years to               
              account for structural heterogeneities in complex scaling objects.             
              The research will attempt to validate the suitability of                       
              multifractals in non-destructive evaluation of biological tissue.
