Title       : Sea Ice Properties and Processes in the Weddell Gyre: A Component of AnZone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9024809

Award Number: 9024809
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen F. Ackley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Gow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter B. Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald K. Perovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed work is an investigation of the processes and                     
              properties of a consolidated perennial, possibly multi-year, sea               
              ice cover in the western Weddell Sea where oceanographic processes             
              are presumed to be largely horizontal, and a similar program in the            
              central and eastern Weddell Sea where seasonal variability is high,            
              and the ocean appears to be dominated by vertical processes.  The              
              western Weddell Sea will be carried out in 1992 at an ice camp                 
              occupied jointly by U.S. and USSR scientists.  The principal                   
              experiment will be a mesoscale deformation array with location                 
              being determined by the satellite-based Global Positioning System              
              (GPS).                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Additionally, long-term heat and mass balance measurements on                  
              various ice types in the vicinity of the camp will be carried out.             
              This involves installing ice thickness gauges, thermistor                      
              (temperature) strings, and stress sensors, which will be sampled               
              periodically over the duration of the drift.  Ice samples will be              
              examined for physical, chemical, biological, and optical                       
              properties in order to establish a baseline ecology and its                    
              variations as the ice cover drifts northward.  Radar backscatter               
              and passive microwave emission measurements will be made at                    
              several frequencies to establish the dielectric properties of the              
              sea ice and to provide ground truth information for future                     
              satellite-based radar experiments.
