Title       : US-UK Cooperative Research: Investigation of Hydrolytic Enzyme Production by
               Ectomycorrhizae Collected in Different Age Forest Stands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1993   
File        : a9024541

Award Number: 9024541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Antibus   (Principal Investigator current)
              A E. Linkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in ecology                      
              between Dr. Robert Antibus, Clarkson University and Dr.                        
              John Dighton, Merlewood Research Station, Institute of                         
              Terrestrial Ecology, Cumbria, England.  The objective of                       
              the project is to investigate  hydrolytic enzyme production                    
              by ectomycorrhizae collected in different age forest stands.                   
                                                                                             
              Mycorrhizae are mutualistic associations formed between                        
              roots of higher plants and fungi.  Most commercially                           
              important temperate zone trees form ectomycorrhizae.                           
              Numerous species of fungi are capable of forming ectomycor-                    
              rhizae with a particular tree species.  However, little is                     
              known about factors that affect fungal distribution and how                    
              different fungi influence tree growth. The concept of                          
              ectomycorrhizal fungal succession has recently been studied                    
              by researchers in England.  They have shown that as trees                      
              age, the species of ectomycorrhizal fungi fruiting in a stand                  
              change. The proposed studies will be conducted in different                    
              age class stands of Sitka spruce in England.  Dr. Dighton                      
              at the Merlewood Research Station has collected background                     
              data on these stands for several years.  During this                           
              project, Dr. Antibus will spend two field seasons at                           
              Merlewood. The proposed work will bring together Dr.                           
              Antibus' expertise in ectomycorrhizal enzyme research with                     
              Dr. Dighton's work on fungal succession and phosphorus                         
              uptake in relation to tree nutrition.  Valuable information                    
              will be gained from this study relative to the function of                     
              ectomycorrhizae in forest nutrient cycles.  The information                    
              obtained and methods applied will be important to forest                       
              ecologists and managers in many parts of the world.
