Title       : An Inter-Institutional Database of Fish Biodiversity in the Neotropics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9024797

Award Number: 9024797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207943             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Schaefer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1129,
Abstract    :
                   Research and conservation efforts in the Neotropics (South and            
              Central America) are dependent upon access to information on the               
              organisms inhabiting this particular region.  Many areas within the            
              Neotropics are undergoing rapid environmental deterioration,                   
              eliminating biological diversity and ultimately affecting our                  
              ability to understand the biology and history of the natural                   
              resources of this part of the world.  Research programs in diverse             
              fields such as population and community ecology, biogeography,                 
              systematics and evolution, and conservation efforts to protect and             
              manage these resources are often hampered by our inability to                  
              obtain access to the kind of information already available on these            
              organisms in the research collections of universities and major                
              museums.                                                                       
                   Recent achievements in computer-aided collection information              
              management have reached a level of sophistication which permit                 
              efforts to inventory and enhance this biodiversity information and             
              make these resources more available to the research and                        
              conservation community.  This project will produce an                          
              international, inter-institutional inventory database of                       
              collections information on the freshwater fishes of South and                  
              Central America.  Three major research institutions will cooperate             
              to build a centralized database of biodiversity information on                 
              fishes now held in several widely-scattered institutions.  Such                
              information includes species identification and taxonomic                      
              information, geographic locality and associated collection, habitat            
              and environmental data.  Data from several North American and Latin            
              American institutions will be combined into a single database.  The            
              project will enhance access to and provide additional research                 
              tools for this centralized database.  The Academy of Natural                   
              Sciences of Philadelphia will coordinate building of the database              
              and development of new research tools.  The University of Michigan             
              will serve as the liaison to the Latin American participants,                  
              providing technical support and remote access to the database.                 
              Cornell University will provide support for developing the                     
              interface between the central database and MUSE, the NSF-sponsored             
              collection management system.                                                  
                   The results of this project will greatly improve the ability              
              of researchers to gain access to Neotropical fish biodiversity                 
              information for use in ecological, biogeographic, evolutionary,                
              and conservation initiatives.  This work will also stimulate new               
              lines of research on the fish fauna that otherwise would not be                
              possible nor feasible.  Access to the information facilitated by               
              this project will likely stimulate local economies by means of new             
              economic initiatives on the commercial exploitation and management             
              of renewable fisheries resources.  Finally, this project will                  
              directly assist cooperative research land efforts to stimulate                 
              continued interchange between North American scientists and their              
              Latin American counterparts.
