Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Fluid Flow, Mass Transfer, and Cooling History
               of the Cuillin Complex, Isle of Skye, NWScotland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9024282

Award Number: 9024282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3075               (Estimated)
Investigator: Emi Ito eito@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0510802   Rock Properties-Mineral                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1573,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award in petrology and geochemistry will                         
              support collaborative research between Dr. Emi Ito of the                      
              University of Minnesota and Dr. Brian Bell of the                              
              University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland.  The objective                       
              of the proposed project is to generate a new set of                            
              stable isotopic, structural, petrochemical, and petro-                         
              graphic data on the Cuillin Complex, a classic, volcanic                       
              region located on the Isle of Skye, Northwest Scotland.                        
              The data will be used to quantitatively characterize the                       
              hydrothermal fluid flow and mass transfer in relation to                       
              the cooling history of the region.                                             
                                                                                             
              The Cuillin Complex consists of multiple concentric                            
              igneous intrusions separated by significant geological                         
              time gaps.  Recent isotopic studies suggest two or more                        
              phases of fluid flow.  Ito's previous research in this                         
              area suggest that a channelized flow through fractures                         
              may have been important and in this project she and Bell                       
              propose to investigate this question further.  The                             
              investigation will describe the fluid flow and mass                            
              transfer by detailed mapping of the geometry, the                              
              distribution of the veins, abundance of minerals, changes                      
              in rock compositions.  Fieldwork and  sampling will be                         
              conducted jointly.  The laboratory analysis will be                            
              handled in both Scotland and the U.S.  Dr. Bell's group                        
              in Glasgow will generate the petrochemical data, determine                     
              the mineral composition of the samples using electron                          
              microprobe analyzer.  Dr. Ito will perform the stable                          
              isotope analysis of the separated mineral samples and                          
              whole rocks.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research combines the complementary expertise of Ito                      
              and Bell and is expected to advance understanding of the                       
              interactions of thermal, mechanical and chemical processes                     
              during the cooling of magmas (molten materials) in the                         
              earth's crust.
