Title       : Collaborative Research on the Effects of International Crises on Supreme Court
               Decisionmaking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9024851

Award Number: 9024851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31406              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Since the 1940s, there has been considerable scholarly interest                
              and research on the behavior and decisionmaking processes of the               
              Supreme Court.  Although scholars disagree on numerous aspects of              
              Court decisionmaking, almost all operate under some basic                      
              assumptions about the very nature of the judicial process.  One of             
              these involves Court behavior in times of external crisis, periods             
              during which the United States or its nationals are threatened by              
              the military forces of another state such as wars or other foreign             
              confrontations and disputes.  The view of most Court scholars is               
              that the Court is less tolerant of rights and liberties during                 
              periods of turmoil.  This view has become entrenched in the                    
              scholarly literature so as to make it part of the "conventional                
              wisdom."  Yet, there has been no systematic research to determine              
              whether the hypothesized impact of crises is a valid portrayal.                
                                                                                             
              This study will test the "crisis" thesis which asserts that the                
              Court is more intolerant toward issues of individual rights and                
              liberties during times of external security crises.  Using a data              
              base consisting of all cases involving individual rights and                   
              liberties resolved by the Court since the early 1800s, a number of             
              known predictors of macro-level behavior will be explored to assess            
              the relative effect of international crises on decisionmaking.                 
              Independent variables include measures of current partisan control             
              of the Court, the presidency, and the Congress; characteristics of             
              the litigants; and characteristics of the external security crises.            
                                                                                             
              This project not only will determine the validity of the crisis                
              thesis, but also it will map the contours of this phenomenon and               
              develop the theoretical propositions upon which it rests.  The                 
              research imbeds the Supreme Court in a general theory of conflict              
              and the state and in doing so blends theoretical and methodological            
              insights about how the state responds internally to conditions of              
              actual or threatened conflict imposed from beyond its borders.                 
              Relatedly, the creation of a longitudinal database on the Supreme              
              Court over approximately seventy-five years will provide the                   
              opportunity for other scholars to make inroads into understanding              
              the Court's institutional role and its place within the political              
              regime as it has evolved and developed over time.  Finally, viewing            
              governmental processes and behavior through this macro-level                   
              approach will provide valuable insights into the development of                
              legal and political institutions and, in particular, the influence             
              of transnational conditions.
