Title       : The Origins of Structure in the American Industrial Labor Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1993 
File        : a9024488

Award Number: 9024488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Sutch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Today's industrial labor market is characterized by a good deal                
              of "structure."  Long-term labor contracts, collective bargaining              
              arrangements, seniority rules, internal promotion ladders,                     
              pension plans, and other forms of employee vesting are thought to              
              limit the flexibility of wages, raise the natural rate of                      
              unemployment and exacerbate macroeconomic fluctuations.  The same              
              structures have been implicated in the creation of a "dual labor               
              market" that some feel has worked to the disadvantage of an                    
              underclass of workers.  Spurred by intriguing new theoretical                  
              insights on the microeconomic foundations of macroeconomic                     
              theory, a great deal of attention has recently been focused on                 
              the origins and implications of these aspects of labor market                  
              structure.  This project undertakes research on the origins of                 
              the modern American labor market.  Its focus will be on the                    
              critical period between 1880 and 1914.  A detailed study of this               
              period will provide an insightful contrast with recent experience              
              and would sharpen further our understanding of macroeconomic                   
              phenomena both then and now.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Data are collected from over 150 separate investigations                       
              undertaken between 1874 and 1920 by 29 state Bureaus of Labor                  
              Statistics.  These bureaus published surveys of working-class                  
              families containing data on wages, hours of work, time lost to                 
              unemployment and illness, family expenditures, and a long list of              
              other economic and social characteristics.  They also published                
              surveys of firms and other Special Reports dealing with                        
              conditions in the labor markets.  Using these data from the late               
              nineteenth and early twentieth century, the project will examine               
              such issues as changes in labor input, the degree of wage                      
              flexibility, the heterogeneity and duration of unemployment; the               
              pattern of age-earning profiles; changes in job tenure; the                    
              presence and importance of inter-industry wage differentials;                  
              labor productivity and short-term increasing returns to labor;                 
              and the opportunities for self-employment.
