Title       : Composites of Colloidal Silica Crystals in Non-crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9024858

Award Number: 9024858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren T. Ford wtford@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9162,9251,
Abstract    :
              The Synthesis of a new kind of composite materials will be carried             
              out that has a more highly ordered microstructure than any known               
              polymer composites.  The composites will consist of monodisperse               
              colloidal silica spheres distributed as crystalline arrays in                  
              amorphous polymers such as poly(methyl methacrylate) and Poly(ethyl            
              acrylate).  Crystal-like order will make them highly selective                 
              filters of visible and infrared light that can be tuned by                     
              variation of the particle density to reject any wavelength by Bragg            
              scattering.  The composites will be prepared by sol-gel synthesis              
              of monodisperse 100 nm diameter silica particles, modification of              
              the silica surface to make it compatible with monomer, formation of            
              colloidal crystals of silica in monomer spontaneously or by shear              
              forces, and polymerization of the monomer.  The modified silica                
              particles and the composites will be analyzed by solid state C-13              
              and Si-29 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  The preparation            
              and chemical characterization of the colloidal silica and the                  
              composites will be performed in Professor Ford's research group,               
              and light scattering and rheological characterization will be                  
              performed in the laboratory of Professor Bruce J. Ackerson of the              
              Department of Physics.  The effects of ordering the dispersed                  
              particles in a composite on its mechanical properties are                      
              fundamentally important to understand, but presently unknown.                  
              Glassy and elastomeric polymer composites having a wide variation              
              of particle density and particle size of the silica will be                    
              provided to Professor James E. Mark of the University of Cincinnati            
              for investigation of their mechanical properties.
