Title       : Verification of Computerized Records of the Collections of the Department of
               Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1991    
File        : a9024386

Award Number: 9024386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Leviton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacques A. Gauthier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1129      LONG-TERM PROJCTS IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Herpetology Collection in the California Academy of                   
              Sciences includes more than 220,000 specimens and 5,000 type                   
              specimens, and has representatives of more than half of the                    
              world's known amphibian and reptile species.  The entire                       
              collection has been entered into a computer database that is                   
              actively used for managing the collection and for supporting                   
              specimen-based research.  Dr. Alan Leviton, Curator in charge of               
              the collection, proposes final validation of the database against              
              the original label data, and installation of new storage                       
              equipment for the growing collections of frozen tissues, dried                 
              skeletons, and whole specimens in alcohol.                                     
                   The proposed curatorial projects will make the collections                
              more accessible and usable to the research community.  Final                   
              verification of the collection database will provide                           
              investigators with reliable information about which specimens are              
              available for loan and study.  The database will also provide the              
              curators with background data for important decisions regarding                
              collecting expeditions, donated and orphaned collections, and                  
              specimen exchange requests.
