Title       : Support of the Fourth Cary Conference: Human versus NaturalInfluences on
               Ecosystems: Implications for Theory and Practice; May 4-7, 1991, Millbrook, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1991      
File        : a9024843

Award Number: 9024843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. McDonnell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene E. Likens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steward T. A. Pickett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Institute of Ecosystem Studies will host an international                  
              conference on "Human as Components of Ecosystems" on 4 May                     
              through 7 May 1991.  The conference is designed to provide a                   
              forum to explore how human influences on ecosystems can be                     
              incorporated better into basic ecological studies.  Although                   
              there have been in the past periodic calls for the inclusion of                
              humans and their effects in ecological studies, ecologists have                
              not often responded.  However, the field is now receptive due to               
              the widespread acceptance of a view of nature accommodating the                
              patchiness and openness of systems, and the role of allogenic and              
              episodic processes.  The Cary Conference seeks to stimulate the                
              timely inclusion of humans as ecological factors.  The specific                
              goals of the conference are to:                                                
                                                                                             
              1    Investigate the similarities and differences between human                
                   and non-human influences on ecosystems.                                   
                                                                                             
              2.   Integrate information from ecology with that from a variety               
                   of other disciplines by bringing together ecologists, human               
                   ecologists, historians, geographers, economists, and                      
                   sociologists to exchange ideas, pose research questions, and              
                   share data and methodologies for studying human influences                
                   on ecosystems.                                                            
                                                                                             
              3.   Produce an edited book containing ideas, data, research                   
                   methodologies and conclusions from a diversity of                         
                   disciplines relevant to the study of human influences on                  
                   ecosystems.                                                               
                                                                                             
              As in previous Cary Conferences, the emphasis of this meeting                  
              will be on the exchange of knowledge, discussion and the critical              
              examination of the fundamental ideas in ecology.  Speakers and                 
              other participants will be challenged to extend their thinking                 
              beyond the day-to-day limits of their own research fields.  Such               
              an open and critical evaluation will help to stimulate the                     
              ecological community, and encourage the integration of ideas from              
              a diversity of disciplines, and will provide the foundation for                
              new research directions.
