Title       : Ironworking And Culture Change Among the Swahili of Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1991     
File        : a9024683

Award Number: 9024683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chapurukha M. Kusimba  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Davis, Mr. Chapurukha Kusimba,              
              a graduate student at Bryn Mawr, will collect archaeological data              
              for his doctoral dissertation.  His research will focus on the                 
              Swahili speaking region of the Kenya coast and he will attempt                 
              both to reconstruct the Iron Age prehistory of the region and to               
              set this into an ethnographic context.  In particular, he will                 
              examine the role of iron technology in culture development and                 
              change.  Although traditional iron working is no longer practiced              
              in this area, elderly men still have knowledge of the techniques.              
              Therefore, in the ethnographic phase of this project, Mr. Kusimba              
              will conduct extensive interviews.  He will also observe iron                  
              smelts conducted for his benefit and collect samples of raw                    
              materials, slag and finished products.  These, as well as similar              
              remains collected by archaeological excavation, will undergo                   
              laboratory analysis.  In a second phase of the project, he will                
              conduct a regional archaeological survey and excavate at the site              
              of Mtwapa which is located near Mombasa.  The site consists of                 
              approximately twenty acres of mud brick ruins and dates to the                 
              Iron Age.  Data from Mtwapa will serve not only to examine                     
              prehistoric iron working techniques, but also to show how this                 
              major site developed and then declined over time.                              
                                                                                             
              The Swahili peoples are distributed along the East African coast               
              and they were transformed in less than a millennia from small                  
              scale fishing and agricultural groups into an urban, literate,                 
              Islamic and maritime trade oriented civilization.  While a                     
              central aim of archaeological research is to understand the                    
              development of social complexity, relatively little attention has              
              been devoted to this case.  Mr. Kusimba wishes to determine the                
              role which technology played in this transformation.  Because                  
              iron was crucial to sub-Saharan peoples and because it was                     
              locally produced, it provides an excellent focus for Mr.                       
              Kusimba's study.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  On an empirical               
              level it will collect data on traditional metalworking techniques              
              which (given the age of remaining practitioners) would otherwise               
              soon be lost.  It will increase scientific knowledge of East                   
              African prehistory and assist in the training of an extremely                  
              promising young scientist
