Title       : Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9024161

Award Number: 9024161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Farkas diana@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1765,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The NSF Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers                 
              recognizes the high quality of the awardee's record in teaching and            
              scholarship, as well as potential research, the academic                       
              profession, and the education of future scientists and engineers.              
              The research to be undertaken by Dr. Farkas with this award is                 
              aimed at understanding the mechanical behavior of ordered                      
              intermetallic alloys.                                                          
                   Ordered intermetallic alloys offer a unique opportunity to                
              develop materials with properties intermediate between metals and              
              ceramics. In recent years it has been shown that the mechanical                
              properties of these alloys can be controlled by microalloying.                 
              Microalloying controls the properties of these materials through               
              modification of the structure and mobility of extended crystal                 
              defects, namely dislocations and grain boundaries. This research               
              for the next five years will concentrate on theoretical studies of             
              extended defect structure in novel ordered intermetallic alloys,               
              with emphasis in predicting mechanical behavior. The alloys to be              
              studied will be both cubic and hexagonal, including, but not                   
              limited to Ni and Ti Aluminides. Using various computer simulation             
              techniques, the atomic structure of grain boundaries and                       
              dislocation cores in these materials and the interaction of                    
              dislocations and grain boundaries will be investigated. The goal is            
              to contribute to the understanding of the mechanical behavior of               
              these alloys in both single crystal and polycrystalline form and to            
              be able to suggest ways to improve their ductility.                            
                   In the last phase of this research, the results of the defect             
              and defect interaction simulations will constitute the basis for               
              the development of models for mechanical behavior of these                     
              intermetallic alloys and in the design of new intermetallics with              
              improved ductility.
