Title       : Dissertation Research: Complementary Approaches to Subsistence Studies in
               Northwest India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1990  
File        : a9024580

Award Number: 9024580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narahari S. Reddy  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. J.M. Kenoyer, Professor of                          
              Anthropology at the University of Wisconsin, Ms Seetha Reddy will              
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation.  She will conduct a                
              range of analyses to explain a change in settlement pattern which              
              took place during Harrapan times, between 2500 and 1700 B.C.                   
              Archaeological evidence indicates that over this interval a shift              
              occurred and many settlements were established in arid areas in                
              Northern India which had been avoided up to that point.  Ms Reddy              
              postulates that changes in agricultural practices allowed this to              
              occur.  She believes that farmers began to plant drought                       
              resistant millet crops as a supplement to the species already                  
              employed and that these millets were used not primarily for human              
              consumption but rather as livestock fodder.  To evaluate this                  
              hypothesis, she plans to collect three types of data.  First,                  
              isotopic analysis will be conducted on animal bones from sites                 
              which span this period.  Changes in carbon isotopes can be used                
              to infer dietary changes.  Secondly, Ms Reddy will conduct                     
              ethnographic research to look at livestock management practices                
              in the region today.  Finally, she will study botanical remains                
              recovered from relevant archaeological sites to determine both                 
              species present and methods of processing.                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  Archaeologists                
              want to know how complex societies develop and decline.  The                   
              Harrapan culture reached the level of a "civilization" before it               
              disappeared and it is unclear what accounted for this phenomenon.              
              Ms Reddy's work should provide insight.  Secondly, the project                 
              will provide very useful data on human adaptation at a                         
              technologically simple level to semiarid environments.  Harrapan               
              peoples developed efficient ways to subsist in this situation and              
              increased understanding of these may produce practical benefits.               
              Finally ,this research will assist in the training of an                       
              extremely promising young scientist.
