Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Ceramics and Holography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9024670

Award Number: 9024670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11485              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray W. Carpenter carpenter@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0512202   Improved Resolution & Sen               
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1772,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Dr. R. W. Carpenter, Director of the                       
              Center for Solid State Science, Arizona State University                       
              (ASU), to link the work of his research group in two related                   
              lines of materials science with two outstanding German                         
              research groups, the ceramics research laboratory of the                       
              German Aerospace Research Establishment (DFVLR), headed by                     
              Dr. Wolfgang Braue, and a group headed by Dr. Hannes Lichte                    
              of the University of Tubingen.  With DFVLR, the ASU group                      
              will investigate the relationships among structures and                        
              properties and processing in structural ceramics.  With Dr.                    
              Lichte, they will pursue a direct experimental investigation                   
              of conventional and holographic high resolution electron                       
              imaging of crystal lattice defects in specimens important for                  
              materials science.  In both projects common specimens will be                  
              used for particular parts of each project.                                     
                                                                                             
              It is well known and central to materials science that the                     
              microstructure of all material objects such as structural                      
              ceramics or solid state electronic materials is quite                          
              dependent on the synthesis process.  Arizona State University                  
              has novel and uncommon capabilities for analyzing the                          
              geometry of microstructures.  DFVLR has unusual capabilities                   
              for processing and analyzing and measuring the properties of                   
              ceramics from starting materials through finished structural                   
              materials.  This unique array of capabilities at the two                       
              cooperating laboratories enables detailed and controlled                       
              study of microstructural properties and their relationship to                  
              processing in this important class of structural materials.                    
                                                                                             
              Collaboration with the group at the University of Tubingen                     
              focuses on the need to obtain better spatial resolution in                     
              the imaging of defects in crystal lattices to advance the                      
              frontiers of materials science research.   Lattice defects,                    
              or interruptions in the periodicity of crystals, such as                       
              grain boundaries and interfaces, have major influences on the                  
              properties of materials.  These are not easily predicted from                  
              theory, and experimental data are badly needed.  The University                
              of Tubingen possesses capability for electron holographic                      
              high resolution imaging.  However, the apparently greatly                      
              enhanced data on lattice defects obtained by this new                          
              experimental method must be interpreted and compared to the                    
              most closely related data obtainable by existing and reliable                  
              methods.  ASU possesses state of the art conventional high                     
              resolution electron microscopes that can be used for this                      
              purpose.
