Title       : US-UK Cooperative Research: Evolutionary Biology of Parasite-Host Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1991       
File        : a9024716

Award Number: 9024716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice Moore pillbug@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in systematic                   
              biology between Dr. Janice Moore, Colorado State University                    
              and two British scientists:  Dr. Paul Harvey, Department of                    
              Zoology, University of Oxford, and Dr. D.W.T. Crompton,                        
              Department of Zoology, University of Glasgow.  The objective                   
              of the research is to develop and use phylogenetic techniques                  
              to examine the role of host evolution in parasite-host                         
              interactions.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The evolution of parasite-host interactions has been approached                
              from the standpoint of host benefit (e.g. resistance to                        
              parasites) and parasite benefit (e.g. manipulation of host                     
              behavior), but has not been addressed from a phylogenetic                      
              perspective.  In a set of strictly comparable behavioral                       
              experiments, Dr. Moore is currently examining the effect of                    
              the acanthocephalan, Moniliformis, on the behavior of ten                      
              species of related cockroaches.  During a long term research                   
              visit at Oxford University,  Dr Moore will extend analytical                   
              techniques developed there to host-parasite phenomena and                      
              will investigate the role of host phylogeny in parasite-                       
              induced behavioral alterations.  During a subsequent research                  
              stay at the University of Glasgow, Dr. Moore will quantify                     
              degrees of resistance to the parasite exhibited by these same                  
              host species and apply the same techniques to elucidate the                    
              contribution, if any, of host phylogeny to parasite resistance.                
              During this research year, Dr. Moore will be able to interact                  
              with major figures in the area of evolutionary biology,                        
              ethology, parasite ecology and parasite resistance, and to                     
              extend comparative analytical techniques developed for free-                   
              living taxa to host-parasite interactions.  This will be the                   
              first quantitative step towards placing these phenomena in a                   
              predictive, evolutionary frame.
