Title       : Inventory and Curation of a Collection of Trichogrammatidae (Hymenoptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9024672

Award Number: 9024672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Pinto john.pinto@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will support the curation and inventory of a                      
              collection of parasitic wasps in the Trichogrammatidae                         
              (Hymenoptera).  Wasps of this family are internal parasites of the             
              eggs of other insects.  73 genera and about 650 species have been              
              described.  They are among the smallest insects known.  Because                
              they commonly parasitize the eggs of several agricultural pests,               
              these wasps have been of particular interest to biological control.            
              Problems associated with their small size, however have deterred               
              entomologists from building requisite collections.  Consequently               
              the taxonomy of the family is in an extremely unsatisfactory state.            
              Species identifications are impossible for most genera.  Generic               
              identifications also are problematic.  Because the family is so                
              poorly sampled, diversity, geographic distributions and biological             
              characteristics remain unappreciated.  A large collection of                   
              Trichogrammatidae has now been put together at the University of               
              California at Riverside.  The collection is world wide in coverage             
              but stresses North America.  It, by far, represents the largest                
              holdings of this group in North America and probably the world.                
              Support will be used to inventory and curate the collection.  The              
              largest portion is in alcohol and in peril because of the fragile              
              nature of these wasps.  Specimens require immediate removal and                
              critical point drying.  Computerization of collection data also is             
              planned and will make specimen information available to other                  
              researchers.  A large and well curated collection is required to               
              encourage future taxonomic studies of this poorly known but                    
              important family of insect egg parasites.
