Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9024775

Award Number: 9024775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40800              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Hercules   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1974,5936,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor David M. Hercules of the University              
              of Pittsburgh and two of his graduate students to collaborate in               
              analytical chemistry research with Professor Alfred Benninghoven               
              and his group of the University of Muenster, Germany.  Together they           
              will study fragmentation of polymers subjected to ion and neutral              
              bombardment, and gas phase decomposition of polymers.  They will               
              also develop methods for determining molecular weight distributions            
              of polymers sampled directly from solids.                                      
                                                                                             
              This research, supported jointly by the U.S.-Germany Cooperative               
              Science Program of the Division of International Programs and the              
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division,            
              will continue the collaboration between the PI, a surface scientist            
              known for his development of electron spectroscopy for chemical                
              analysis and for his work on secondary ionization mass spectrometry            
              (SIMS), and a world class German chemist who originated a particular           
              design of time-of-flight SIMS instrument, which provides high                  
              sensitivity and moderate resolution for spectra from complex                   
              samples.  Dr. Hercules has obtained the second of these instruments,           
              so collaboration will allow the US partners to quickly reach the               
              state of the art in this complex technology.  The German col-                  
              laborators will obtain added expertise in SIMS sampling of                     
              polymers.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Polymers are long chain molecules, whose use has resulted in                   
              humanity's ability to design structural materials and lubricants               
              to suit a variety of needs, without being restricted by nature's               
              more limited repertoire.  Polymers are generally "polydisperse"                
              i.e. the result of making a polymer is a group of related molecules            
              of similar structure but different length.  Understanding such                 
              length differences requires sampling the solid polymer without                 
              changing the chain-length distribution or dispersity, a difficult              
              task.  Polymer scientists in general require better methods for                
              studying polymer structure in solids.  Linking the sampling methods            
              (developed by Dr. Hercules) together with the structural measurement           
              techniques (developed by Dr. Benninghoven) will be a significant               
              contribution to fundamental and applied research in analytical                 
              chemistry.
