Title       : Photochemical and Photophysical Mechanisms of Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1993      
File        : a9024845

Award Number: 9024845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Ford ford@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Peter C. Ford of the Chemistry Department, University of                   
              California at Santa Barbara, is supported by the Inorganic,                    
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program for studies of the                    
              photochemical properties of some organometallic and                            
              coordination compounds of transition metals.  The first study                  
              will explore physical and chemical excited state deactivation                  
              pathways of luminescent compounds, including rhodium amines,                   
              chromium acetylacetonate derivatives, copper amines and                        
              thiocarbamates, and some inclusion compounds.  Accompanying                    
              theoretical models will be developed.  The second study is                     
              concerned with determining the chemical reactivities of                        
              short-lived organometallic intermediates produced as the                       
              primary photoproducts of excited stae reactions.  The cluster                  
              fragmentation of triangulo-dodecacarbonyltriruthenium(0) and a                 
              related alkylidyne cluster will be investigated in detail.  The                
              third project is an initial photochemical study of                             
              nitroprusside, focused especially on the release of nitrosyl.                  
              Laser flash photolysis and luminescence spectroscopy are among                 
              the techniques which will be used.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              These studies will provide fundamental information on mechanism                
              and dynamics of excited state processes that will be useful in                 
              inorganic photochemistry and more generally in molecular                       
              engineering.  Quantitative information regarding excited states                
              of metal complexes will be obtained.  The work is relevant to                  
              nonlinear optics, optical memory devices, photocatalysis, and                  
              biomedical problems.
