Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Evaluation of Mixed Mode Crack
               Propagation in Concrete Using Acoustic Emission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1991    
File        : a9024762

Award Number: 9024762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wimal Suaris wsuaris@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1442,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for Professor Wimal Suaris                 
              of the University of Miami to collaborate during a long term                   
              visit with  Professor Jan G. M. van Mier of the Faculty of                     
              Civil Engineering of Delft University of Technology, The                       
              Netherlands.  These investigators share an interest in mixed-                  
              mode crack propagation of concrete.  They will conduct shear                   
              fracture tests on concrete, with acoustic emission monitoring,                 
              using the biaxial test rig available at the Dutch University.                  
              The Dutch group offers world class laboratory facilities that                  
              place it at the forefront of experimental civil engineering                    
              research.  They have developed the mixed-mode loading technique                
              that is crucial for the proposed research.  Its use will be                    
              combined with a novel acoustic monitoring technique currently                  
              being developed by Professor Suaris.  He has a strong analytical               
              background and experience in non-destructive testing technology.               
              These complementary skills and their mutual interest in the                    
              fracture of concrete should result in a very fruitful collabo-                 
              ration.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The failure of concrete structures involves a substantial                      
              amount of cracking.  It is natural to use a fracture mechanics                 
              approach to characterize the behavior of concrete.  However, it                
              is generally accepted today that classical fracture mechanics,                 
              which was developed for homogeneous purely brittle materials,                  
              is inapplicable for concrete.  This is because a relatively                    
              large fracture process zone develops which undergoes softening                 
              damage.  Therefore, during the last decade, substantial                        
              research has been conducted on developing a form of fracture                   
              mechanics applicable for concrete.  The proposed collaboration                 
              will contribute to that effort and lead to improved understanding              
              of the behavior of concrete under stress.
