Title       : Fluvial and Ecological Dynamics of Stream Confluences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1992   
File        : a9024225

Award Number: 9024225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Rhoads b-rhoads@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin E. Herricks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                   The places where one stream flows into another are important              
              points in stream systems.  Abrupt changes in the velocity and direction        
              of water flow and in the shape and character of streambeds alter the           
              character of the streams and create distinctive ecological niches              
              within which certain species thrive and others are repelled.  Most             
              research on the geomorphic and ecological dynamics of stream                   
              confluences has been conducted in laboratories using flume experiments         
              or on computers using mathematical models.  Some field observations            
              have been made, but measurements usually have been limited to a few            
              variables.  This project will explore geomorphic and ecological                
              processes empirically by taking detailed measurements of a wide range          
              of variables at the confluence of two streams of roughly equivalent            
              size in central Illinois.  These measurements will be used to determine        
              how temporal variations in the different rates of velocity for the two         
              merging streams affect interactions among flows, streambed morphology,         
              and sediment transport.  A related set of measurements of biotic               
              phenomena will be used to assess habitat conditions and to determine           
              how geomorphic characteristics of the confluence influence the                 
              structure and function of aquatic communities upstream and downstream          
              from the confluence.  Some members of the investigative team engaged in        
              field observations and data analysis will be undergraduate students            
              funded through the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program.            
                   This research project is an intensive case study at a single site,        
              but the measurements collected at that site will provide a coherent            
              test of qualitative and mathematic models that have been developed in          
              laboratory and theoretical settings.  In addition to providing                 
              empirical tests of these models, the project also will contribute to           
              evaluation of the efficacy of methods to obtain detailed measurements          
              in settings like this.  The addition of the undergraduate students to          
              the project's research team will enhance the study and will provide            
              valuable experience for promising undergraduats.
