Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Logic and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1993     
File        : a9024411

Award Number: 9024411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128700             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Jerome Keisler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A major objective of this project is to use nonstandard                   
              analysis to give a general metatheorem which reduces existence                 
              problems for continuous-time stochastic processes to                           
              corresponding statements about discrete-time processes.                        
                   A step towards the objective was taken in the forthcoming                 
              paper, "From Discrete to Continuous Time".  In that paper, a                   
              concept of forcing was introduced, and it was proved that a wide               
              class of statements about continuous-time stochastic processes                 
              are true if and only if forced by a sequence of discrete-time                  
              stochastic processes.  This forcing theorem can be used to prove               
              a variety of existence theorems.  For example, the method gives                
              proofs of the existence of solutions of many stochastic                        
              differential equations.  The discrete-time statement is often                  
              easy to prove, and the forcing theorem does most of the work                   
              required to get from there to the continuous-time statement.                   
                   The forcing theorem is presently formulated in a way which                
              is natural from the point of view of mathematical logic but is                 
              often more difficult to apply than one would hope.  One reason                 
              for this is that one must first show that the statement to be                  
              proved is expressible in terms of "liftable functions", which are              
              defined in a technical way using nonstandard analysis.  The                    
              investigator is working toward a more general and more convenient              
              forcing theorem which would use nonstandard notions in its proof               
              but not in its application.  To complement this effort, the scope              
              of the method will be tested by developing a wider variety of                  
              applications to particular problems in probability theory.                     
                   It is surprising that deep methods from mathematical logic                
              can be used to obtain alternative and often simpler proofs in the              
              theory of probability.  However, the investigator has been very                
              successful in demonstrating this by example over a period of many              
              years.
