Title       : Purchase of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9024194

Award Number: 9024194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Klinkhammer gklinkhammer@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-An Huh  (Co-Project Director current)
              John C. Westall  (Co-Project Director current)
              David M. Christie  (Co-Project Director current)
              Douglas R. Caldwell  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 5413,
Abstract    :
              Oregon State University will receive partial funding for                       
              acquisition of an inductively-coupled plasma mass                              
              spectrometer(ICP-MS).  This new analytical capability will be                  
              established within the Dept, of Oceanography for broad use                     
              within the University.  ICP-MS is a relatively new technology                  
              that is useful in the analysis of many types of geophysical                    
              fluid and solid samples and greatly facilitates the detection                  
              of certain elements such as barium, cobalt, and noble metals.                  
              Samples are introduced into an argon plasma after vaporiza-                    
              tion by one of several processes including laser excitation.                   
              The plasma is then subsampled by the mass spectrometer,                        
              separated into discrete mass regions, and focused onto an                      
              electromultiplier detector.  The instrument can detect more                    
              than 70 elements in the sub-part-per-billion concentration                     
              range and is able to measure major and trace elements                          
              simultaneously, thereby reducing analysis time.  ICP-MS                        
              generates a mass spectrum and its sensitivity and versatility                  
              lends itself to a wide range of scientific applications                        
              ranging from geochemistry, to paleooceanography to ceramic                     
              chemistry.  The new instrument will serve a number of NSF-                     
              sponsored investigators at OSU.  The University and the U.S.                   
              Dept. of Energy are providing substantial cost-sharing for                     
              the establishment of this capability.
