Title       : Dissertation Research: A Study of Middle Paleolithic Denticulated Tool
               Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1990   
File        : a9024823

Award Number: 9024823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5870               (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Campbell  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Ms Amy Campbell will                 
              conduct research for her doctoral dissertation.  She will analyze              
              stone tool assemblages from a number of Middle Paleolithic sites               
              from Nubia, the Negev, the Near East and Western Europe to                     
              understand the manufacturing process which produced "denticulate"              
              types of tools.  These collections are housed in museums both in               
              Europe and the United States.  Middle Paleolithic cultures were                
              widespread in the Old World and date to periods greater than                   
              40,000 years ago.  While archaeologists have focussed their                    
              analytic efforts on some types of stone tools which are included               
              in such lithic assemblages, denticulate pieces have received                   
              little attention.  A denticulate is defined by closely spaced                  
              notches along the edge of a stone flake which create a saw tooth               
              effect.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The Middle Paleolithic period is of great interest to                          
              archaeologists because it is during this time that anatomically                
              modern humans first appeared.  Scientists want to understand what              
              cultural adaptations are associated with this emergence and the                
              main body of data available consists of stone tools.  Through                  
              classification of these into different types and the study of                  
              variation within types they are able to make inferences about                  
              both the cognitive abilities and the social organization of their              
              makers.  It is surprising that so little attention has been                    
              focussed on denticulate because they are widely distributed and                
              are common in most assemblages.  Ms Campbell's work will increase              
              our understanding of how they were manufactured and what                       
              functions they served.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              insight on the factors which led to the emergence of modern                    
              humans.  It will provide data of interest to Old World                         
              archaeologists and will assist in the training of an extremely                 
              promising young scientist.
