Title       : Documenting Multi-Institutional Collaborations, Phase II: A Case Study in Space
               Science and Geophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1991  
File        : a9024198

Award Number: 9024198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan N. Warnow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Spencer R. Weart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              The process of large-scale collaborative research is not well                  
              understood by historians, sociologists and other scholars.                     
              Nor do scientists, research administrators and the public                      
              possess any of the systematic analysis of this centrally                       
              important activity.  Under this grant, Ms. Warnow is continuing                
              her study of the problems of documenting the history of large                  
              collaborations in physics and allied sciences.  Currently their                
              administrative and intellectual records are widely dispersed and               
              often discarded.  Until the documentation has been secured it will             
              be impossible for scholars to study the collaborative research                 
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Under her prior grants, Ms. Warnow has studied the patterns of                 
              team formation, funding, communication, delegation of                          
              responsibility, and publication, as well as the creation and                   
              retention of records in the area of high energy physics.  Under                
              this grant, Ms. Warnow is trying to determine how far insights                 
              from high energy physics extend to other fields of science.                    
              Specifically, she is undertaking a two year study of space                     
              science and geophysics.  She is directing a group of researchers               
              who will (1) conduct a computerized statistical census of a                    
              large number of collaborations, (2) interview some 150-200                     
              members of a selected sample of collaborations involving satellites,           
              planetary spacecraft, oceanographic expeditions, and other system              
              for data-gathering (drill holes and seismic networks and arrays),              
              and (3) conduct detailed historical probes of a few especially                 
              important cases.  The aim is to identify patterns of collaboration,            
              define the documentation problems, field-test possible solutions               
              to these problems, and recommend actions to facilitate future                  
              scholarly study.  The PI and other AIP staff will be joined by                 
              archivists, historians, and sociologists; distinguished scientists,            
              administrators, and other specialists are serving as advisors on               
              the project.
