Title       : Infrastructure for Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9024735

Award Number: 9024735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3278966            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred V. Aho   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zvi Galil  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This is an infrastructure award to support the acquisition of             
              a high speed network of data servers, computation servers, parallel            
              processors, and workstations for the support of research in                    
              software, artificial intelligence, and parallel algorithms.  The               
              software research is in operating systems, wireless distributed                
              systems, parallel processing, and software engineering.  The                   
              artificial intelligence research is in intelligent multimedia                  
              interfaces and vision and robotics.  The parallel algorithms                   
              research is in parallel string matching with applications to genome            
              matching.                                                                      
                   New networking technologies make it possible to support                   
              computation intensive activities distributed across networks.  This            
              support requires new software tools that will support distributed              
              and parallel computing.  This award is for the infrastructure                  
              necessary to test this new software and also for the infrastructure            
              necessary for research in robotics and parallel algorithms for                 
              large information system searches.  The operating system research              
              concentrates on a high performance operating system for distributed            
              and parallel computers.  The distributed systems research is for               
              research in wireless distributed computing in which the                        
              transmission medium consists of radio waves.  This research                    
              promises the true portable workstation in which no wires whatsoever            
              are needed in order to access the network.  Both the parallel                  
              processing and the software engineering research involve rule based            
              systems.  The parallel processing research uses rule based systems             
              to distribute computational tasks while the software engineering               
              research uses rule based systems to coordinate cooperative work                
              amongst multiple software developers.  The multimedia research                 
              involves the construction of virtual realities for the manipulation            
              of multi-dimensional data.  The example application area is                    
              financial data.  The vision and robotics research is aimed at                  
              processing multiple sources of spatial data in order to navigate a             
              robot in a natural environment and to control robot manipulators.              
              Finally, the parallel algorithms research is concentrated on string            
              matching algorithms applicable to data arising from genome                     
              databases.  This research is important for actually using large                
              databases that will arise from the human genome project.
