Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research in Polyhedral Combinatorics (Mathematics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1991    
File        : a9024300

Award Number: 9024300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie E. Trotter trotter@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5950      SWITZERLAND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1271,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for Professor Leslie E.                    
              Trotter to collaborate in mathematics with Professors Thomas M.                
              Liebling and Dominique de Werra of the Department of Mathematics,              
              Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne.  They share an                
              interest in polyhedral combinatorics, and will collaborate on                  
              three specific lines of research in that general area.  These                  
              current research topics are partially ordered sets, perfect                    
              graphs, and stability critical graphs.  The Swiss research                     
              group is very active and has an excellent international                        
              reputation in the areas of combinatorial optimization and                      
              operations research.  The lead Swiss collaborators have                        
              particularly notable research accomplishments on topics directly               
              related to the proposed work.  Professor Trotter is deeply                     
              involved in a substantial group effort at Cornell that will be                 
              significantly enhanced by collaboration with the group in                      
              Switzerland.  Previous collaboration among these investigators                 
              was extremely productive.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Polyhedral combinatorics is the study of the interplay between                 
              algebraic and geometric structure of polyhedra, on the one                     
              hand, and algorithmic aspects of linear objective optimization                 
              over polyhedra on the other.  This approach has yielded                        
              effective optimization algorithms for computationally difficult                
              models in broadly diverse fields such as inventory control,                    
              statistical mechanics, VLSI, econometrics and parallel machine                 
              scheduling.  For example, the graph theory and algorithmic                     
              nature of stability critical graphs produce models with direct                 
              applications to forestry harvesting strategies and the allocation              
              of computer memory.
