Title       : Theoretical Investigation and Numerical Simulation of High Pressure Plasma
               Microdischarges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9615237

Award Number: 9615237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97484              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Williamson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Constantine E. Theodosiou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: ECS-9615237    Principal Investigator:  William Williamson   
              Title:  Theoretical Investigation and Numerical Simulation of High Pressure
              Plasma Microdischarges      Analysis:       Theoretical and computational
              research activities to develop a comprehensive understanding of high pressure
              plasma microdischarge physics and engineering principles will be pursued.  This
              research will form the basis for development of the microdischarge cells to be
              used in plasma display panel (PDP) technologies. PDP technologies are the only
              flat panel display technology with large screen potential.  The PDP area is
              presently undominated, therefore this research offers an opportunity for
              significant contribute towards a leadership position for the United States. 
              The grant research activities will include several important investigations:
              (1) the behavior of gas mixtures; (2) investigation of voltage-transfer curves
              for multi-component mixtures using simulations and analytic theory in to learn
              how to optimize them  for maximum efficiencies and luminous outputs for given
              phosphor response functions; (3) expansion of the atomic database for the noble
              gasses used in discharge cells.  Additional cross-sections for (Ne, Ar and Kr)
              are needed.  Penning ionization, dimer ion formation, neutral kinetics and the
              tracking of photons (including radiation trapping) will be included in the
              simulation. (4) the inclusion of 3-dimensional effects such as barrier ribs and
              varying cell geometries.  The overall approach is based on careful study of the
              basic principles involved, careful computational design to include many
              synergistic plasma, atomic, and solid state factors accurately yet efficiently,
              and a serious reliance on matching predications with available experiments and
              practical cell design strategies.  Successful development of codes to
              accurately model these basic effects and to create a design tool of this
              sophistication will be of great value to the display technology industry. The
              research also provide s  a multidisciplinary learning experience for students
              in the strong growth flat panel display area.
