Title       : Ecological Genetics of X-Linked Meiotic Drive
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1997   
File        : a9615065

Award Number: 9615065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Jaenike joja@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615065  Jaenike  Most animal species have a genetic system that keeps the
              population half female and half male. Generally, males are XY, and produce half
              X sperm, which result in daughters, and half Y sperm, which result in sons.  In
              many species, some X chromosomes destroy Y sperm, which results in more females
              among the progeny of those individuals and in the population.  If unchecked by
              natural selection, the alleles causing the sex-ratio bias (termed SR) will
              increase so that only females are produced, causing the extinction of
              populations or even entire species.  That certain insect species harbor SR
              alleles at moderate frequencies indicates that the advantage in the proportion
              of sperm must be opposed by some other form of natural selection.  The aim of
              this proposal is to test a specific mechanism that can potentially halt the
              spread of SR alleles, in the insect Drosophila neotestacea.  An increase in the
              frequency of SR causes the ratio of females to males to increase, which leads
              to an increase in the potential rate of male mating.  Because SR males produce
              only half as many sperm as do normal males, the increased rate of male mating
              may cause the fertility of SR males to decline relative to that of normal males
              and eventually halt the spread of SR.  This mechanism will be tested in a
              series of laboratory and field experiments.     An increasing number of insects
              have been found to harbor X-chromosome SR alleles that could drive a species
              extinct.  Because the mechanism to be tested involves a general side-effect of
              SR genes, the conclusions drawn from these studies will be applicable to a wide
              variety of insects.  This study will show how extinction risk is related to the
              frequency of the SR alleles and to the density of the species, which is useful
              for pest control and for conservation biology.  More generally, the results
              will indicate the balance between natural selection acting at the levels of
              genes, individuals, and populations.
