Title       : NASA Neurolab: Chronic Recording of Otolith Nerves in Microgravity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9615003

Award Number: 9615003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Highstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Gravity reception in all vertebrate animals is done largely by structures
              called otolith organs in the vestibular system of the inner ear. These organs
              are pouches that contain dense calcified masses called otoliths; the action of
              gravity on these masses, overlying specialized mechanosensory cells, provides a
              signal for determining the normal earth-vertical direction.  Nerve activity
              from these otolith organs show combinations of excitatory and inhibitory firing
              patterns, and under some conditions the brain sends some kinds of modulation by
              nerve fibers called efferents, which affect the incoming firing patterns.  Not
              much information is available about long-term activity of gravistatic organs. 
              The flight of Neurolab provides a unique opportunity to test gravitational
              responses to forces far less than normal earth gravity, and so greatly extend
              the study range for testing hypotheses about neural encoding of gravity
              signals.  This project uses a novel electrophysiological recording technology
              in freely-moving fish to compare earth-based with space-based responses to
              gravity over a wide range of forces.     Results from this work will provide
              fundamentally important information on this sensory system, and will have an
              impact beyond vestibular neuroscience to sensory science in general, and is
              likely to be important to applied aspects of human spaceflight.   Contribution
              to this project represents the NSF Biological Sciences Directorate's
              participation in the NASA/Interagency Neurolab activity on the space shuttle
              orbiter, which in turn is part of Decade of the Brain activities.
