Title       : Characterization of Indigenous and Introduced Toxic Phytoplankton in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9615831

Award Number: 9615831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Anderson danderson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5106      ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                        Abstract                           OPP-9615831        
                                         There are thousands of species of marine
              phytoplankton, but  only a few produce potent toxins.  These species are found 
              in the massive `red tides" or blooms of cells that discolor  the water.  More
              commonly, the organisms are present at low  concentrations and are noticed only
              by the effects their  toxins have on aquatic organisms and humans.  The nature
              of  the toxic phytoplankton problem has changed considerably in  recent years
              as many areas that were previously unaffected  are now subject to recurrent
              outbreaks.  Therefore, it is  alarming that marine algal toxins (saxitoxins)
              have been  found in Antarctic molluscs.  The implications of this  discovery
              are profound given the low number of trophic  levels between primary producers
              and top predators and the  proven ability of the saxitoxins to alter the food
              web  structure and dynamics.  Saxitoxins can affect zooplankton,  fish larvae,
              whales, porpoises, seabirds, and humans.  A  concern is that the
              saxitoxin-producing alga, presumably the  dinoflagellates in the genus
              Alexandrium, has been  introduced to Antarctic waters, possibly by vessel
              traffic  between South America and the Antarctic Peninsula.  This  mechanism of
              species dispersal has been implicated in the  sudden appearance of toxic algae
              in other areas of the  world.  Short and frequent transport pathways do exist 
              between Antarctic and the high-toxicity waters of southern  Chile and
              Argentina.  It is also possible that the  saxitoxins-producing organism is
              indigenous to Antarctica  and was only recently noticed.  In either case, the 
              implications to the Antarctic food web are significant.  The  objectives of
              this proposal are to identify and characterize  the possible source(s) of
              saxitoxins in Antarctica to  determine whether the causative organisms are
              indigenous or  introduced species, and if introduced, to identify the  probable
              origin and transport pathway.
