Title       : Chronological Control for Chiefdom Development in the Upper Tennessee Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1996  
File        : a9615970

Award Number: 9615970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne P. Sullivan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the State of NY
	      Rm. 152 State Education Bldg.
	      Albany, NY  12234    518/486-2423

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Lynne Sullivan and a graduate
              assistant will develop a ceramic chronology for the time period from ca. 1,200
              - 1,600 AD for the Eastern Tennessee region. This area has yielded
              archaeological materials with the potential to address significant
              anthropological questions, but presently sites can not be placed in an accurate
              relative or absolute sequence because chronological control is lacking. Because
              pottery designs change in systematic ways over time, archaeologists have
              developed detailed analytic methods to isolate and describe time sensitive
              attributes which permit the establishment of a master sequence. Materials from
              individual sites can then be compared to the master chronology and placed in
              relative time. With the addition of radiocarbon dating such systems can then be
              anchored to absolute years. Dr. Sullivan and graduate assistant will seriate
              whole or reconstructible ceramic vessels excavated from grave situations in
              Eastern Tennessee. These are curated at the McClung Museum of the University of
              Tennessee. The seriation will be cross-referenced with sherds from
              stratigraphic sequences and tied to dates from radiocarbon assays.   In the
              thousand years before the arrival of Columbus Native American societies across
              much of North America were transformed from highly mobile egalitarian groups
              into settled agricultural communities. This process was accompanied by the
              growth of social and political complexity and the rise of hierarchically
              organized chiefdoms. Widespread across the Midwest was a system marked by large
              sites with raised earthen mounds which functioned as centers for political and
              religious authority. What makes Eastern Tennessee of particular archaeological
              interest is the appearance of agricultural sites but the lack of central mound
              organization. Archaeologists wish to understand both how such chiefdoms were
              organized and why the process is apparently different in this one region.
              Although many sites are known, to achieve maximum usefulness they must be
              placed in a secure chronological context and Dr. Sullivan's research is
              directed towards this goal.  The work is important because it will provide a
              chronological tool which will increase the scientific value of a large number
              of already excavated archaeological sites. It will permit scientists to address
              significant questions of culture change and development.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
