Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Chemical Analysis of Domestic Sediments as a Means of
               Identifying Prehistoric Activity Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1996  
File        : a9615372

Award Number: 9615372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Feinman   (Principal Investigator current)
              T. Douglas Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Drs. Gary Feinman and T. Douglas Price, Mr. William
              Middleton will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. The research has
              several goals: first, to refine chemical techniques for the reconstruction of
              human activities at archaeological sites and secondly, to apply the results to
              answer a series of specific questions at Ejutla, a prehistoric habitation in
              Oaxaca, Mexico. Although objects such as stone tools or ceramics often provide
              insight into specific activities conducted by inhabitants of a prehistoric
              site, they are often of little use in the reconstruction of the spatial and
              social context in which the activities occurred. People often sweep and remove
              debris from living areas and deposit them in trash dumps. To solve this
              problem, archaeologists have increasingly turned to chemical analysis of living
              floors to search for chemical indicators of cooking or manufacturing processes
              such as ceramic production or shell working. However the relationship between
              activity and chemical signature is often not straightforward and is complicated
              by multiple activities which occur in the same place. To gain insight into both
              the spatial patterning of human behavior and the marks which activities leave
              behind, researchers such as Mr. Middleton have increasingly turned to
              controlled ethnographic contexts where activities can be directly observed and
              soil samples subsequently collected for analysis. This award will permit Mr.
              Middleton to return to Mexico, make observations and collect samples in a
              series of households. These then will be analyzed to determine elemental
              compositions. With this information, Mr. Middleton will then examine material
              collected from a Classic period house floor from the site of Ejutla in Oaxaca,
              Mexico. Ejutla was tied into a larger Middle American trade network which
              integrated tens of thousands of individuals over a large area of Central
              Mexico. It served as a manufacturing center for shell ornaments. Archaeologists
              wish to understand how trade in such complex societies was organized and
              whether specialists existed who focused on the production of one or a very
              limited range of materials. Many have argued that just such craft
              specialization led to the rise of civilization. Dr. Feinman has excavated a
              structure which indicates both subsistence and specialized production
              activities and Mr. Middleton will use the insight gained through his
              ethnographic research to analyze and interpret the preserved chemical signals. 
              This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the
              organization of craft production in prehistoric societies. It will also help to
              develop a technique which archaeologists can apply at many sites in many parts
              of the world. This grant will also help in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
