Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  1997    
File        : a9615257

Award Number: 9615257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian J. Brearley brearley@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Papike  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura J. Crossey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael N. Spilde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Selverstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615257  Brearley    This grant provides $90,000 as partial support of the costs
              of  acquiring a new, state-of-the-art scanning electron microscope  (SEM) with
              a high resolution backscattered electron detector, an  ultrathin window for
              light element energy dispersive spectrometer  (EDS) analysis, a computer
              controlled stage for X-ray mapping and  a digital image processing system.  The
              new SEM would benefit a  large group of researchers in the Department of Earth
              Sciences  and Institute of Meteoritics as well as regional users.  Additional
              funds for the purchase of this instrument will be  provided by University
              matching funds ($70,000) and a funded NASA  proposal ($90,000).  The new SEM
              will replace their current  Hitachi S450 SEM (circa 1980) which has a faltering
              EDS and thus  provides unreliable backscattered electron images and poor 
              quality high-resolution (x5000) images of geological and  planetary materials. 
              The new SEM will benefit a large number of  projects including studies of the
              mechanisms and kinetics of  phase changes of olivine to beta and gamma-spinel
              at depth within  the mantle via analysis of the backscattered electron images
              from  SEM scans to elucidate nucleation rates, identification of clay 
              mineralogy during early sedimentary diagenesis, X-ray mapping of  crustal
              xenoliths to help unravel the geochemical evolution of  the Proterozoic crust
              beneath the Colorado Plateau,  characterization of magnetic mineral phases as
              ancillary to  paleomagnetic studies, SEM mapping of thin sections to select 
              appropriate regions for subsequent SIMS analysis and analyses of  surface
              textures of subaerial volcanics and planetary materials  etc. etc.  The
              remarkable level of funded research in this  group's portfolio will fully
              subscribe the new SEM which will  also aid SEM research projects conducted by
              both graduate and  undergraduate students.  ***
