Title       : Phylogeny of Laboulbeniales (Ascomycetes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9615520

Award Number: 9615520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith Blackwell mblackwell@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James V. Moroney  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615520  Blackwell   The taxonomic order Laboulbeniales includes minute fungi
              that are obligate ectoparasites on a variety of arthropod hosts. Their bizarre
              morphology and interesting ecological relationships make them fascinating
              subjects for evolutionary investigation. Although known in a general sense to
              mycologists and entomologists, these remarkable ascomycetes have attracted
              little sustained study, and the taxonomic classification of the c. 2,000 named
              species is unstable. As a group, the Laboulbeniales are characterized by the
              absence of the tubular threads (mycelia) typical of the bodies of most fungi,
              but instead possess few-celled bodies that are initiated by division of the
              sexual spores, followed by haustoria that grow through the arthropod host
              cuticle to obtain nutrients. Because they are dispersed through host contact,
              often during mating, species of Laboulbeniales often have processes and
              structures that may act as triggers for spore discharge. So unusual is the
              morphology of this group of fungi that they were once proposed as parasitic
              descendants of the red algae. The intriguing features of their life cycle
              provide many morphological characters for phylogenetic analysis, but no such
              explicit study has yet been undertaken.   The current study draws upon Prof.
              Meredith Blackwell's previous work with putatively related ascomycete fungi
              with more typical morphology and with life cycles that include parasitic stages
              on both other fungi and arthropods. The phylogenetic work will include studies
              of morphological features, of life history stages, and of nucleotide sequence
              diversity in nuclear ribosomal DNA as a source of characters for taxonomic
              resolution and genealogical reconstruction. A phylogenetic framework for the
              genera and families of the order, with consequent improvement in
              classification, is one major goal. Another goal is to explore hypotheses of
              host-shifting and speciation among groups of Laboulbeniales on different
              arthropod hosts.
