Title       : What Causes Large Local-Scale Variation in Tree Diversity in a Neotropical
               Forest? An Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9615226

Award Number: 9615226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Hubbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615226  Hubbell    Unexpectedly large differences in tree diversity that
              correlate with topography and dry season soil moisture have been found on small
              spatial scales in tropical forests.   This research is an experimental test of
              the simple hypothesis that tropical tree diversity is controlled largely by
              drought stress in the seedling and small sapling stages.  In drier sites, a
              smaller fraction of tree species may have sufficiently deep root systems as
              seedlings to survive prolonged periods of drought than is the case in wetter
              sites.  The hypothesis will be tested by a watering experiment on seedlings
              transplanted to sites with greater or lesser dry season soil moisture and
              drought stress within a single tropical forest.  The experiment will
              demonstrate whether dry season watering increases seedling survival and growth
              compared with seedlings in non-watered control plots.  The experiment will also
              show whether the effect is sufficiently large to explain the large observed
              differences in species richness between sites.    World-wide patterns of tree
              species richness in tropical forests show a strong, unexplained pattern of
              increasing richness with mean annual rainfall.  This research will help us to
              understand the potential causes of large geographical variation in tropical
              forest diversity and whether it is controlled by events in the seedling stages.
               The study will improve predictions on the impact of global climate change on
              loss of tropical forest diversity.  Major changes are forecast in the next
              century by Global Climate Models in the worldwide distribution of annual and
              seasonal rainfall, and much of the tropics is expected to become drier.
