Title       : Phylogenetic and Monographic Studies in the Tribe Aeschynomeneae:
               Classification, Character Evolution, and Biogeography in the Legume Family
               (Leguminosae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1997  
File        : a9615203

Award Number: 9615203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew T. Lavin mlavin@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615203  Lavin   The inventory and analysis of plant species, especially in the
              tropics, remain current challenges for botanical scientists. Dr. Matt Lavin of
              Montana State University is continuing his studies of the large legume family,
              focusing on the tribe Aeschynomeneae that includes well known food crops (like
              peanut, genus Arachis) and forage crops (like the genus Stylosanthes). A
              phylogenetic analysis using both morphological evidence and new molecular
              characters from DNA sequencing of nuclear ribosomal genes is proposed to
              construct a framework of genealogical relationships for the many genera
              currently placed in this papilionoid group, and to test several genera
              suspected of belonging within the tribe but currently placed in others. These
              likely include Adesmia, a genus of plants that dominate the landscape in drier
              regions of the Andean cordillera of Argentina and Chile, and also Dalbergia,
              the genus that includes species of valuable rosewood. For five selected genera
              within the group, Belairia, Pictetia, Chaetocalyx, Fiebrigiella, and Nissolia,
              estimated to encompass 40 or so species collectively, taxonomic monographs will
              be produced, to summarize biological knowledge of all the species in these
              genera, with accompanying data on habitats, geographic ranges, synonymy of
              scientific names, local names and uses, and identification keys.    The
              significance of the study includes facilitating higher level phylogenetic
              analyses of the entire legume family by clarifying phylogenetic relationships
              among the Aeschynomeneae, which likely includes about 10% of the papilionoid
              legumes. Also, traditionally important taxonomic characters of these legumes,
              like free stamens and lomented pods, may be shown to be prone to higher rates
              of independent (parallel) evolution and secondary loss than previously thought.
              More accurate assessment of species diversity and geographic distribution will
              be possible for many of the genera in the tribe, plants of which are common
              components of neotropical dry forest s. The species-level monographic studies
              will provide data for tests of biogeographic patterns in the history of
              vegetation changes in Central and South America and the Caribbean.
