Title       : Collaborative Research: Ecological Engineering by Fishes: The Importance of
               Biodiversity to Resource Heterogeneity and the Structure of Neotropical Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1999  
File        : a9615620

Award Number: 9615620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69609              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Vanni   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615620  Vanni  The major premise of this research is that sediment-feeding and
              algivorous fishes and amphibians are important ecological engineers in tropical
              streams, and can generate significant resource heterogeneity over a variety of
              spatial and temporal scales. Specifically, this research will examine whether
              the diverse guild of epibenthic-feeding fishes is ecologically redundant, and
              whether species identities are important to stream community and ecosystem
              dynamics including the generation of resource heterogeneity. The main objective
              of this research focuses on the importance of biodiversity, species identities,
              and density to resource heterogeneity, community and ecosystem dynamics. A
              series of experimental and observational tests will be used to address this
              main objective. This study will provide insight into the importance of
              biodiversity to the structure and function of stream communities. The proposed
              research will further our knowledge of community and ecosystem roles of
              sediment feeding and algivorous fishes, and demonstrate whether these organisms
              vary significantly in their capacities as ecological engineers. Sediment and
              algal-feeding fish are among the most important components of the freshwater
              fisheries throughout South America, yet their ecology is very poorly known.
              Overall, this project will broaden our limited knowledge of patterns and
              processes in tropical stream communities.
