Title       : A Manual of the Misumalpan Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9615545

Award Number: 9615545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Hale klhale@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Danilo Salamanca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The three living members of the small Misumalpan family represent  the majority
              of the population still using an indigenous language  in Nicaragua, and the
              family is well represented north of the  Coco River, in Honduras, as well.
              Thus, despite its small size  Misumalpan is the most important indigenous
              linguistic entity in  the region popularly termed the Atlantic Coast of
              Nicaragua. It  is important sociopolitically, since speakers of the two largest
               languages, Miskitu (70,000 speakers) and Northern Sumu (8,000),  have been
              strong and effective proponents of the political,  cultural, and economic
              rights of the indigenous peoples of the  Atlantic Coast, and they have worked
              successfully to secure a  position of dignity and official status for their
              languages  within the Autonomy Project of the Nicaraguan government of the 
              1980's, Speakers of the third much smaller, Misumalpan language,  Ulwa (or
              Southern Sumu, with approximately 400 speakers), have  also been vocal and
              effective in expressing their right to have  their language documented and to
              reverse the process of language  loss which, if unchecked, will quickly lead to
              its disappearance.  Ulwa is now confined to Karawala, a village of 750 people, 
              predominantly Miskitu in linguistic practice, near the mouth of  the Rio Grande
              de Matagalpa, a dramatic reversal of its fortune,  given that it was the most
              widespread Misumalpan language in the  17th century. Although there are great
              numerical disparities  among the languages of this small family, there is a
              sense of  common interest among the speakers, a sense that the fate of even 
              the smallest language is relevant in the general program of  promoting the
              welfare of the indigenous languages and cultures of  the Atlantic Coast. The
              proposed Manual of Misumalpan Languages  is inspired very largely by the
              clearly perceived need for a  single reference work which brings these
              linguistic traditions  together for use by the growing number of
              Misumalpan-speaking  scholars and teachers, as well as  other Nicaraguan
              involved in  various ways with language matters on the Atlantic Coast and a 
              Nicaraguan public becoming increasingly aware of the country's  diverse
              cultural and linguistic heritage.        In the domain of linguistic
              scholarships the Misumalpan  family is important for both historical and
              synchronic research,  It is a classic example of the effects of intense
              bilingualism,  developed since the Miskitu ascendancy of the 17th century and 
              resulting in large-scale changes making the languages very close  in grammar,
              while maintaining differences in vocabulary, This has  given rise to a number
              of theories about the origin of Miskitu  which the present project will attempt
              to evaluate through  careful comparison of grammatical features and vocabulary.
              In the  realm of grammar, Misumalpan furnishes us with new data on  certain
              important linguistic processes, including among many  others the expression of
              possession (e.g., the child's dog),  cause (e.g., 'the wind makes the house
              shake') the problem of  "keeping track" of the participants in a sequence of
              events  (e.g., who is 'he' in John came in and he sat down' -- is it John  or
              someone else? Misumalpan makes this clear at all times). The  manual will cover
              these and the full range of other constructions  and processes which are of
              central interest to linguists and  language learners. It will contain three
              parts - Grammar,  Lexicon. and History and it will be prepared for publication
              in  Spanish and English.
