Title       : Mathematical Sciences: VIP/Thin Film Deposition: Atomic Level Simulations,
               Verification, and Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9615877

Award Number: 9615877
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2088642            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Greene jegreene@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a multi-disciplinary collaboration on the development of
              mathematical and computer simulation techniques which are sufficiently
              sophisticated, flexible and robust to meaningfully predict a complex
              manufacturing process.  Success in this program will represent a significant
              step forward in the complexity of real manufacturing issues which can be
              effectively addressed by simulation.    The specific process which will be
              addressed in this program is the growth of multilayer metal and dielectric
              films, which need to be patterned with precision of a fraction of a micron for
              contacting the tens of millions of individual device elements within modern
              microelectronic circuits.  The program will combine mathematical models  with
              atomic-level computer simulations to predictively model the film growth over
              length scales ranging from the atomic to the microstructural.  These
              predictions will then be compared with atomic-scale characterization (using
              state-of the-art electron and ion microscopy techniques) of experimental
              depositions, to refine our understanding of the exact physical processes
              describing film growth, and to verify and refine the predictive models.  The
              experimental depositions will be performed both with state-of-the-art research
              systems which provide atomic-scale control of film growth, and with real
              microelectronics processing facilities at Lucent Technologies.    This program
              will assemble a team of internationally recognized mathematicians, physicists
              and materials scientists.  The program goals are to improve substantially the
              deposition of  microelectronic contact layers, a central challenge to the two
              hundred billion dollar microelectronics industry, and to expand current
              acceptance of what is technically "possible" in terms of predictive modeling of
              complex manufacturing processes.    Funding for this activity will be provided
              by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities, the NSF Engineering Directorate, and by DARPA .
