Title       : Collaborative Research: The Origins of Word Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9615391

Award Number: 9615391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta Golinkoff roberta@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615391  GOLINKOFF    Before children can tie their shoes they have learned
              thousands  of words.  Yet little is known about the process of early word 
              learning, partly because of the methodological barriers  researchers have faced
              in attempting to work with preverbal and  barely verbal children.  This
              research will use two new methods  to investigate how young children
              (approximately 10-24 months of  age) learn the words of their native language. 
              The particular  focus will be on how children learn object names since, around 
              the world, object names predominate in children's earliest  vocabularies. 
              Previous research has suggested that children are  guided by a set of six
              principles in learning new words,  principles which narrow the range of choices
              which children must  consider for what a new word might mean.  These principles
              are  organized into two "tiers," with the first tier present by the  end of the
              first year of life.  The three principles in the first  tier are (1)
              "reference," or the idea that a word can "map to" or  become linked to an
              object in the world, (2) "extendibility," the  fact that a word does not just
              name the original object but a  class of objects (e.g., "dog" does not just
              label Fido, the  family dog, but all dogs), and (3) "object scope," the
              assumption  that a new word labels an object (as opposed to say, an action) 
              and that it labels the whole object (versus just an interesting  part of the
              object).  The eleven experiments in this project are  designed to understand
              how children derive these three principles  of the first tier.  In all the
              experiments, children will be  taught the names of novel objects under various
              conditions in  order to probe the processes by which they learn new words.   
              Since young children do not often talk on command, in all the  experiments,
              children will be asked to show their word learning  facility through their
              language comprehension instead of through  language production.  The research
              will seek to answer three  questions.   The firs t is the question of
              emergence, i.e., when  does each principle appear and does each principle have
              both a  mature and an immature form?  The second is the question of  mechanism,
              i.e., what mechanisms are responsible for the  appearance of each principle and
              do children of different ages  rely on different cues as they deploy these
              principles for word  learning?   The finally question is that of language
              specificity,  i.e., do words have some special status for children (the way 
              they do for adults) or are they treated just the same as other  environmental
              sounds?  For example, does an object's name come to  stand for the child's
              concept of that object, in a way different  from, say, the sound that the
              object makes?  Answers to these  questions will illuminate the mysterious
              process by which word  learning occurs as well as advance knowledge of
              cognitive  development in general.  Furthermore, as we succeed in lessening 
              the mystery of word learning, we will be in a far better position  to use our
              knowledge of the word learning process to aid those  children who are having
              difficulty with that process.    ***
