Title       : New Approaches to Measuring and Understanding the Effects of Ultraviolet
               Radiation on Photosynthesis by Antarctic Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9615342

Award Number: 9615342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Neale neale@serc.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Neale  9615342  Increases in ultraviolet-B radiation (UV-B, 280-320)  associated
              with the Antarctic ozone hole have been shown to  inhibit the photosynthesis of
              phytoplankton, but the overall  effect on water column production is still a
              matter of  debate and continued investigation.  Investigations have  also
              revealed that even at "normal" levels of Antarctic  stratospheric ozone, UV-B
              and UV-A (320-400 nm) appear to  have strong effects on water column
              production.  The role of  UV in the ecology of phytoplankton primary production
              has  probably been underappreciated in the past and could be  particularly
              important to the estimation of primary  production in the presence of vertical
              mixing.    This research focuses on quantifying UV effects on  photosynthesis
              of Antarctic phytoplankton by defining  biological weighting functions for
              UV-inhibition.  In the  past,  techniques were developed  to describe
              photosynthesis  as a function of UV and visible irradiance using laboratory 
              cultures.  Further experimentation with natural assemblages  from McMurdo
              Station in Antarctica showed that biological  weighting functions are strongly
              related to light history.  Most recently, measurements in the open waters of
              the  Southern Ocean confirmed that there is substantial  variability in the
              susceptibility of phytoplankton  assemblages to UV.  It was also discovered
              that inhibition  of photosynthesis in Antarctic phytoplankton got 
              progressively worse on the time scale of hours, with no  evidence of recovery. 
              Even under benign conditions, losses  of photosynthetic capability persisted
              unchanged for several  hours.  This was in contrast with laboratory cultures
              and  some natural assemblages which quickly attained a steady-  state rate of
              photosynthesis during exposure to UV,  reflecting a balance between damage and
              recovery processes.  Slow reversal of UV-induced damage has profound
              consequences  for water-column photosynthesis, especially during vertical 
              mixing.    Results to date have been used to model th e influence of UV,  ozone
              depletion and vertical  mixing on photosynthesis in Antarctic waters.  Data
              indicate  that normal levels of UV can have a significant impact on  natural
              phytoplankton and that the effects can be  exacerbated by ozone depletion as
              well as vertical mixing.  Critical questions remain poorly resolved, however,
              and  these are the focus of the present proposal.  New  theoretical and
              experimental approaches will be used to  investigate UV responses in both the
              open waters of the  Weddell-Scotia confluence and coastal waters near Palmer 
              Station.  In particular,  measurements will be made of the  kinetics of UV
              inhibition and recovery on time scales  ranging from minutes to days. 
              Variability in biological  weighting functions between will be calculated for
              pelagic  and coastal phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean.  The  results will
              provide absolute estimates of photosynthesis  under in situ, as well as under
              altered, UV irradiance;  broaden the range of assemblages for which biological 
              weighting functions have been determined; and clarify how  kinetics of
              inhibition and recovery should be represented in  mixed layer models.
