Title       : Control of Productivity and Plant Species Segregation by Nitrogen Fluxes to
               Wetland Beaver Meadows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a9615326

Award Number: 9615326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $620000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Pastor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Johnston  (Principal Investigator former)
              Howard D. Mooers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                JOHNSTON et al.  DEB-9615326    Ponds and meadows created by beaver are key
              components of the regulation of overall water and nutrient fluxes over large
              areas in North America.  These beaver ponds and meadows occur in landscape
              positions ideally suited to receive surface runoff, stream flow, and
              groundwater discharge from upstream sources, giving beaver ponds and meadows a
              hydrologic control function disproportionately greater than would be inferred
              by their area alone.  Moist graminoid meadows are a key stage through which
              beaver ponds pass during changes in hydrologic regimes which may govern the
              dynamics of these landscapes.  Building on previous research that has shown N
              limitation of plant growth in these meadows, this new research will attempt to
              quantify the relative importance of different N sources in beaver meadows, and
              the effect of N supply to vegetation on its composition, structure, and
              productivity.    To test these relationships, a spatially explicit model of
              hydrology and nutrient budgets within beaver ponds and meadows will be coupled
              to a model of plant growth, canopy allocation, and the vertical light gradient
              under different nutrient and water regimes.  The model will be parameterized
              using hydrologic data collected in Voyageurs National Park and using greenhouse
              and mesocosm experiments on species responses to water, light, and nutrients. 
              The model will then be tested against spatial patterns of vegetation along
              gradients of water depth and nutrient availability in several meadows of
              different hydrology.    This research will provide significant advances in
              understanding of landscape controls on plant species segregation and
              productivity via water and nutrient delivery.  It will also advance
              understanding of how species segregation and productivity of graminoid species
              are controlled in moist ecosystems, in which transient canopy dynamics, rather
              than total response to nutrients, may be determining community dynamics.
