Title       : Modeling Paleozoic Glaciations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9615011

Award Number: 9615011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Crowley   (Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Hyde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OPP 9615011  Crowley    Abstract  The geologic record indicates that the earth
              has been subject to  four main phases of glaciation in the last one billion
              years: the  late Cenozoic, Carboniferous, Ordovician, and Late Precambrian.  In
              order to develop a uniform theory for glacial periods it is  necessary to
              identify the factors responsible for both general  conditions of glacial
              inception and growth and retreat of the ice  sheets.  Over the last several
              years our modeling group has  succeeded in identifying plausible boundary
              conditions for  glacial inception for the pre-Cenozoic glacial ages. 
              Separately  W. R. Peltier and colleagues have succeeded in simulating the 
              evolution of ice volume during the last glacial cycle with an ice  sheet model 
              coupled to a two-dimensional energy balance model  (EBM).  This award supports
              a project to combine these separate  lines of research in order to test whether
              an ice sheet model  developed for Pleistocene studies can, without any
              additional  tuning, yield changes in ice volume consistent with evidence from 
              the Carboniferous and Ordovician glacial periods.  This research  will entail
              conducting a suite of experiments with the Peltier  model that involve forcing
              the model with temperature and  (parameterized) moisture fields from EBMs with
              the model run  through a series of orbital insolation changes.  The objective
              is  to determine whether the paleo ice sheet grows to dimensions  commensurate
              with geological data and also whether "hot" summer  orbits melt the ice sheet. 
              To test for robustness of results,  some of the experiments will be repeated
              using temperature and  precipitation fields generated by a general circulation
              model.  If this work is successful in simulating the Carboniferous and 
              Ordovician glaciations, confidence will be enhanced in the ice  sheet model and
              a significant step will have been taken in  developing a uniform explanation
              for glacial periods in earth  history.
