Title       : Collaborative Research: Assessing the Genetic Potential andPhysiological
               Controls of N2 Fixation in a N-Limited Estuary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9615772

Award Number: 9615772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans W. Paerl hpaerl@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615772  Paerl    Productivity in estuaries is often controlled by nitrogen(N) 
              availability,even  though  there  is  a  vast  reservoir  of  gaseous N2 in the
              atmosphere. N2 fixation, the conversion of  atmospheric  N2 into cellular
              nitrogen, can  occur  at  high  rates in the plankton of freshwater ecosystems,
              due to dense  blooms of N2 fixing cyanobacteria. These blooms can be toxic  and
               cause  water taste and odor problems. Such  blooms  are  scarce    in   marine
                systems,   even   those   undergoing  eutrophication  (becoming more
              productive  as  a  result  of  increased   nutrient  inputs).  The  contrast 
              between   the  predominance  of N2 fixing organisms in freshwater  and  the 
              apparent  dearth  of N2 fixing organisms  in  estuaries  and  oceans,  provides
               the  basis  for  the  proposed  research.  Estuaries  define  the  transition
              from  freshwater  to  the  marine   environment,   and  thus  provide   a  
              basis   for  investigating the factors that control N2 fixing  blooms  in  both
               freshwater and marine environments. This objective  of  this  research  is  to
               define how N2 fixing  organisms  are  distributed  spatially  and temporally 
              in  the  freshwater,  mesohaline and euhaline reaches of the Neuse River 
              estuary.  The  conceptual framework developed in this research project  will
              provide a new perspective for understanding N2 fixation  potentials in marine,
              estuarine and freshwater environments,  which will help to understand when and
              where nitrogen-fixing  blooms  are  likely to occur in response to  the  threat
               of  cultural eutrophication. A particularly novel aspect of this 
              investigation  is  that experimental manipulations  will  be  used  to 
              determine  how salinity and nutrients  affect  the  distribution,  growth  and
              activity of  specific  N2  fixing  populations using a molecular biology
              approach. The  results  of  these  experiments will provide new information  on
               the  regulation  of  productivity and  algal  bloom-formation  in  estuaries,
              freshwaters, and  the marine environment.
