Title       : Impacts of Climate Change on Antarctic Vascular Plants: Warming and UV-B
               Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9615268

Award Number: 9615268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Day tadday@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615268  Day  There is strong evidence that the climate of the Antarctic 
              Peninsula has changed appreciably in this century.  Weather  records indicate
              that mean summer air temperatures have  risen >1oC over the past 45 yr at some
              Peninsula locations.  In addition to this warming trend, springtime ozone 
              depletion events have resulted in well-documented increases  in UV-B radiation
              levels.  These rapid changes in regional  climate provide a unique opportunity
              to assess the impacts  of climate change on vascular plants.  While the
              presence of  only two native vascular plant species (Deschampsia  antarctica
              and Colobanthus quitensis) and their sparse  distribution in Antarctica attest
              to the severe conditions  for plant survival, there are already indications
              that  climate changes are exerting a strong influence on these  species. 
              Regional warming appears to be leading to rapid  increases in populations of
              these species, based on censuses  along the Peninsula.  The influence of
              enhanced UV-B levels  on these species is less clear.    An experiment has been
              initiated in which temperature and UV  radiation levels are manipulated around
              naturally growing  Deschampsia and Colobanthus plants on the Antarctic 
              Peninsula to assess their response to these factors.  Assessment involves
              examining changes in photosynthesis,  growth and reproduction of these plants
              following warming or  exclusion of different UV components.  During the first 
              field season growth significantly improved under warming  treatments. 
              Exclusion of UV did not have any significant  effects, although conclusions
              from this short-term  assessment would be premature.    Field manipulations
              will be continued, and expanded in the  current assessment of plant responses
              in four key areas:  (1) photosynthesis, (2) general thermal adaptations, (3) 
              reproduction, and (4) soils.  These areas are critical to  understanding plant
              responses to climate change in  Antarctica.  (1) Photosynthesis - Antarctic
              plants have  unique photosynthetic charact eristics including the ability  to
              photosynthesize at near freezing temperatures and a high  sensitivity to
              moderate temperatures.  Using in vitro and in  vivo techniques including gas
              exchange, chlorophyll  fluorescence and enzyme assays, the mechanisms
              responsible  for these unique photosynthetic traits will be examined. It  will
              also be determined whether these species can alter  these traits in response to
              changes in climate.  (2) General  thermal adaptations - These plants must also
              possess  well-developed thermal adaptations that allow them to  survive in the
              Antarctic. Cell membrane stability, osmotic  potentials and supercooling
              characteristics of these plants  will be noted to determine how these
              characteristics change  in response to our field manipulations. (3)
              Reproduction -  Warming appears to substantially improve sexual reproduction 
              in these plants.  However, high levels of UV-B may reduce  reproductive success
              by damaging pollen.  The influence of  these opposing factors will be observed
              by examining the  production and viability of pollen and seeds under field 
              manipulations.  (4) Soils - Nutrient cycling plays an  important role in
              controlling plant responses to changes in  climate. Baseline information will
              be collected on pools of  nutrients (C, N, P) in soils and plants under our
              field  manipulations, which will be complimented with measurements  of soil
              respiration.
