Title       : Consequences of Mutualism (Lichenization) on the Phylogeny and Diversification
               of Ascomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9615542

Award Number: 9615542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois M. Lutzoni   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615542  Lutzoni   Symbiotic associations between distantly related life forms
              that have complementary functions provided key innovations that led to the
              origin and diversification of major groups of organisms. Lichen symbioses,
              resulting from mutualistic interactions between fungi and photosynthetic algae
              (usually green algae or cyanobacteria), enabled the evolution of at least 20%
              of all named species of fungi. Most lichens include fungi that are ascomycetous
              in nature (the others are basidiomycetes); 50% of all known species of
              ascomycetes are involved in lichen symbioses. Despite the indisputable
              significance of mutualism as a major evolutionary force, very little is known
              about the origins and pathways of diversification among mutualistic groups. It
              is clear that the phylogeny of filamentous ascomycetes and the impact of
              mutualism (lichenization) on the evolution of this phylum can be understood
              only with taxonomic sampling of lichen-forming ascomycetes that is at least
              comparable to the sampling currently underway for non lichen-forming
              ascomycetes. Dr. Lutzoni at the Field Museum in Chicago is commencing molecular
              phylogenetic analyses of lichen-forming ascomycetes as part of this enterprise.
                One goal of the project is to discover the ancestry and relationships of
              lichen-forming fungi relative to their non-lichenized counterparts. To attain
              this goal, three molecular data sets, from three nuclear genes expected to show
              informative variation, will be gathered from representatives of a wide array of
              lichenized and non-lichenized ascomycetes. Special emphasis will be directed
              toward the Gyalectales and Lichinales, two taxonomic orders of lichen-forming
              fungi believed to comprise the early radiation of filamentous ascomycetes.
              Theoretical issues relating to constructing phylogenetic trees from DNA
              sequence data from multiple genes will also be explored.
