Title       : Mathematical, Computational and Biological Aspects of Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9615444

Award Number: 9615444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Mumford mumford@dam.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mumford  9615444       The problem of vision can be studied from many points of 
              view: from an engineering, system-building problem to a problem  in biology and
              psychology.  The investigator seeks to understand  vision from the perspective
              of Bayesian statistics, as one of  modeling and learning the `priors' of visual
              signals and of  finding algorithms for efficiently sampling the posterior 
              probability distribution on the unobserved 3D world variables.  More
              specifically, he constructs a larger, more inclusive,  probability model for
              vision based on a pyramid architecture that  combines low-level texture
              segmentation with high-level object  recognition.  He seeks more effective
              algorithms for sampling the  posterior or making `near-MAP (maximum a
              posteriori probability)'  estimates by combining region growing and genetic
              algorithm  ideas.  He also seeks to model the neurophysiology of the primate 
              visual system, using the insights gained by this statistical  analysis.  He
              continues the analysis of cortical functioning  based on single/multiple-cell
              recordings, especially with models  of cortical areas V1 and M1, based on
              information multiplexed via  synfire-like chains.       The investigator
              believes that logic-based methods for  solving problems in artificial
              intelligence are reaching their  limits and that Bayesian statistics is the
              best tool for modeling  how we think.  The ability to see, to transform raw
              measurements  of light in a camera or on the retina into a symbolic description
               of the world being seen, is an extremely challenging problem for  these
              methods.  Vision is the perfect test case, especially, for  massively parallel
              computation because of the huge size of its  data.  In the last 5 years, the
              technology for processing the data  streams produced by video cameras in real
              time has become  available and the challenge of building general purpose
              computer  vision systems may now be within reach.  On the theoretical side, 
              the understanding of human and animal vision systems has   complemented the
              engineering of artificial vision systems in a  remarkable synergy.  In
              neurophysiology, the possibility of  massively parallel neural recordings is
              now available and may  lead to understanding how mammalian cortex uses
              parallelism so  successfully.  This project seeks to attack the problem of
              vision  from these two perspectives.
