Title       : Penguin-Krill-Ice Interactions: The Impact of Environmental Variability on
               Penguin Demography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9615673

Award Number: 9615673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Z. Trivelpiece waynezt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Trivelpiece  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  Trivelpiece 9615673    Long-term seabird research conducted at Admiralty
              Bay, which is located on King George Island in the Antarctic Peninsula region,
              has documented annual variability in the life history parameters of the
              breeding biology and ecology of the Adelie, gentoo and chinstrap penguins.
              Twenty-year records acquired on these species, including survival and
              recruitment, population size and breeding success, and diets and foraging
              ecology have enabled scientists to test key hypotheses regarding the linkage
              between these predator parameters and variability in the Antarctic marine
              ecosystem. This project will focus on understanding the linkages between the
              physical environment and the population biology of penguins, in particular, sea
              ice coverage and its impact on krill availability as a food source for
              penguins. Krill is a key food web species in the Antarctic oceans and accounts
              for nearly one hundred percent of the prey eaten by dominant predators such as
              baleen whales, seals and penguins. Analysis of long term data sets has
              suggested that years of heavy winter sea ice favor krill recruitment, as larval
              krill find refuge and food in the sea ice habitat. It has also been observed
              that years of heavy sea ice favor Adelie penguin recruitment and not that of
              chinstrap penguins. Aspects of the work include analysis of diet samples,
              shipboard krill sampling, survival and recruitment studies of penguins,
              satellite tracking of penguins during the breeding season, and analysis of
              satellite sea ice images. Penguins are the key species used to monitor the
              impact of commercial fisheries activities in the region, so this study will
              provide useful information to the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
              Marine Living Resources, which is the part of the Antarctic Treaty System which
              focuses on fisheries management.  ***
