Title       : U.S. RIDGE: Polymetal Sulfide Oxidation by Hydrothermal Vent Sulfur Oxidizers at
               Circumneutral pH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a9615830

Award Number: 9615830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl O. Wirsen cwirsen@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1319,1650,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615830  Wirsen    New processes of sulfur metabolism are continuously being 
              described, yet aspects of chemolithotrophic metabolism of  marine sulfur
              oxidizers have not been well studied. These  organisms may have adaptive
              mechanisms for energy yielding  oxidations in the highly buffered marine
              environment  compared to the extreme acid conditions in which many of  these
              types of organisms grow in freshwater environments. A  new aspect of oxidation
              of polymetal sulfides has recently  been described which demonstrates this
              process is carried  out by natural marine populations and by pure cultures at 
              the near neutral pH of seawater. Isolates of marine non-  acidophilic sulfur
              oxidizers from different hydrothermal  vent habitats will be studied to
              determine the mechanism of  this process, what component(s) of metal sulfides
              (e.g.  pyrite, chalcopyrite) are utilized for energy, what role  abiological
              solubilization plays, what the intermediates and  end products of the oxidation
              are, and what some of the  limitations are that can control this process of
              polymetal  sulfide oxidation in the vent environment. Radioisotopic  procedures
              to follow carbon fixation; chemical assays and  EDX to determine substrates,
              intermediates and endproducts;  factors controlling growth such as pH and
              oxygen;  epifluorescent microscopy for total direct counts and  attached cells;
              and traditional cultural techniques will all  be used in addressing the above
              objectives. It is likely  that this process of circumneutral metal sulfide
              oxidation  may play a significant role in augmenting abiological  processes of
              sulfide geochemistry and mineralization. That  the massive accumulations of
              metal sulfides which are  deposited around hydrothermal vent areas constitute a
              new  and important long term supply of chemolithotrophic energy  for
              autotrophic processes necessitates a clear and better  understanding of the
              importance of this mechanism in the  overall transfer of geothermal into
              biochemical energy.
