Title       : Dissertation Research: Potters and Politics: An Ethnoarchaeological Study of
               Political Competition and Craft Specialization in Paradijon, Southern Luzon,
               Philippines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9615373

Award Number: 9615373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11291              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Longacre longacre@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William Longacre, Mr. Mark Neupert will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will obtain neutron activation and
              petrographic thin section analyses of ceramic materials collected during an
              ethnoarchaeological study in Paradijon a village in the Philippines. He will
              also conduct a network analysis to determine social ties among artisans who
              live in the village. The goal of Mr. Neupert's research is to gain insight into
              the relationship between social factors which structure a society and the
              artifacts which individuals produce. During the course of his now completed
              fieldwork, Mr. Neupert studied potters who produced ceramics for sale in local
              markets. Part of this research involved determining the sources from which
              individuals obtained clay and the techniques they employed to mix and prepare
              it. He wished to determine the range of behavioral variation which existed and
              how this related to other social factors such as political, economic and
              kinship ties. To accomplish this he collected both social data and pottery
              produced by a range of individuals .During his study in Paradijon, shifts
              fractional disputes resulted in political realignments and this had a direct
              effect on how potters were organized and the sources from which they obtained
              their raw materials. Mr. Neupert will now conduct systematic analyses of these
              data at both a social and material level.  Archaeologists wish to reconstruct
              the behavior of the prehistoric societies they study and given the limited
              material remains which are usually recovered through excavation, this goal can
              be extremely difficult to achieve. Because of its durable structure, pottery is
              often recovered in large amounts and researchers attempt to develop analytic
              techniques which will yield the maximum amount of information through study of
              it. To understand how a potentially wide range of behaviors are indirectly
              reflected in such material remains it is necessary to examine controlled
              present day situations where both behavior and material byproduct can be
              directly observed. Mr. Neupert has obtained relevant information from just such
              a context.  This research is important because it will provide a case study of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will help to develop analytic techniques of
              potentially broad archaeological value and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
