Title       : Antarctic Search for Meteorites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9615276

Award Number: 9615276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260417             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph P. Harvey rph@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Schutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Cassidy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OPP 9615276  Harvey    Abstract    This award supports continuation of the
              Antarctic Search for  Meteorites (ANSMET) for the 97/98, 98/99, and 99/2000
              austral  summer field seasons in Antarctica.  Since 1976, ANSMET has  recovered
              more than 7800 meteorite specimens from locations along  the Transantarctic
              Mountains.  Over the next three years,  systematic searches will be conducted
              in regions known to contain  meteorites and reconnaissance work will be
              conducted to discover  new concentrations.  During the 1997-98 field season
              work will be  done in the Pecora Escarpment-LaPaz Icefields region, where 
              several small ice fields remain unsearched and earlier  reconnaissance located
              significant concentrations.  During the  1998-99 field season the southern
              Walcott N?v? region will be  visited, where more than 1500 meteorites have
              already been  recovered and many more remain.  During the 1999-00 field season 
              several ice fields in the Dominion Range- Grosvenor Mountains-  Scott Glacier
              region will be visited, where previous  reconnaissance and incomplete
              systematic searching promise  significant meteorite recoveries.    Antarctica
              is the world's premier meteorite hunting-ground for  two reasons.  Although
              meteorites fall in a random fashion all  over the globe, the likelihood of
              finding a meteorite is enhanced  if the background material is plain and the
              accumulation rate of  terrestrial sediment is low.  Consequently the East
              Antarctic Ice  Sheet, provides an ideal background for meteorite recovery. 
              This  allows the recovery of meteorites without bias toward types that  look
              most different from earth rocks (a problem on the other  continents) and
              without bias toward larger sizes.  But another  factor may be equally
              important.  As the East Antarctic Ice Sheet  flows toward the margins of the
              continent, it's progress is  occasionally blocked by mountains or obstructions
              below the  surface of the ice.  In these areas, old deep ice is pushed to  the
              surface and can become stagnant, with very little outf low and  consistent,
              slow inflow.  When such places are exposed to strong  katabatic winds, massive
              deflation results, removing large  volumes of ice and preventing accumulation
              of snow while leaving  a lag deposit of meteorites on the surface.  These areas
              exhibit  a balance between inflow, outflow and deflation, all of which are 
              intimately tied to environmental change during recent Antarctic  history.  Over
              significant stretches of time large concentrations  of meteorites can develop,
              as high as 1 per square meter.  Terrestrial exposure ages of meteorites suggest
              that some of  these ice surfaces are very old.  Antarctica is by far the best 
              place on Earth to search for meteorites, and the ANSMET program  has proven to
              be reliable and cost effective.    Continued recovery of Antarctic meteorites
              is important for  several reasons.  These samples have been the only reliable 
              source of new, non-microscopic extraterrestrial material since  the Apollo
              project, and will continue to be until future  planetary  sample-return
              missions develop (none are currently  scheduled for launch).  These samples
              provide essential "ground-  truth" about the composition of asteroids, planets
              and other  bodies of our solar system.  Studies of these materials have 
              fundamentally changed our understanding of the solar system,  greatly extending
              our knowledge of the materials and conditions  present in the nebula from which
              our solar system was born 4.556  billion years ago.  ANSMET meteorites provide
              samples of  asteroids ranging from primitive bodies unchanged since the 
              formation of the solar system to complex,  miniature planets,  where both
              traditional and exotic geological activity has taken  place. Other ANSMET
              samples proved, against the conventional  wisdom, that some meteorites actually
              represent planetary  materials, delivered to us from the Moon and Mars. ANSMET 
              meteorites have even promoted the discovery that meteorites can  be used to do
              astronomy, through the study of isotopically  anomalous grains that  could only
              have evolved in a different  stellar environment.
