Title       : Making Sense of Information: An Electronic Library of Environmental Exhibitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9615691

Award Number: 9615691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy Pollock wpollock@astc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn of Science-Tech Ctrs
	      1025 Vermont Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200053516    202/783-7200

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9615691  Pollock    The Association of Science-Technology Centers Incorporated
              (ASTC) proposes a two-year pilot project (November 1996-October 1998) entitled
              Making Sense of Information: An Electronic Library of Environmental
              Exhibitions. This project will result in a prototype electronic library of
              exhibit-based science resources on environmental themes accessible via the
              World Wide Web. The electronic library will assist museum professionals in
              sharing exhibit resources, and enhance access to those resources by teachers
              and students.    Science Center Teams from two leading science centers-the
              Exploratorium (San Francisco) and the Brooklyn Children's Museum-will work in
              close collaboration with ASTC staff to create and test models and frameworks
              for documenting scientific resources on the WEB. Consultants and a Project
              Review Team will contribute perspectives from other Internet-based science
              education efforts. This collaborative project will enable ASTC to leverage the
              considerable investment already made by NSF and other funders in two major
              exhibitions related to environmental systems now in the final stages of
              development and scheduled to begin nationwide tours through ASTC beginning in
              1997. They are:    Breaking Ground, an exhibition about plants and people from
              the Brooklyn  Children's Museum and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden; and    
              Turbulent Landscapes: The Natural Forces That Shape Our World, an exhibition
              from the Exploratorium about self-organization in nature, including phenomena
              like clouds and blowing sand dunes.    The electronic resource developed in
              this project will enhance the outreach of science center exhibitions, expand
              science center educational programming, and develop evaluation results for two
              traveling exhibitions. The project will result in three principal outcomes:   
              * Models and frameworks for the electronic documentation of science museum
              exhibitions on the World Wide Web;  * Increasing efficiency and speed through
              which science centers share exhibit ideas and r esources; and   * Enhanced
              access to exhibit-based science resources available via the World Wide Web to a
              projected 5,000 museum professionals, 25,000 students in 1,000 classrooms, and
              1,000,000 World Wide Web users in the U.S. and abroad.    The long-term goal of
              this pilot project is to provide the basis for classroom teacher training in
              using exhibit-based electronic resources for science education. Evaluation will
              focus on the extent to which this new electronic resource can enhance access
              and exchange of valuable intellectual and cultural resources both within the
              museum community and between museums and schools, locally and nationally.
              Ultimately, the resources developed in its project will be disseminated and
              implemented through the interactions of teacher-practitioners, technology and
              science consultants, researchers, the Associations of Science-Technology
              Centers, and 475 museum members of ASTC.  ***
