Title       : SGER: Social Dynamics in Cyberspace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9615111

Award Number: 9615111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernardo A. Huberman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xerox-Palo Alto Res Ctr
	      3333Coyote Hill Road
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    650/812-4073

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9615111  Huberman  The need to understand organizing and community
              formation  phenomena in the National and Global Information  Infrastructures is
              high---for example, to understand virtual  organizations. This is research
              empirically investigates  fundamental principles of how organizations and
              communities  emerge in large-scale networked computing environments.  The 
              dynamic structure of communities through time will be  revealed by capturing
              empirical data about growth and change  in links among nodes in regions of the
              Internet. These data  will be analyzed for structural and temporal patterns, 
              linked to explanatory phenomena, and used to develop new  theoretical models.
              In order to gather data and perform  measurements on community topology and
              dynamics, new probes  and instrumentation will be developed and deployed on the
               Net. This research is especially innovative, first, in that  it will develop
              new tools for gathering and analyzing data  on organizational activity and
              network dynamics directly  from the Internet at large. This begins to provide a
              new  kind of research infrastructure that opens up the Internet  as a research
              tool, as a rich source of empirical data on  large-scale organizing phenomena,
              and as a source of data on  very-large-scale network dynamics in general.
              Second, it  will provide exciting empirically-derived models and  theories of
              dynamic phenomena such as communities and  organizations in very large scale
              electronic environments.  The phenomena uncovered in the data alone can serve
              as  valuable tests of and challenges to existing models derived  from analysis,
              simulation, or extrapolation from smaller-  scale models. The models built to
              explain that data promise  to drive empirical theories of network dynamics to
              new areas  and to inform other fields.  ***
