Title       : Nitrous Acid Chemistry in the Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9615748

Award Number: 9615748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xianliang Zhou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615748  Zhou     This project aims to advance our understanding of the
              chemistry of nitrous acid (HONO) in the troposphere, including its
              distribution, its formation mechanisms, and its importance as a source for
              hydroxyl radicals, and as a recycling pathway for NOx in both urban and clean
              environments. This knowledge, when incorporated into models, will improve our
              ability to predict the photoformation of oxidants, such as hydroxyl radicals
              and ozone, and photodegradation of pollutants on a regional or global scale.   
              Field measurements in urban environments have confirmed that HONO photolysis is
              a major source for hydroxyl during the morning hours. However, few HONO
              measurements have been made in clean air masses, due to a lack of sensitive
              methods. Therefore, the HONO distribution and its importance as a hydroxyl
              precursor is poorly understood. The exact formation mechanisms of HONO are not
              well characterized, although it is recognized that atmospheric HONO is formed
              via heterogeneous reactions involving NOx and nitric acid.    In this project,
              a highly sensitive technique for atmospheric measurements of HONO will be
              developed. It will be based on aqueous scrubbing of HONO using a coil sampler,
              followed by derivatization with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine and determination of
              the azide formed using HPLC with UV-detection. The detection limit of this
              technique will be less than 1 pptv with a time resolution of ten minutes. This
              technique will be used to establish the distribution of HONO along with a suite
              of chemical and meteorological parameters in both polluted and clean air
              masses, during four two-week intensive measurements in downtown Albany, NY, and
              one one-month intensive campaign at the summit of Whiteface Mountain, NY.   A
              box model will be constructed and used to verify suggested formation mechanisms
              by comparing the predicted and measured HONO distributions, and to obtain
              information on the importance of HONO in tropospheric chemistry.   ***
