Title       : Optimal Management of Analytical Redundancy in Reconfigurable Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9615956

Award Number: 9615956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233973             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Eva Wu evawu@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9615956  Wu    The proposed research is concerned with developing new
              approaches to enhancing fault tolerance of reconfigurable control systems
              through management of analytical redundancy.  The redundancy management
              involves a decision, upon the identification of some failures, on whether and
              how a control reconfiguration should take place in order to maintain a certain
              system performance level.  Such a decision is made difficult by the presence of
              uncertainties in the system and the exogenous signal models, by the limited
              processing/memory capability in carrying out failure detection and
              identification (FDI), and by the vagueness in the definition of a failure in
              the context of control performance.  The underlying issues of the research
              range from those defined at subsystems level to those formulated at the overall
              systems level.  At the level of overall systems, our task involves finding a
              way of assessing objectively the reliability that takes into account the
              likelihood of failed reconfiguration action.  Therefore, there is a need to
              define and compute the reconfiguration coverage.  A definition for coverage is
              proposed that takes the form of a ratio of two nonspecificity measures
              associated with the estimated impairment parameter.  It links explicitly the
              reconfiguration coverage to the available FDI resolution, the chosen control
              performance threshold, the selected control settings, and the ranking method
              used.  Therefore, it offers a way to explore, through numerical and analytical
              means, the relationship between the performance of individual subsystem modules
              and the reliability of the overall system.  At the level of reconfiguration
              decisions, our task involves forming strategies for achieving the highest
              possible reconfiguration coverage by optimally managing the analytical
              redundancy in the system.  It is proposed that the decision making amount to
              ranking the relationships between two classes of fuzzy sets.  One class
              represents the control performance evaluated for every control  setting, and
              the other represents the estimated impairment parameter generated through an
              FDI scheme.  In order to develop algorithms that implement the strategies, it
              is necessary to show that these representations are obtainable and realizable. 
              It is also necessary to carry out a search for a ranking method that maximizes
              the coverage, and is simple to execute.  At the level of subsystem modules, our
              task involves deriving the required FDI resolution.  A definition of FDI
              resolution is proposed using the nonspecificity measure of the identified
              impairment parameter, which has uncovered some interactions between the control
              subsystem module and the FDI subsystem module, in relation to analytical
              redundancy management.  These relationships are to be further studied and
              quantified in this research to provide a more refined guideline for the bottom
              level design, i.e., the design of control and FDI subsystem modules.  Results
              to be produced thus far are applicable to control/FDI designs that are either
              retrospective or new.  New designs under the criteria of highly integrated
              consideration can be ventured from this point on.  An F-16 like aircraft model
              subject to actuator/surface impairment is to be used for the bottom level
              design, and also for the verification of the proposed new concepts through
              simulation and analysis.
