Title       : Hydrothermal Activity in Bransfield Strait, Antarctica: Sample Analysis and Data
               Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1997      
File        : a9615259

Award Number: 9615259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92802              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Klinkhammer gklinkhammer@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OPP 9615259  Klinkhammer    In the austral summer of 1995 a research team from
              Oregon State  University conducted a survey of hydrothermal activity in the 
              Bransfield Strait (cruise NBP9507).  The approach was to search  the water
              column for the types of anomalies in temperature,  turbidity, and chemistry
              that are known to be indicative of  hydrothermal plumes in mid-ocean ridge
              settings.  This work  produced a detailed picture of the hydrography of this
              area in  addition to locating three active hydrothermal areas in the  Central
              Basin.  These are the first deep ocean hydrothermal sites  ever discovered in a
              polar region.  A plume being discharged to  the Strait through the entrance to
              the sunken caldera at  Deception Island was also discovered.    Follow-up
              research on these discoveries is important for several  reasons:  (1) 
              Bransfield is isolated from the system of mid-ocean ridges  and has a
              relatively short history of rifting (approximately 4  my).  So, while the
              Bransfield straddles the Atlantic and  Pacific, vent biota in the Strait may
              well have a distinct  genealogy.  It will not be possible to sample biota until
              the  water analyses and data interpretation are completed.  (2)  Bransfield is
              a backarc rift system.  It is likely that the  vent fluids and mineral deposits
              associated with venting in this  setting are unlike anything sampled so far. 
              The closest analogy  is probably the Okinawa Trough or Lau Basin where native
              gold is  part of the hydrothermal assemblage.  (3)  Bransfield is in a
              sensitive position as far as world  climate and regional productivity. 
              Preliminary evidence suggests  that Deception Island is a significant source of
              hydrothermally  affected water to the surface waters of the Strait. 
              Consequently, it as important to quantify this flux and access  the
              biogeochemical impact of this phenomenon.  (4)  Bransfield is a rift zone which
              has little spreading or, if  spreading is occurring, it began in the recent
              past.  On the  other hand there is a definite tectonic fa bric that separates
              the  Strait into three distinct basins.  This situation allows an  opportunity
              to study the impact of tectonic processes on the  emplacement of hydrothermal
              circulation cells.    The success of the NBP9507 cruise has led to an enormous
              amount  of information on the water column in the Bransfield, both in  terms of
              the amount of data collected by instrument packages and  in the number of water
              samples that were taken for analysis.  Over 100 water samples from the
              Bransfield are available for  analysis for total dissolvable manganese.  This
              award supports  research to complete this analytical program and to analyze the
               results.  These data will provide information about the nature of 
              hydrothermal activity in the Strait which will be invaluable in  understanding
              the role of hydrothermal waters in regional  oceanography and for planning
              future work.
