Title       : Molecular Studies of PgiC Evolution in Allotetraploid Species of Clarkia
               (Onagraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9615037

Award Number: 9615037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie D. Gottlieb ldgottlieb@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615037  Gottlieb   The genus Clarkia of the evening-primrose family
              (Onagraceae) is a group of 42 species, all but one native to western North
              America, that has been examined for more than 50 years as a model for
              understanding speciation and genetic divergence and to assess the value of
              different sources of evidence for inferring phylogeny. The genealogical
              relationships among the species have been resolved by analyses of many classes
              of characters, including nucleotide sequences of the gene PgiC which encodes
              the cytosolic isozyme of phosphoglucose isomerase, an essential enzyme of sugar
              metabolism in plants. PgiC was duplicated in the basal stock that gave rise to
              Clarkia, and about half the extant diploid species express both duplicated
              genes (have two PgiC isozymes). In the other diploid species, one PgiC gene has
              been "silenced" (there is only one isozyme present for enzyme function, but
              there are two detectable DNA loci). Clarkia also includes a number of
              allotetraploid species, that combine through hybridization the genomes
              (chromosome sets) of two diploid species and are thus expected to possess four
              PgiC genes. However, in all tetraploid Clarkias tested only two PgiC genes have
              been found. The major goal of Prof. Gottlieb's research is to determine through
              DNA nucleotide sequencing which PgiC genes are expressed and whether the genes
              that are not expressed have been mutated or lost.   In this study, the
              naturally occurring tetraploid species will be compared to experimentally
              synthesized hybrids between their diploid progenitors. In addition, hybrids
              between the diploids and tetraploids will be studied. The synthesized hybrids
              are expected to express all the PgiC genes of their parents. The extent and
              rate of nucleotide divergence between the duplicate genes will be compared
              between the diploid and tetraploid genomes. The proposed studies are an attempt
              to describe at the molecular level the fate of particular genes encoding
              enzymes of known function during the formation and establishm ent of
              allotetraploid plant species. Such basic information should also help guide
              future analysis of the molecular causes of gene silencing and loss. The study
              will also provide information about the use of nuclear genes from polyploids in
              analyzing phylogeny, a highly relevant issue in plant systematics because more
              than half of the flowering plants are polyploid.
