Title       : Collaborative Research: Improved Instrumentation for Arctic Submarine-based
               Geophysical Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1998   
File        : a9615283

Award Number: 9615283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1727770            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale N. Chayes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard J. Coakley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus G. Langseth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This work is to develop an improved geophysical instrument package for use on
              US Navy nuclear-powered submarines during science cruises to the Arctic Ocean. 
              The authors plan an integrated data acquisition system that would expand the
              current instrument suite to include a swath-bathymetric imaging system, a
              "chirp"-type low frequency bottom penetrating sonar and an integrated data
              logging and quality control computer system.  With specifically adapted
              instrumentation the submarine is the only platform for underway marine
              geophysical surveys in the high Arctic.     The proposed 12 kHz bathymetric
              imaging system will acquire co-registered bathymetry and backscatter from the
              seafloor across a swath up to 20 km wide.  Data from the "chirp" sonar will,
              under favorable conditions, define the acoustic stratigraphy of at least the
              upper 100 m sediment below the seafloor.  Transducers for both sonars will be
              housed in a single, pod secured beneath the submarine.  The combined
              backscatter, bathymetry, "chirp" profiles and gravity anomaly data collected
              over the entire deep Arctic Ocean will not only provide the basis for solving
              some of the vexing problems of Arctic tectonics, it will also provide an
              essential database for planning future coring, dredging or deep sea drilling.  
               This instrument package will make the most of the opportunity generously
              offered by Navy of operational support for annual submarine cruises through
              1999.  Critical design goals include: collection of high quality data, dockside
              installation (i.e. without dry-docking), boat to boat transfer with modest
              effort and cost; and minimization of returns from the ice canopy.    The
              proposed development, integration and testing effort is a complex undertaking,
              requiring coordination between participating organizations, user community and
              the submarine fleet.     These submarine cruises will be the only opportunity
              to systematically collect this data with a set of optimized instruments over
              the entire ocean basin.  The combined suite of  swath bathymetry and
              backscatter imagery, gravity anomaly data, bottom penetrating chirp sonar and
              possibly magnetometer data will provide a complete geophysical characterization
              of the morphology, recent sedimentology, shallow stratigraphy and deep
              structure of the major Arctic Ocean basins.  This dataset will revolutionize
              our understanding of the tectonic history of the Arctic Ocean and the
              surrounding continents and provide essential information for other disciplines
              and future scientific exploration of this poorly known region.
