Title       : Molecular Measures of Microbial Community Structure in Sediment Biogeochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9615356

Award Number: 9615356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Stahl   (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Hollander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615356  Stahl  This research will extend studies in microbial ecology of
              sediment biogeochemistry in Lake Michigan. The first component of the research
              will continue to characterize site conditions which will serve as a comparative
              data base for studies at additional sites in this Lake. The PIs will continue
              to determine geochemical profiles to use as baseline criteria for relating the
              contribution of different microbial populations to organic mineralization via
              different respiratory processes. Quantification and identification of
              populations using group-specific hybridization probes and comparative rRNA
              sequencing will remain the principal organizing framework. This research will
              continue to relate individual population abundance to seasonal variation in
              sediment processes thought to be governed primarily by changes in organic
              matter input.    To further understanding of carbon and electron flow in this
              complex habitat, the PIs will combine two independent molecular measures,
              group-specific DNA probes and lipid biomarkers. This will serve as a critical
              comparison of methods, provide independent measures of total active biomass,
              and serve as a foundation for subsequent stable isotope measurements. Stable
              isotope composition of signature lipid components that can be clearly
              associated with well-defined phylogenetic groups will be used to infer the
              carbon source for individual groups. Preliminary studies suggest that this will
              provide very useful information about the trophic relationships of individual
              sediment populations. More standard microbiological methods of enumeration will
              be used for comparison. The emphasis will be on anaerobic process, although
              recent observations have prompted continued analysis of a novel archaeal
              population. In the longer term, these studies should also contribute to
              establishing the connections between sediment and water column activities, for
              example, how sediment microbial populations may affect or regulate the
              production of organic matter in the overlying water .
