Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships of West Indian EleutherodactylineFrogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9615643

Award Number: 9615643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Hedges sbh1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615643  HEDGES      The West Indies is unique among tropical archipelagos of
              the world in being composed of several, large islands of ancient origin, the
              Greater Antilles.  Each island possesses a species-rich biota, and
              collectively, the islands provide a valuable "laboratory" where scientists can
              replicate tests of hypotheses regarding phylogenetic relationships and
              biologically-meaningful mechanisms.  The islands of the Greater Antilles have
              been the focus of numerous, classical studies in ecology, animal morphology and
              behavior, and historical biogeography.  Our understanding of phylogenetic
              relationships among most West Indian animal and plant groups, however, remains
              poor.  A critical group of West Indian animals are leptodactylid frogs (genus
              Eleutherodactylus).  Eleutherodactylus is the largest genus of vertebrate
              organisms, and comprise most of the amphibian fauna of the West Indies.  Nearly
              every species of Eleutherodactylus is restricted to a single island and is
              found nowhere else.  In this project, Blair Hedges will examine DNA sequences
              from two mitochondrially-encoded, ribosomal RNA genes and from one
              nuclear-encoded gene (serum albumin).  Aligned sequences will be subjected to
              rigorous phylogenetic analysis, and the resulting relationships inferred will
              be subjected to rigorous statistical testing   The resulting and well-supported
              hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships will then be used to determine
              significant patterns of divergence of chromosomal change, vocalization,
              life-history, and speciation in these frogs and in anurans in general.  The
              phylogenetic hypotheses also will be used to test hypotheses of historical
              biogeography in the West Indian region.
