Title       : Atomic Level Study of Grain Boundary Diffusion in Intermetallic Compounds using
               Polysynthetically Twinned TiAl as a Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9615228

Award Number: 9615228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500371             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Luzzi luzzi@sol1.lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vaclav Vitek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9615228  Luzzi    An opportunity exists to carry out a basic investigation of 
              the relationship between interfacial structure and diffusion  along interfaces
              in intermetallic alloys.  The  crystallographically sharp twin-like and fault
              interfaces  found in the lamellar structure of the technologically  important
              intermetallic compound TiAl provide a model system  which is ideal for such a
              study.  The structure of the  interfaces in this alloy system allow
              high-resolution  electron microscopy (HREM) analysis to be used to study the 
              location of atoms.  Together with high resolution  compositional analysis,
              electron energy loss spectroscopy,  and theoretical atomistic modeling, the
              location of solute  atoms on well-characterized interfaces in TiAl are 
              determined.  Large crystals of the lamellar TiAl are grown  by optical float
              zone processing.  High temperature  Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy
              experiments measure  the time for penetration of the solute atoms along the 
              interfaces at various temperatures through a thin film.  Incorporation of the
              results of the HREM analysis allows the  interface diffusion coefficients and
              activation energies to  be calculated via a Hwang-Balluffi analysis as a
              function of  interface structure and diffusion direction.  Theoretical  studies
              are tied to the experimental program through the  determination of minimum
              energy interfacial structures by  molecular statics calculations employing
              potentials that  include the directional character of bonding in TiAl.  An 
              important aspect of the theoretical studies is the  development of these
              potentials.  The diffusion properties  at the interface are investigated
              through a detailed  analysis of vacancy configurations within and near the 
              interfaces and vacancy migration energies.  The results of  this theoretical
              analysis are correlated with the  experimental measurements to develop a
              clearer understanding  of the atomic level diffusion processes on interfaces. 
              This  research program which combines synergistic expe rimental and 
              theoretical studies provides an excellent vehicle for  graduate education in
              which the students will be immersed in  in-depth experimental or theoretical
              investigations and will  be continuously exposed to the complementary approach.
               %%%  Intermetallic alloys are candidate materials for high  temperature
              applications where stability of structure is  important.  This research should
              provide increased  understanding of the influence of structure on diffusion of 
              alloying elements.  ***
