Title       : Indigenous Craft Production on the Kenya Coast and Hinterland in the Development
               of Swahili Polities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9615291

Award Number: 9615291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51459              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chapurukha M. Kusimba ckusimba@mail.fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr.Chapurukha Kusimba and his
              collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork on the Kenya
              coast and its immediate hinterland. The group will continue ongoing research at
              the site of Mtwapa which is located north of Mombasa. The site covers
              approximately eight hectare and contains monumental architecture. Because of
              its excellent port, it participated in international trade for many centuries
              and ceramic chronology suggests it was inhabited between 1100 and 1750 AD.
              Excavation at the site will focus on a series of 2 x 2 meter test exposures at
              several middens in order to obtain a broader picture of economic life. Attempts
              will be made to locate storage structures and market and workshop localities.
              In this way it should be possible to gain insight into both the kinds of
              objects produced and the social context in which this took place. In a second
              phase of the research the group will survey an area approximately 200 km by 10
              km in size which extends inland from Mtwapa. The exact position of located
              sites will be determined by a geographic positioning system and the coordinates
              recorded on aerial and topographical maps. Note will be made of size and
              artifact content and collections made of ceramics, slag and other artifacts to
              determine relative chronology, stylistic similarities to other sites and to
              document manufacturing activities. Test excavations will also be conducted. On
              this basis it will be possible to determine the relationship between coastal
              and inland settlements.  Historical documents indicate that a trans Indian
              Ocean trade can be traced back almost 2,000 years and archaeological data
              supports conclusion. The Swahili polity which developed on the East African
              coast has traditionally been interpreted as a result of this trade and largely
              abstracted from an indigenous context. Dr. Kusimba wishes to re-examine this
              question. While such trade obviously played a role, it appears likely that
              Swahili coastal cities had extensive interaction with inland `hinterland`
              regions and that the growth of large coastal settlements with monumental
              architecture may best be explained in this latter context. It is likely that
              coastal groups produced products for exchange with the interior and the planned
              inland survey and coastal excavation will provide data to evaluate this
              proposition.  This research is important because it will shed light on the
              processes which lead to the rise of complex societies. While archaeologists
              know that some states arise solely as the result of pristine processes, they
              disagree on what gives rise to 'secondary` states such as the Swahili example.
              Some see the rise of these latter entities as the result of primary state
              contact which others accord a more prominent role to local processes. Dr.
              Kusimba's research focuses on this issue. The project will produce data of
              interest to many archaeologists and strengthen scientific ties between US and
              Kenyan researchers.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
