Title       : Ecosystem Consequences of Trophic Exchange From A River to Its Watershed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9615175

Award Number: 9615175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Power mepower@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1325,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9645175  Power  These investigators will study the effects of river subsidized
              insect production on a range of watershed consumers that differ in their
              abilities to track and translocate this resource. In order of increasing
              mobility, these consumers are filmy dome spiders, tetragnathid spiders,
              cursorial wolf spiders, western fence and sagebrush lizards, and three common
              species of bats. This research will test the prediction that ecosystem-level
              effects of aquatic insect subsidies on these consumers will depend on the scale
              of their activities. For example, bats may be the most important guild in
              translocating nutrients from the river to upland portions of the watershed,
              while lizards may have locally intensified impacts on their terrestrial prey,
              due to the river subsidies. Emergence traps, sticky traps, and quantitative
              exuviae collections will be used to monitor spatial and temporal variation in
              insect emergence and subsequent dispersal. Coordinated monitoring of consumer
              densities and activities will be used to assess their resource tracking in
              space and time. Insect emergence and subsidies will also be manipulated
              experimentally on spatial scales relevant to spiders and lizards, respectively.
              In these experiments, we will test the ability of particular consumers to track
              variation in their resources, and test an anticipated tradeoff between tracking
              ability and the impact of local resource variation on per capita performance of
              consumers. During the three years of this study, the investigators anticipate
              that year-to-year variation in hydrologic regimes will strongly affect the
              timing and magnitude of insect production, as it has over the ten previous
              years that we have studied this river food web. Studying this variation and its
              effects on watershed insectivores will help to forecast how river hydrologic
              regimes, including those altered by land use or climate change, will influence
              adjacent terrestrial communities.
