Title       : Metabolic Evolution and Taxonomy of Amitochondriate Protists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9615659

Award Number: 9615659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miklos Muller mmuller@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615659  Muller  This project concerns the distribution, taxonomic significance
              and evolutionary origin of the main types of eukaryotic energy metabolism.
              Biochemical studies on a few parasitic protists have clearly shown that in
              addition to the broadly distributed aerobic type with its
              mitochondrial/cytosolic compartmentation, there are two additional types
              without mitochondria: Type 1 without metabolic compartmentation (Giardia and
              Entamoeba) and Type 2 with cytosolic/hydrogenosomal compartmentation
              (Trichomonas and other trichomonads, anaerobic ciliates and fungi of the
              rumen). The presence of these metabolic types in independent lineages suggests
              that they became established repeatedly during evolution. Amitochondriate
              organisms differ from mitochondriate ones by oxidizing pyruvate with
              pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase and not with the nonhomologous pyruvate
              dehydrogenase complex. Type 1 organisms have a number of other glycolytic
              enzymes, which differ from those found in organisms of Type 2 and also in
              mitochondriate protists. Type 2 organisms differ from the mitochondriate group
              by lacking mitochondria but containing hydrogenesomes with a pathway leading to
              H2. The main metabolic patterns thus can be recognized by the presence or
              absence a few selected enzymes. Information on these enzymes and on the
              hydrogenosome is entirely restricted to the few strictly parasitic or symbiotic
              species mentioned. Morphological and ecological data reveal the existence also
              of a great variety of free-living amitochondriate eukaryotes, all living in
              anoxic or hypoxic habitats. In this project PCR methods combined with
              nucleotide sequencing will be applied to such species selected from several
              taxa to establish the nature of those key enzymes that can define their
              metabolic type.  The sequences obtained will also serve permit the phylogenetic
              reconstruction of the history of these enzymes.  In combination, this
              information will contribute to our understanding of the evolution of eukaryotic
              energy metabolism  and the much debated origin of the hydrogenosome.  %%% 
              Similarly to animals, plants and fungi, most unicellular organisms, protists,
              are aerobic, thus their metabolism depends on oxygen and is linked to an
              organelle, the mitochondrion.  A number of protists that live in oxygen-free or
              oxygen-poor environments lack mitochondria and have a relatively inefficient,
              oxygen-independent metabolism. The mechanisms of this metabolism have been
              studied only in a few parasites. This research, made possible by recent
              advances in molecular biology, will establish the metabolic types of
              oxygen-independent free-living protists and will compare these with the
              parasitic species. The results will contribute to our understanding of the
              significance and evolutionary history of this type of metabolism, a topic that
              until recently was beyond the possibilities of experimental study.  ***
