Title       : Evolution of Plant Competitive Performance in Different Environments: An
               Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9615305

Award Number: 9615305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Miller miller@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise A. Thiede  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615305  Miller   Competition is well known to affect growth and reproduction in
              plants.  Plants are thought to compete for a number of resources, including
              water, nitrogen, and light.  Such competition frequently suppresses plants to
              less than 5% of their maximum possible growth, but exactly how plants compete
              is relatively unknown.  We therefore have even less idea of how important
              competition has been in plant evolution and how we might expect plants to
              evolve when in competition.  This study directly follows the evolution of
              plants grown under competition for different resources.  Populations of wild
              mustard, Brassica rapa, will be grown in competition with another species,
              Raphanus raphanistrum, for three generations.  Each generation, the plants that
              are "better" competitors will be chosen to pass on a greater genetic
              contribution to the next generation through both seeds and pollen.  In this
              way, lines of plants will be bred to be better competitors under specific
              environmental conditions.  At the end of the breeding, the selected lines will
              be tested to determine whether their competitive ability did increase and to
              determine what characteristics of the plants evolved.   Determining how plants
              evolve in response to a major component of their environment (competition) is
              scientifically important in providing insight into both the evolutionary past
              and future  plants.  The results could be used not only to explain why plants
              have their present characteristics, but also to explain aspects of biodiversity
              by suggesting how groups of plants evolve.  Such information could be of great
              use to conservation biologists interested in explaining or predicting where
              plants may or may not be successful.  It also has agronomic value:  virtually
              all crop plants are grown under significant competition, and this study could
              help reveal how crop productivity is related to the evolution of competitive
              ability.
