Title       : Antarctic Tectonics Evolution: CD-ROM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9615161

Award Number: 9615161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Lawver lawver@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian W. Dalziel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OPP 9615161  Lawver and Dalziel    Abstract  Antarctica is the Earth's most
              isolated continent.  It is  surrounded by actively spreading ridges except in
              the South  American sector.  Antarctica is the only glaciated continent on  the
              planet, and as such constitutes a unique element in the  Earth's environment. 
              The tectonic evolution of its plate  boundaries, and of features within the
              Antarctic plate,  controlled development of the seaways around and through the 
              continent prior to and during the onset of glaciation.  In  addition to its
              unique role in the present day planetary  environment and its classic one as
              the Okeystone of GondwanalandO  during Paleozoic and early Mesozoic times,
              Antarctica has played  an important role in global dynamics over the past 1.0
              billion  years, and indeed throughout Earth history.    Because Antarctica is
              ice covered, few continent-wide compilation  maps have been attempted.  This
              award supports a project to  produce a set of digital geologic reference maps
              of the  Antarctic.  A new tectonic map of the Antarctic plate will 
              incorporate:  geological data, both from previously-published  maps, from new
              papers and from unpublished sources; and  terrestrial and marine tectonic data,
              including seafloor  structure derived from Geosat satellite gravity data, and 
              seafloor age and spreading history information.  Moreover, it  will be based on
              the sub-ice topography.  In addition to a  tectonic map, a series of
              reconstructions centered on Antarctica,  starting with the early Neoproterozoic
              and continuing through to  the Cenozoic will be produced.  These maps will be
              presented in  digital form on a CD-ROM, so that they can be easily reproduced 
              and used by others. The digital information will be compiled in a  format that
              will allow future data sets to be easily added to the  database and to allow
              old data to be easily updated, modified or  discarded.  Besides the maps
              mentioned above, the CD-ROM will  include digitized versions of updated
              ice-thickness and sub-ice  top ography maps, and an archive of available data
              as other  investigators wish to contribute.  Other data, such as 
              aerogeophysical and paleomagnetic data, would be covered with  separate
              chapters in the accompanying text and separate files on  the CD-ROM.  About
              1000 copies of the CD and accompanying text  will be available for the cost of
              postage and handling.  Further  copies can be distributed for the cost of
              reproduction, postage  and handling.
