Title       : RESEARCH PLANNING GRANT: The Integration of Technical and Personnel
               Considerations for Utility Storm Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9615658

Award Number: 9615658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel N. Schulz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615658  Schulz  Electricity has become a vital resource in our everyday lives. 
               From car factories to business offices to universities to homes,  the public
              depends on reliable electrical energy.  A power  delivery system consists of
              systems for the transmission and  distribution of the electric power from power
              plants to  customers.  Recently there has been renewed interest in the 
              distribution side of the power delivery system.  This interest  has stemmed out
              of an increased number of outages and reliability  problems relating to the
              distribution system rather than the  transmission system.  Current research on
              distribution systems  involves both planning and operational issues.  A
              overriding  concern is to increase the reliability of the supply of electric 
              energy by decreasing the time it takes to restore power after an  outage
              occurs.  Outage management involves the identification of  the location of
              outage and taking the necessary action or  actions, such as switching steps or
              repair, to restore power as  soon as possible to any affected customers.    The
              proposed long term research project for the Computer  Applications in Power
              System Operations Laboratory (CAPSOL) at  Michigan Technological University
              involves the integration of  numerical power system analysis, non-numerical
              power system data,  and the resource base of personnel and equipment to create
              a  comprehensive set of outage management techniques to optimize  restoration
              efforts during and after a storm condition.  Such  research should provide an
              increased awareness of the contrasts  between normal operations and storm
              operations and provide  increased performance in utility reliability.    The
              planning grant research activities involve three components:   initial research
              work and laboratory development, travel, and  proposal creation.  Background
              literature review will be used to  identify published algorithms for outage
              identification,  restoration, and prioritization; to identify the previous 
              approaches to integration o f intelligent system techniques to  storm
              management issues; and to highlight the applications where  intelligent system
              techniques can be either improved or increased  in the storm management
              process.  Research will focus on setting  up a complete topological network
              analysis package and a power  flow program.  By combining the knowledge gained
              from previous  work with utilities and the enhanced resources of the CAPSOL 
              laboratory, initial storm management algorithms can be developed.    The travel
              activities will permit interaction with experts in the  power engineering field
              from utilities, vendors and other  universities.  The PI also plans to write
              proposals to support  work on storm management issues seeking federal, state
              and  industrial research support.   ***
