Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Photoinduced Degradation inDoped Hydrogenated
               Amorphous Silicon, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9615766

Award Number: 9615766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28548              (Estimated)
Investigator: P C. Mathur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delhi
	      
	      New Delhi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9615766  Mathur   Description:  The proposed research  "Photoinduced Degradation
              in Doped Hydrogenated  Amorphous Silicon (a-SiH)" is a collaboration  in
              materials research between Professor Craig  Taylor, University of Utah and
              Professors P.C.  Mathur and R.M. Mahra, University of Delhi.   This proposal
              adds an international component  to Professor Taylor's research on the 
              properties of disordered semiconductors and  thin-film photovaltaic materials. 
              Taylor has  made significant progress in understanding  metal chalcogenide
              glasses as a model system  linking tetrahedrally-coordinated amorphous 
              materials and traditional chalcogenide glasses.   As a logical extension, this
              proposal  will  concentrate on photo-induced degradation and  transport
              properties of n-type doped silicon-  sulfur alloys.             Scope:  This is
              a new collaboration linking two  university research laboratories in the US and
               India.  The research seeks to  understand  metastable defects in a-Si:H that
              are crucial  for optimum performance of solar cells.  The  research combines US
              expertise on growth,  optical and magnetic resonance characterization  and
              Indian expertise on transport and  structural measurements.  The research plan
              is  designed to make progress on ultimately  improving the stability of devices
              such as  thin-film transistors and solar cells.   ***
