Title       : LTREB: Short-term Climate Change and Variable Response to Disturbance in an Arid
               Land Watershed-stream Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9615358

Award Number: 9615358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy B. Grimm nbgrimm@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart G. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615358  Grimm  The primary objective of this LTREB project is to understand the
              link between climate variability and the structure and functioning of running
              water ecosystems in arid lands. Year to year variability in precipitation is
              great in arid regions and precipitation regime determines the relative
              influence of drying and flash floods on desert streams and rivers. In addition
              to water, nutrients derived from desert uplands control rates of biological
              productivity in streams and adjacent riparian zones. Flux of nutrients from
              upland to streams is higher after several years of drought than after long wet
              periods. The specific objective of this research is to determine the influence
              of alternating wet and dry years on water and nitrogen transport in the
              landscape and its eventual utilization in streams and riparian wetlands.
              Methods include long-term monitoring of quantity and nutrient content of
              precipitation, overland flow at several upland points, and streamwater in
              channels with permanent flow. Stream ecosystem response will be measured in
              terms of several algal and macroinvertebrate community parameters, rate of
              reestablishment of communities after flood and drought, and patterns of
              nutrient cycling in the aquatic sector. Research will be performed in the
              Sycamore Creek catchment ecosystem of central Arizona.   Arid lands are
              extensive nationally and globally and water is the critical resource therein,
              yet little is known about how upland deserts and rare surface water ecosystems
              are linked. The nature of this linkage is central to an understanding of
              factors determining water quality in arid lands. Changing climate,
              anthropogenic or otherwise, is likely to alter not only precipitation regime,
              but also land use and natural vegetation patterns. This long-term research
              project will enhance our knowledge of how entire catchment ecosystems respond
              to changing climate and the consequences of this response for both natural
              habitat and water quality.
