Title       : Design and Analysis of Moment Connections Using Truss Analogy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9615273

Award Number: 9615273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181854             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bozidar Stojadinovic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this project are to establish the truss analogy approach for
              analysis of steel beam-to-column connection and to develop a new design
              procedure and detailing practice for welded connections in steel
              moment-resisting frames.  Modern steel buildings in the wake of the classical
              Bernoulli hypothesis.  The beam bending moment is transferred to the column
              through the flange welds, while the shear force is taken by the shear tab,
              which implicitly assumes the capacity of the beam at the beam-to-column
              connection is the same as the capacity of the beam in the span.  However,
              detailed model analysis showed  that the area of the connection near the shear
              tab is virtually devoid of stresses, while high stress concentrations occurring
              the flanges and the flange welds.    The truss analogy approach is used herein
              to develop a rational model of force transfer in the beam-to-column connection.
               The model postulates that the connection bending moment is transferred through
              the horizontal chord forces, while the connection shear is taken by a diagonal
              strut.  Under bending, the flange welds will be subjected to a complex state of
              stress and overloaded.  The truss analogy approach shows that the beam in the
              connection is necessarily weaker than in the span.  The new design procedure  ?
               is based the rational truss force transfer model.  The new design strategy is
              to increase the capacity of the beam near the connection by adding a flexural
              and a shear strengthening element.    Analytical work needed to achieve the
              research objectives has been carried out.  This project focuses on the
              experimental research needed to verify the truss analogy approach and refine
              the proposed beam-to-column connection design procedure.  Together, the results
              will form a base for full-scale proof-testing of the new connection design
              procedure and detailing practice.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
