Title       : Dissertation Research: Obsidian Economy in the Formative Tres Zapotes Hinterland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1996 
File        : a9615365

Award Number: 9615365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11444              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olivier De Montmollin olly@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Olivier de Montmollin, Mr. Charles Knight will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
              research at the Olmec site of Palo de Rabo,  located in the Gulf Coast region
              of Mexico to determine how obsidian was distributed and controlled. Obsidian
              (volcanic glass), because it holds a razor sharp edge, was a highly prized
              commodity among peoples such as the Olmec who lacked metal tools since it was
              used for both cutting and scraping functions. As an important economic
              commodity, obsidian can be traced through a prehistoric social system and by
              understanding how it was distributed and controlled, one can gain insight into
              many aspects of social organization. Obsidian in Middle America is particularly
              interesting from this perspective because it occurs in only a very limited
              number of places and through trace element analysis it is possible to trace
              obsidian from a site back to its source. Thus one can reconstruct not only
              intrasite but also external trade networks. Palo de Rabo contains widespread
              surface scatters of obsidian and other cultural material. It also has mounds
              and plazas associated with elite parts of the site. Mr. Knight will first
              conduct a general ground reconnaissance to determine the limits of the site and
              to produce a schematic map. A full coverage survey will then be undertaken with
              shovel probes where vegetation obscures the surface. On this basis, areas for
              excavation, including both `elite` and `commoner` residences, will be conducted
              to collect obsidian and other cultural materials. The obsidian will then be
              analyzed to determine how and where it was manufactured, distributed and used. 
              The Olmecs developed the first complex society in Middle America and therefore
              are of great archaeological interest. They are important subjects for study
              both for the light they shed on the prehistory of the region and for the
              insight they can provide into the processes which led to the development of
              social complexity. Researchers wish to understand how social stratification,
              which accompanies social complexity takes place and have developed several
              hypotheses. Two of the most promising concern control over the acquisition and
              distribution of scares resources and Mr. Knight wishes to uses the Palo de Rabo
              data to test them. Since obsidian in not locally available in the region, it is
              a scarce and valuable resource which is ideal for an investigation of this
              type.  The data Mr. Knight collects will be of interest to many archaeologists.
              The research will shed light on an important and poorly understood period of
              Middle American prehistory and will assist in the training of a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
