Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Algebraic Cocycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9615808

Award Number: 9615808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pawel M. Gajer pgajer@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615808  Gajer       This project lies on the interface of algebraic topology,
              differential  geometry, and algebraic geometry.  It is based on the
              investigator's recent  work, in which he successfully employed some classical
              constructions  of algebraic topology and differential geometry to reveal the 
              geometric content of ordinary cohomology as well as smooth and  holomorphic
              Deligne cohomology.  The investigator plans to apply the ideas  contained in
              his previous research on Deligne cohomology to study the  structure of the
              image and the kernel of the cycle homomorphism.  Some  of the deepest and most
              important problems of transcendental algebraic  geometry concern the cycle
              homomorphism.  The most celebrated among  these is the Hodge conjecture. 
              Except for a few classes of very  special algebraic varieties, codimension one
              is the only codimension  in which complete cohomological and geometric
              descriptions of the  image and the kernel of the cycle homomorphism exist.  The
              investigator  intends to pursue extensions to all codimensions of structures  
              playing a central role in the codimension one case.  In particular, he 
              introduces generalized exponential sequences and a new cohomology  theory that
              is conjecturally dual to Chow groups of algebraic cycles  modulo rational
              equivalence.  The objective of this project is to  verify that conjecture.  If
              this is the case, then the cohomology long  exact sequence of the generalized
              exponential sequence will induce a  complete cohomological description of the
              image and the kernel of the  cycle homomorphism.       Projective varieties are
              geometric objects defined by means of   polynomial equations.  Like other
              notions that arise in many important   contexts and sound deceptively simple,
              for example, the ordinary whole   numbers, they possess properties that are not
              at all obvious or easy to   discover, and over the course of many years,
              mathematicians have been   led to develop elaborate algebraic machinery for
              making computations   concerning some of  these properties.  It is hard to
              remain in touch with   the geometric meaning of these computations, and this is
              what has given   rise to the current project.  The investigator will attempt to
              understand   a geometric structure of what are known as algebraic cycles.  This
              will   be done by extending some classical techniques of algebraic topology and
                differential geometry to the context of algebraic geometry.  One might   say
              that at least this one corner of algebraic geometry will be reintroduced   to
              its roots.  This will be not only an esthetic triumph, but an aid to  
              intuition and thus to further discoveries and advances in mathematics and   in
              the disciplines like theoretical physics that make use of this   mathematics. 
              ***
