Title       : Maestrichtian Land Mammals of Vega Island, Antarctic Peninsula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1999    
File        : a9615933

Award Number: 9615933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judd A. Case jcase@stmarys-ca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      Saint Mary's College
	      Moraga, CA  94575    415/376-4411

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OPP 9615236  Woodburne  OPP 9615933  Case    Abstract  The Maestrichtian is
              considered to have been a key interval in  the development of the land mammal
              fauna of southern Gondwana  from Australia to Antarctica and South America.  Up
              to now, no  Maestrichtian fossil land mammals have been found in any of these 
              continents.  The Lopez de Bertodano Formation of Vega Island,  Antarctic
              Peninsula, shows the best potential of yielding remains  of land mammals of
              Maestrichtian age in any southern Gondwana  location. This project is designed
              to grasp that opportunity as a  collaborative venture between St. Mary's
              University, University  of California, Riverside, and Argentine scientists.   
              Current theory predicts that the presently unknown Maestrichtian-  age land
              mammal fauna in Antarctica should consist (1) of a suite  of non-therian taxa
              remnant from an Albian-Campanian fauna that  occupied southern Gondwana from
              Australia to Antarctica to South  America and (2) a complex of marsupials
              composed of relict  peradectids and more derived early members of
              australidelphians.  The australidelphians should include early members of the 
              (currently) South American Microbiotheriidae as well as early  lineages of the
              (currently) Australian Peramelina, Dasyuromorphia  and Diprotodontia.    This
              awards supports work to test this hypothesis in terms of the  composition of
              the Maestrichtian land mammal fauna by conducting  field research in Vega
              Island of the James Ross Island basin,  Antarctic Peninsula.  The location has
              been chosen on the basis  of its known productivity in yielding
              Maestrichtian-age  vertebrates (presbyornithid birds and hypsilophodont
              dinosaurs)  in near-shore fine-grained shallow-water marine sandstones of the 
              Lopez de Bertodano Formation that are amenable to dry or wet  sieving
              collecting methods, methods that have proven successful  in obtaining fossil
              mammals from similar facies in the medial  Eocene La Meseta Formation of
              Seymour Island.    This is a cooperative project with the Antarct ic Institute,
               Argentina, (IAA) and the Museo de La Plata, Argentina (MLP).  MLP  personnel
              are collaborating on research into the evolutionary  history of Late Cretaceous
              to early Tertiary therian mammals in  South America and Antarctica and the
              potential relationship of  these to the early population of Australia.  The
              collaboration  with IAA personnel is focused on litho- and biostratigraphy of 
              the marine successions.    The first grant year (1997) will focus on examining
              existing  material.  Years 2 and 3 will focus on field work on Vega Island  and
              follow up examination of any fossil discoveries.  The IAA  will supply all
              Antarctic logistic support for US as well as  Argentine personnel, including
              travel from Argentina to Seymour  Island, and logistical support in the field. 
              Collaborative  visits to participating institutions will occur as required over
               the life of the project.
