Title       : High-Resolution Climatic Variability in the Southwestern U.S. During the Last
               Millennium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1998   
File        : a9615875

Award Number: 9615875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven M. Colman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teh-Lung Ku rku@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hung C. Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9615875  Ku, Teh-Lung  University of Southern California    Title:
              High-Resolution Climatic Variability in the Southwestern  U.S. During the Last
              Millennium    This award supports a research project aimed at developing an 
              effective proxy tool which will enable the PIs to reconstruct the 
              precipitation variability on sub-decadal (3-10 years) time scales  for the past
              millennium in the southwestern U.S.  This is a region  (at least the southern
              part) of atmospheric teleconnection  associated with the El Nino/Southern
              Oscillation (ENSO) events.   The key approach is to employ the high-resolution
              oxygen isotopic  measurement on dated carbonate sediments retrieved from
              closed-  basin lakes located along a N-S transect in Oregon, California and 
              Nevada.  The basis for the approach lies in the fact that water  entering a
              closed-basin lake via rain and runoff mostly leaves by  evaporation, and the
              lake's isotopic composition reflects the  hydrologic balance that serves to
              monitor the regional climate  change, especially the precipitation variability,
              at a given time.   Past variations of lake water isotopic composition are
              recorded by  authigenic carbonate minerals of the lacustrine sediment.  The 
              feasibility of the proposed research has been tested in a recent  study
              conducted in Mono Lake.  The method will allow the PIs to  assess the moisture
              sources (from three climatic regimes: Pacific,  continental, and Gulf of
              Mexico) and their relative strengths and  detect any shifts in storm track in
              the time domain.  It is  anticipated that the study will allow the PIs to
              evaluate such  climatic anomalies as the Little Ice Age, Medieval Warm Period,
              and  ENSO, and contribute to the understanding of the causes and  dynamics of
              sub-decadal climatic variability.
