Title       : Role of Antifreeze Proteins in Freezing Avoidance in Antarctic Fishes:
               Ecological and Organismal Physiology, Structure-Function and Mechanism,
               Genetics and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9615023

Award Number: 9615023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $621482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. DeVries adevries@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chi-Hing C. Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9615023  DeVries  The project includes on-going and new studies on the role of 
              antifreeze glycopeptides (AFGPs) and peptides (AFPs) in freezing  avoidance of
              Antarctic fishes in five specific areas:  (1) relationship of severity of
              environment and association of  ice in fish; (2) the uptake of endogenous ice
              and its fate;  (3) structure-function of antifreeze proteins including the 
              molecular mechanism of AP adsorption and inhibition of ice  growth; (4)
              structures and organizations of AP genes and gene  families and their
              relationship to protein characteristics and  gene evolution; (5) tissue
              specificity of AFGP expression.    The extent of exogenous and endogenous ice
              will be determined for  McMurdo area fishes, which experience the coldest and
              most  ice-laden waters of the Antarctic region. The severity of the 
              environment will be investigated by deriving freezing isotherms  from CTD data
              in McMurdo Sound and waters beneath the McMurdo Ice  Shelf and correlated with
              physical and biological measurements of  the presence of the ice. Similar
              experiments will be conducted  for the less severe marine environment of the
              Antarctic  Peninsular. These studies will correlate freezing extremes with 
              circulating levels of AFGPs in the fishes associated with these  environments.
              The uptake of endogenous ice and its fate will be  determined by experimentally
              introducing labeled ice into the  fish to find out its route of disappearance
              from the blood and  ultimately its fate. Experiments will be designed to test
              whether  macrophages can increase solute concentration and "melt" or  dissolve
              ice crystals.    The relationship of AP structure to function will be
              determined  for some of the eel pout AFPs. Detailed structural information 
              will be obtained from X-ray crystallography and computer aided  modeling to
              determine the nature of the lattice match between the  surface polar residues
              and the water molecules in the ice lattice  on the adsorption plane. A new
              unique AP will be characterized in  the Antarctic  smelt Pleuragramma
              antarcticum and its ice crystal  size-dependent antifreeze activity
              investigated.    Molecular characterizations of AFGP and APP genes and gene 
              families, and their arrangement in the genome will be carried out  to further
              our understanding of the genetic parameters governing  gene dosage versus
              environmental exigency, protein abundance,      complex protein heterogeneity,
              and the evolution of these gene  families. Cellular and molecular aspects of
              the expression of  AFGPs in pancreas, the newly discovered major synthetic
              tissue,  will be investigated.
