Title       : Application of a Novel Experimental Technique to Probe the Effect of
               Microstructure on Small Cracks in Fatigue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9615705

Award Number: 9615705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi Chandran ravi@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,1771,9161,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9615705  Ravichandran    This is a fundamental study to understand the anomalous
               behavior of naturally initiated small fatigue cracks  relative to large
              cracks.  It is suspected that the  anomalous behavior is associated with the
              three-dimensional  characteristics of small cracks, including  large, isolated 
              perturbations in crack front, as well as a lack of crack  wake closure.  An
              experimental approach examines the effects  of important microstructural
              variables, including grain size  and shape, deformation behavior ,and
              orientation in nickel-  base and aluminum-base alloys.  A novel technique is 
              employed involving a laser interferometric displacement  measurement system and
              a photomicroscopic system.  The laser  interferometric system allows the
              measurement of the crack  opening displacements of a small crack and the 
              photomicroscopic system records changes in the surface crack  length.  The
              unique aspect of the laser interferometric  system is the simultaneous accurate
              measurement of crack  compliance and crack closure levels of very small cracks.
               This facilitates the calculation of growth rates of crack  tips at both the
              surface and  depth regions, incorporating  the continuous changes in aspect
              ratio.  An accurate  comparison of small crack behavior with that of large
              cracks  is therefore possible, leading to a better understanding of  small
              crack phenomena.  It is believed that this approach  provides new insights into
              the anomalous characteristics of  small cracks.  %%%  This novel experimental
              technique is useful in studies of  mechanical behavior of advanced materials,
              including  intermetallic alloys, ceramics and composites, where high  precision
              non-contact displacement measurement techniques  are needed for accurate
              property measurements.  ***
