Title       : Dynamic Social Impact: Self-Organization in Interacting Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9615747

Award Number: 9615747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bibb Latane latane@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Conceiving society as a complex nonlinear system of interacting individuals,
              dynamic social impact theory explores how individual experience and social
              influence lead to the regional differentiation and temporal evolution of all
              forms of culture (including scientific knowledge). Changes in the attributes
              (e.g. beliefs, practices, theories) of spatially-distributed individuals
              resulting from the interactive, reciprocal, and recursive operation of social
              influence processes can be modeled through computer simulation, using dynamic
              social impact theory, a simple but very general model of social influence.
              Surprisingly, several macro-level phenomena can be predicted to emerge from the
              operation of these micro-level processes, including a consolidation with
              reduced diversity, a clustering into spatially coherent subgroups, a
              correlation of initially unrelated positions on different issues, and often, a
              continuing diversity, as minority clusters protect each other from exposure to
              outside influence. Empirical research with people interacting in electronic
              mail networks, in lecture halls, and in dormitories will test these predictions
              and extend them to new arenas. This research will contribute to understanding
              the complex interaction between individual psychological processes and social
              outcomes in groups ranging in size from families and other small groups to
              organizations, communities, scientific disciplines, and even nations. Concepts
              and procedures developed in this research should be applicable to understanding
              the historical development   of regional and disciplinary differences in
              customs, values, and beliefs, both constructive and maladaptive, and such
              elusive phenomena as fads, social movements, consumer confidence, national
              character, and public opinion. The research will also have implications for
              predicting both positive and negative consequences of the increasing use of
              electronic communication in workgroups and society.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
