Title       : Categorization and Expertise in Human Visual Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9615819

Award Number: 9615819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233607             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Tarr Michael_Tarr@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615819  TARR  This research will investigate visual recognition mechanisms 
              employed by human observers across different levels of  categorization and
              expertise, with particular reference to the  difference between faces and
              non-face objects.  Earlier studies  making claims for face-specific recognition
              mechanisms include a  number of experimental confounds.  Addressing these
              concerns will  first require the use of computer graphics to create carefully 
              controlled three-dimensional objects for presentation in  psychophysical,
              neuropsychological, and functional neuroimaging  experiments.  These objects
              will include a set of non-face  control objects that will combine several
              properties of faces  (such as a fixed configuration of parts and homogeneity
              across  the class) but none of their superficial characteristics.  A  first set
              of psychophysical experiments will use these novel  stimuli, as well as
              familiar classes of objects, to assess which  of the several "face-specific"
              behavioral effects described in  the literature can be obtained for a)
              individual as opposed to  more categorical judgments for the same objects and,
              b) with  experts as opposed to novice participants.  New expertise  training
              procedures will provide methods for manipulating  participants' experience with
              the novel object class as well as a  better understanding of the reorganization
              of recognition  mechanisms that may occur during expertise acquisition.  A
              second  set of experiments will test brain-lesioned patients  traditionally
              classified as having a face-specific disorder in  neuropsychological
              experiments with the same object class to test  whether face-recognition
              deficits may be better described as an  impairment of exemplar-level processing
              mechanisms.  Testing of  these patients will be performed in a manner closer to
              what is  standard in the testing of normal participants, by improving the 
              control of object presentation and of response measurements, in  particular
              using reaction times and signal detection measure s.   Other experiments will
              use methods developed for studying the  creation of expertise in normals to
              explore the plasticity of the  visual system of patients with recognition
              deficits.  A third set  of experiments will study the neural substrate of
              exemplar vs.  categorical level visual judgments using functional magnetic 
              resonance imaging (fMRI).  While the importance of comparing face  processing
              to exemplar-level processing of non-face objects has  been acknowledged, few
              studies have compared recognition  judgments at different levels of abstraction
              for the same  objects, in particular, under conditions where participants begin
               as novices and then gain experience with an object class.   Longitudinal fMRI
              studies will assess the neural changes  underlying expertise acquisition at
              multiple levels of  categorization.  Overall, these experiments should shed
              some  light on the issue of face-specificity in the visual system,  provide
              data about the role of categorization level and expertise  for object
              recognition, explore rehabilitation possibilities for  patients with visual
              form recognition deficits, and extend our  understanding of the plasticity of
              the human visual system.  ***
