Title       : Cognitive Processing During Saccadic Eye Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9615988

Award Number: 9615988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144997             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Irwin dirwin@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615988  IRWIN  People make rapid eye movements called saccades in order to 
              examine the world around them.  The still periods between  saccades are called
              fixations.  It is well known that vision is  suppressed during saccades;
              therefore, visual information about  the world is acquired only during
              fixations.  This research will  investigate whether saccades also interfere
              with particular  cognitive processes.  Preliminary findings suggest that this
              may  be true, but the evidence is not convincing; this research will  provide
              some steps toward a definitive answer.  The experiments  will examine whether
              cognitive processes that are set into motion  during one eye fixation continue
              to operate while the eyes are  moving to a new position in space or whether
              these processes  pause during the eye movement.  People will be presented with
              a  simple mental task that they will begin to perform while they are  fixating
              one position in space and will then make either a short  or a long saccade to a
              different position in space while  attempting to continue performing the task. 
              If cognitive  processing is suppressed during eye movements, then long saccades
               (which take longer to execute) should disrupt performance more  than short
              saccades (which take less time to execute).   Performance will also be measured
              in another condition, in which  the eyes do not move.  Performance in the
              eye-movement conditions  should be equivalent to performance in the
              no-eye-movement  condition if eye movements do not interfere with cognition.   
              The average person makes about three saccades per second (hence,  about 172,800
              saccades per 16-hour working day), and the average  saccade lasts about 30 ms;
              thus, if suppression occurs during  saccades, it would mean that cognition is
              disrupted for  approximately ninety minutes each day.  If this happens, it is 
              truly remarkable.  Thus, determining whether this occurs is of  fundamental
              importance to the understanding of human cognition,  particularly for
              activities such as reading  and scene perception  that require many eye
              movements.  ***
