Title       : Mechanisms of Olfactory Foraging by Antarctic Procellariiform Seabirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9615061

Award Number: 9615061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roberta Marinelli                       
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10469              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabrielle A. Nevitt ganevitt@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615061  Nevitt  The Pelagic Ecosystems Studies (PES) program utilizes 
              Framework Science to analyze the operation of the Southern  Ocean Marine
              Ecosystem.  Objectives of the program include  questions relating to the
              development of strategies for the  management and exploitation of marine
              resources as part of  CCAMLR, and the effect of Climate Change upon the marine 
              ecosystem.  The geographical focus for the work is the South  Georgia area but
              the open nature of the ecosystem means that  the system must be studied in the
              context of the operation  of the Scotia Sea and the wider Southern Ocean.    As
              part of the proposed five-year research program for the  period 1995-2000, the
              Pelagic Ecosystem Studies Group have  designed a coordinated series of research
              cruises.  In  addition to those cruises targeted on specific aspects of 
              ecosystem dynamics, the study program includes a yearly  repeat mesoscale
              survey cruise designed specifically to  provide information on large-scale,
              long-term, variability.    The repeat survey will focus on three aspects. 
              First, it  will establish a physical oceanographic context for the  season
              based on a 740 km transect between the Maurice Ewing  Bank and the Willis
              Islands, to the west of Bird Island.  This transect crosses the Polar Frontal
              Zone (PFZ) which is  a key area for setting the South Georgia studies in a
              larger  context.  Second, it will examine features of community  composition
              both along the transect and in two survey areas  along the north coast of South
              Georgia.  Finally, it will  collect information on the population structure, 
              distribution and abundance of krill in the same survey  areas.  Krill is the
              dominant dietary component for many of  the bird and seal species studied at
              Bird Island, and  interannual variation in predator populations is largely 
              related to changes in krill availability around the island.  Krill is also the
              focus of a major commercial fishery and is  the key organism in the CCAMLR
              resource based analyses of  the ecosystem.
