Title       : Chemists and Cultures in Early Modern Germany: Andreas Libavius and his War of
               Words
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9615657

Award Number: 9615657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81143              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce T. Moran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Libavius was one of the most prolific writers of the early modern era yet only
              scant attention  has been given to his writings by historians of science.  In
              over twenty large volumes he  defended his own understanding of the dignity and
              disciplinary nature of chemistry and  contended with the philosophical claims,
              laboratory procedures, and interpretations of nature  proffered by Paracelsian
              empirics, court physicians, literate artisans, and members of academic 
              faculties.  The study will follow the course of Libavius's polemics and will
              investigate the  wide range of social, political, moral and religious issues
              that were often included in debates  about chemical-medical reform, the proper
              use of chemical language, and the preparation of  chemical medicines.  By
              analyzing the broader social and intellectual content of the chemical-medical
              debates  surrounding Libavius and by exploring the dynamics of cultural
              exchange within and between  local chemical communities, the project will
              suggest new ways of understanding the history of  chemistry.  On a broader
              level, the discussion of chemists and cultures will propose new  techniques for
              assessing the influence of chemistry itself among the many currents
              intersecting  within the Scientific Revolution.                                
                                   ¢ ¥©/¥  ?>?%??Á ¢??Á>¥?¢¥¢ />? ?©?%?¢??©Á?¢  ??%??` _/,Á?¢
               />? ¥©Á ÀÁ>Á?/% ???%??                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
