Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Metastable State Dynamics for Hard Spheres,
               Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9615212

Award Number: 9615212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shankar P. Das   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jawaharlal Nehru Univ
	      
	      New Delhi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9615212  Das  Description:  This is a U.S.-India research collaboration entitled
                Metastable State Dynamics for Hard Spheres.  The project is under  the
              direction of James W. Dufty, University of Florida and Shankar  P. Das,
              Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi.  The  investigators will study the
              long-standing problem of describing  glass formation and the properties of
              glasses.  Their objectives are  to identify qualitative mechanisms responsible
              for very slow  dynamics and to develop practical methods for quantitative 
              analysis.  They will limit their study to the idealized hard sphere  system in
              order to take advantage of recent developments which  permit accurate
              theoretical analyses of the dynamics in both dense  fluid and crystal phases,
              not available for any other atomic or  molecular systems.  These prototype
              studies will address some of  the most basic questions relevant to glass
              formation and their  properties.  Glasses and related composites play an
              essential role in  the development of new materials in a wide range of
              applications.     Scope:  This collaboration is driven by the research
              interests of two  highly competent investigators who have worked together on 
              closely related research for the past six years.  The unique  approach they
              have developed for solving a significant problem has  excellent potential for
              scientific breakthrough.  The support  requested is primarily for travel and
              per diem.  Postdocs and  graduate students involved in the program will be
              supported by  their respective institutions.    ***
