Title       : The Quantitative Genetics of Metapopulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9615260

Award Number: 9615260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Goodnight charles.goodnight@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615260   Goodnight  A standard assumption of genetical models is that the
              effect of a gene on the phenotype is constant.  Models show, however, that in
              the presence of gene interaction these effects will not be constant, rather,
              the effects of genes may change when the frequencies of genes at other loci
              change.  Thus, a gene that is deleterious in one population may be favorable in
              another population with a different suite of genes at other loci.  For example,
              a gene causing a "genetic disease" in one population or family may be neutral
              or even beneficial in other populations or families.  These models also suggest
              that a period of small population size may shift the selective values of genes,
              sending the population down a new evolutionary trajectory. In extreme cases
              speciation can result.  This may have implications for endangered species that
              have been reduced to very small population sizes.  This research will explore
              the role of gene interaction in population differentiation and species
              differences.  One portion of this research will involve models and statistical
              analysis designed to detect and interpret gene interaction in molecular
              quantitative trait loci (QTL) studies.  Of interest will be how to detect
              interacting QTL, and how to relate these QTL to classical quantitative genetic
              measures.  This will provide important tools for researchers seeking to
              identify the genetic basis of traits affected by gene interaction.  A second
              portion of this research will examine the role of gene interaction in species
              differences.  This will provide fundamental insights into the role of gene
              interaction in species formation.
