Title       : Can Insect Herbivory Control Grassland Composition, Productivity and Dynamics:
               An Alternative View
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a9615184

Award Number: 9615184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter P. Carson walt+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrice A. Morrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. David Tilman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615184  CARSON    For more than 35 years evidence has accumulated that
              herbivorous insects will not harm native prairies and grasslands (with the
              exception of grasshoppers).  New evidence suggests, however, that insect attack
              dramatically reduces the diversity and abundance of broad-leaved herbaceous
              plants, or forbs, that occur in North American prairies.  Damage by certain
              insects may lead to less diverse prairies that are more susceptible to
              environmental perturbations.  The goal of this research is to determine if
              damage by beetles, native specialist insect herbivores, control the
              distribution and abundance of three species of native, clonal goldenrods which
              form large, productive patches in the prairies of Minnesota.  The
              investigators' hypothesis, based on work by Grover is that specialist insects,
              such as beetles, play a "keystone" role especially in infertile grasslands by
              reducing the abundance of dominant plant species.  "Patch-centered" insect
              exclusion, transplant, and competition experiments will be conducted in native
              prairies in Minnesota to determine whether beetles reduce the abundance of
              goldenrods in natural grasslands.      This work will help us understand how
              some plant species become rare or threatened by natural processes that are not
              strongly related to human activities.  Furthermore, many of the most important
              agricultural crops are grasses (e.g., corn and wheat) and are plagued by weeds
              including a large number of forbs.  Understanding and identifying those insects
              that damage forbs and not grasses could lead to a greater use of biological
              control agents (e.g.,  insects) to control weeds.  This would ultimately reduce
              the use of expensive and potentially harmful herbicides.
