Title       : SGER: Cooperative Control: New Alternatives for the Second Wave of the Power
               System Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9615599

Award Number: 9615599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarosh N. Talukdar talukdar@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Granger Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9615599  Talukdar    This is a proposal to do preliminary work on an untested
              and  novel idea: to use autonomous, cooperating agents to control  future
              electric power systems.    In today's power systems, controllers are arranged
              in hierarchy.   Controllers in higher levels adjust the set points of
              controllers  in lower levels.  But the controllers are not allowed to 
              cooperate (interact).  That is, controllers cannot help one  another to do a
              better job.  Specifically, no two controllers can  adjust the value of any
              system variable in the same time frame.   This precaution is taken to minimize
              the risk of instability.    Any control problem can be formulated as an
              optimization problem.   The authors of this proposal have shown that
              convergence to good  solutions of optimization problems is an emergent behavior
              of  certain mixes of autonomous agents, and much better solutions are  obtained
              when the agents are allowed to cooperate in certain  ways.  The implication is
              that much more effective control of  power systems could be achieved by
              autonomous controllers,  provided these controllers cooperate in the right way.
               The  proposed work is to provide a proof-of-concept for this idea and 
              identify the forms of cooperation that would provide control  advantages.  If
              successful, this work will open a new research  area--cooperative control--and
              take the first step in  dramatically changing the way power systems are
              controlled.    Emerging hardware technologies, such as flexible AC transmission
               systems, electric storage, and fuel cells, make cooperative  control feasible.
               Many of these technologies are already in the  demonstration stage.  Once they
              reach the deployment stage, it  will probably be too late to introduce a new
              control technique.   Therefore, it is imperative that the preliminary
              investigation of  the idea of cooperative control be undertaken immediately. 
              ***
