Title       : Diagnostic Indicators of Biological Community: An Experimental Test in McMurdo
               Sound, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a9615849

Award Number: 9615849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5106      ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                            OPP-96-15849   
              Communities of benthic invertebrates are widely used to monitor  and evaluate
              biological impacts of pollution in the marine  environment because their
              sessile life styles, longevity,  functional diversity, well-known taxonomy and
              ecological  significance render this system an ideal ecological template on 
              which biological consequences are imprinted.  Benthic communities  have been
              used successfully in environmental assessments for  convincing demonstrations
              that impacts of pollution are readily  detectable at the level of family and
              phylum for macrofaunal  invertebrates.  This ability to detect pollution
              impacts at high  taxonomic levels appears to be a consequence of different taxa
               responding to two classes of benthic communities, organic loading  and
              toxicity, in opposite ways.  This project is designed to test  the hypothesis
              that indices of abundance and production for  individual phyla of macrofauna
              and/or meiofauna can be used as  independent diagnostics to tease apart the
              typically confounded  impacts of these two separate classes of marine
              pollution.  The  PIs will test the hypothesis that annelid worms and nematodes
              are  enhanced by modest organic loading and that arthropods and  echinoderms
              are depressed preferentially by modest exposure to  toxic contaminants (trace
              metals).    The first hypothesis will be tested near McMurdo Station because 
              of 1) its relatively constant environment allows experimental  work to proceed
              on the seafloor without compromise by confounding  disturbances; 2) previous
              benthic studies at this site have  revealed significant confounded patterns of
              sediment  contamination and benthic community degradation; and 3) low rates  of
              natural bioremediation in cold polar oceans make study of  pollution impacts
              especially critical at high latitudes.  The  first objective will be to
              establish a field experiment near  McMurdo Station where they will manipulate
              organic loading and  trace meta l concentration in sediments within
              colonization trays  so as to test by factorial design (permitting tests of 
              interactions between factors) whether the separate taxa respond  independently
              to the classes of pollution.  Treatments will also  include access of larger
              mobile predators and time for community  development so as to assess whether
              biological interactions  within the ecosystem with the diagnostic capability of
              the  indices of pollution stress.  Second, the PIs will complete a  rigorous
              review and meta-analysis of all available data sets on  effects of pollution on
              marine invertebrate communities to test  the hypothesis using the wealth of
              pre-existing information from  monitoring discharges, oil spills, and previous
              experimentation.  Results have great potential to allow the establishment of 
              diagnostic indicators of community stress that can be used to  separate
              confounded causes of causes of marine pollution and  direct appropriate
              management responses at McMurdo Station
