Title       : Contrasting Architecture and Dynamics of the Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9615704

Award Number: 9615704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin E. Bell robinb@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Roger Buck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bell and Buck: OPP 9615704  Blankenship: OPP 9615832    Abstract  Continental
              extension produces a great variety of structures from  the linear narrow rifts
              of the East African Rift to the diffuse  extension of the Basin and Range
              Province of the Western U.S.  Rift shoulder uplift varies dramatically between
              rift flanks.  The cause of variable rift width and crustal thinning is fairly 
              well explained by variable initial heat flow and crustal  thickness. 
              Mechanical stretching of the lithosphere has been  linked to rift shoulder
              uplift but the cause of variable rift  flank uplift remains poorly understood. 
              The Transantarctic  Mountains (TAM) are an extreme example of rift flank
              uplift,  extending over 3500 km across Antarctica and reaching elevations  up
              to 4500 m and thus constitute a unique feature of EarthOs  crust.  The range
              was formed in the extensional environment  associated with the Mesozoic and
              Cenozoic breakup of  Gondwanaland.  Geological and geophysical work has shown
              that the  TAM developed along the long-lived lithospheric boundary between 
              East and West Antarctica reactivated by a complex history of  extensional and
              translational microplate motions.    The TAM are not uniform along strike. 
              Along the OWilkes FrontO,  the northern segment of the rift extends from North
              Victoria Land  to Byrd Glacier.  The Wilkes Front architecture consists of (1) 
              thin, extended crust forming the Victoria Land Basin in the Ross  Sea, (2) the
              TAM rift shoulder, and (3) a long-wavelength down-  ward forming the Wilkes
              Basin.  Contrasting structures are mapped  along the OPensacola/PoleO Front,
              the southern segment of the  rift extending from the Nimrod Glacier to the
              Pensacola  Mountains.  Along this southern section no rift basin has been 
              mapped to date and the down-ward along the East Antarctic, or  ObacksideO, edge
              of the mountains is less pronounced.  A flexural  model linking the extension
              in the Ross Sea to the formation of  both the mountains and the Wilkes Basin
              has been considered as a  me chanism for uplift of the entire mountain range. 
              The  variability in fundamental architecture along the TAM indicates  that
              neither a single event nor a sequence of identical events  produced the rift
              flank uplift.  The observation of variable  architecture suggests complex
              mechanisms and possibly a  fundamental limitation in maximum sustainable rift
              flank  elevation.    The motivation for studying the TAM is to try to
              understand the  geodynamics of this extreme elevation rift flank.  Are the 
              geodynamics of the area unique, or does the history of glaciation  and related
              erosion contribute to the extreme uplift?  With the  existing data sets it is
              difficult to confidently constrain the  geological architecture across
              representative sections of the  TAM.  Any effort to refine geodynamic
              mechanisms requires this  basic understanding of the TAM architecture.    The
              goal of this project is to (1) constrain the architecture of  the rift system
              as well as the distribution and structure of  sedimentary basins, glacial
              erosion and mafic igneous rocks  surrounding the rift flank by acquiring three
              long wavelength  geophysical transects with integrated gravity, magnetics, ice-
               penetrating radar, and ice surface measurements, (2) quantify the 
              contribution of various geodynamic mechanisms to understand the  geological
              conditions which can lead to extreme rift flank  uplift, and (3) use the
              improved understanding of architecture  and geophysical data to test geodynamic
              models in order to  improve our understanding both of the TAM geodynamics and
              the  general problem of the geodynamics of rift flank uplift  worldwide.  This
              project will allow development of a generalized  framework for understanding
              the development of rift flank uplift  as well as address the question of the
              specific geodynamic  evolution of the TAM.
