Title       : The Education Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1996 
File        : a9615425

Award Number: 9615425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moira K. Rankin Moira@soundprint.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna Maria de Freitas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soundprint Media Ctr, Inc
	      525 Main Street
	      Laurel, MD  20707    301/317-0110

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9615425  Rankin    The SOUNDPRINT Media Center, Inc. (SMCI) proposes the
              production and distribution of The Education Connection (w.t.), a news service
              that will focus media attention on model efforts that use networked
              technologies to reform the teaching of science, mathematics, engineering and
              technology in   K-12 education. The Education Connection project is designed to
              increase both the volume and the quality of reporting on science and math
              educational reforms. Through this reporting, The Education Connection will
              bring valuable information to those who can act upon it: teachers,
              administrators, and parents of school age children. SMCI will work with an
              expert advisory board that  includes practicing teachers, educational
              researchers and experts to identify successful uses of  technology in the
              science and math classroom.    The Education Connection will provide news
              directors, radio talk show hosts, public  and commercial radio and television
              broadcasters, and science and technology reporters in all media with monthly
              tip sheets that present in-depth profiles of how and why technology-based
              reforms were implemented, and their results to a broad national audience.
              Twelve major technology-based reform projects will be featured in major
              articles, while others will be profiled in shorter pieces and sidebars. The
              Education Connection will have a radio broadcast component that features model
              science and technology educational reform programs in a series of 24 short
              format modules created to fit within existing broadcast vehicles, and as a
              stand-alone series. A full length half-hour audio documentary will be
              distributed for broadcast during April 1997, for National Science and
              Technology Week. And an online multimedia resource will provide listener-users
              with background information, information, including plans, photos and graphics
              illustrating the reform project, and other materials that demonstrate to the
              user how change was effected.    The Education Connection will target an
              audience that in cludes parents of K-12 students, educators and administrators,
              as well as the general public through distribution on public and commercial
              radio stations nationwide, on television and in print publications. Online
              distribution will reach a national and international audience with model
              projects, maximizing the impact of The Education Connection.   ***
