Title       : Arctic Environmental Data Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9615032

Award Number: 9615032
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Charles E. Myers                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Posson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey-Denver
	      
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/236-5906

NSF Program : 5240      INFORMAT & ADVIS SVC(ARCTIC RE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                OPP-9615032  PI  Posson  Abstract    In 1988, the Interagency Arctic Research
              Policy Committee (IARPC) established the AEDD Working Group to identify,
              organize, preserve, and present information about Arctic environmental data
              which is available from US Federal agencies and selected Alaska State agencies
              and academic institutions.  The Arctic Environmental Data Directory (AEDD) was
              assembled as a subset of the Earth Science Data Directory of the U.S.
              Geological Survey.  AEDD contains more than 400 references to data sets, each
              of which has been reviewed for completeness, consistency, and accuracy.  Data
              sets described cover many disciplines including geophysics, hydrology,
              geochemistry, oceanography, cartography, atmospheric physics and chemistry,
              marine and terrestrial biology, health and medicine, contaminants, remote
              sensed data, and in situ data.  AEDD resides on a computer system accessible to
              scientists, policy makers, educators, and the interested public over the
              Internet.                                                            Diary Note
                 Subject:  Arctic Environmental Data Directory (AEDD) Proposal      This
              proposal is for continuation of funding support for the project activities of
              the AEDD Working Group for 1996-1997.  The AEDD Working Group is comprised of
              members of IARPC agencies, and academic representatives.  These activities
              include:    Maintenance of the AEDD, including entry and review of new data-set
              descriptions, updates to existing entries, personal-computer hardware and
              software;    Internet access to AEDD on a Unix server located in offices of the
              U. S. Geological Survey in Anchorage, Alaska;    Development of an
              international counterpart to AEDD, the international Arctic Data Directory
              (ADD) with partner organizations initially in Canada, Denmark, Finland, Norway,
              and Russia;    Coordination with and links to related data-management
              activities such as the Global Change Master Director and the ADD;    Outreach
              and information dissemination, including sponsorship  of and participation in
              workshops, conferences, and meetings involving agencies, academics, the Arctic
              Research Commission, the IARPC, and international partners;    Liaison with
              related U.S. and international environmental programs.      This project
              supports the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC) response to
              recommendations of the Arctic Research Commission on Arctic Data and
              Information.          Charles E. Myers
