Title       : RUI: Using a Paleolimnological Approach to Assess the Interactive Effects of
               Acidic Deposition and Eutrophication on Softwater Lakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9615062

Award Number: 9615062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Carol Johnston                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Siver pasiv@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  SIVER (96-15062)    Acid deposition eutrophication remains two of the
              most adverse processes effecting the health of aquatic resources today. Even
              though much research on acid deposition and eutrophication has occurred over
              the last two decades, scientists are just beginning to realize the importance
              of the interactive effects of both processes on the condition of surface
              waters. Much of the research on acid deposition over the last twenty years has
              focused on terrestrial processes generating alkalinity in the watershed and,
              more recently, on the role of sulfur biogeochemistry on within-lake alkalinity
              generation. However, this heavy emphasis on alkalinity generation has sometimes
              obscured the roles and interactions of other elements and processes in
              determining the long term effects of acidic deposition. Likewise we understand
              many of the consequences of entrophication, but are just now realizing that
              this process also alters the sulfur cycle and changes the sedimentary sulfur
              storage record. Although not completely understood, it is clear that the
              effects of acid deposition and eutrophication in controlling the condition and
              subsequent degradation of surface waters are coupled through the biogeochemical
              cycling of sulfur, iron, and carbon, and the internal loading of phosphorus
              from the sediments.  A key to understanding these linkages resides in the
              chemical and biotic signals that are archived in lake sediments. To understand
              the interaction between acid deposition and eutrophication on the sulfur cycle
              of lakes, and on the chemical signals we measure in sediments, we need to
              examine biogenic markers in the sediment, which respond uniquely to either
              eutrophication or acidification. It is now relatively common to use microscopic
              algal remains to form inference models that are used to reconstruct historical
              changes in the chemical structure of individual lakes. Such a paleolimnological
              method has been successfully utilized to reconstruct pH and trophic status. An
              independent tracking  of changes in historical pH and trophic status relative
              to alterations in the burial of sulfur will help elucidate the role that
              eutrophication plays in explaining why some low alkalinity lakes in the
              northeast have acidified as a result of acid deposition, while others have not.
               The primary focus of this project will be to utilize a paleolimnological
              method in order to elucidate the interaction of acidification and
              eutrophication on sulfur biogeochemical cycling in southern New England lakes.
              We propose to utilize scaled chrysophyte remains in order to form inference
              models that will be used to reconstruct historical changes in the pH and
              trophic status of lakes, and simultaneously analyze changes in the storage of
              sulfur, iron and carbon, from the same waterbodies. The study will focus on
              changes over the last ca. 150 years, compare drainage (Connecticut lakes) and
              seepage (Cape Cod lakes) lakes, and include waterbodies that span relatively
              wide contemporary trophic and pH gradients. The project will effectively
              utilize and continue to add to large paleolimnological data sets from both
              geographic   regions.
