Title       : Dissertation Research: Where people Can Speak: Community Radio and
               Democratization in Postwar El Salvador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1997   
File        : a9615913

Award Number: 9615913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: June C. Nash JuneNash@midwau.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This dissertation research project supports an anthropology student from City
              University of New York.  The student will investigate how the emergence of
              community radio stations in El Salvador, after the fighting has ended,
              facilitates the consolidation of democratic culture.  By providing access for
              social groups previously excluded form public life to represent their interests
              in this public forum, the stations can support the development of `civil
              society`, meaning the values, norms and social institutions that undergird
              democracy.  In a region where newspapers and local television are non-existent,
              local radio serves as a vehicle for community self-expression.    Methods
              include intensive interviews and participant observation in four radio
              stations, in urban and rural El Salvador.  The data to be gathered will include
              the organization of the stations, and the identity of local actors involved
              (and not involved) in the stations, the nature of the programming offered, the
              involvement of listeners both passively and as participants.      This research
              is important because it will provide information in a little-studied aspect of
              democratization in the developing world, how local radio stations shape and are
              influenced by local society and culture.  This case study will be a basis for
              generalizations to promote the construction of civil society in similar
              less-developed areas.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
