Title       : Long-Term Variations of the North Atlantic Oscillation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1998   
File        : a9615679

Award Number: 9615679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Stockton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary F. Glueck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9615678  Stockton, Charles W.  University of Arizona  Title:
              Long-Term Variations of the North Atlantic Oscillation    This award supports a
              research project designed to use tree-ring  data from Morocco, appropriate
              tree-ring data from western Europe  and eastern North America, sea ice extent
              records, and indices from  the GISP2 Greenland ice cores to provide a 1000 year
              reconstructed  record of variability of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).  
              Previous investigations have shown that the cool season large scale 
              alternations of atmospheric mass between the North Atlantic regions  of
              subtropical high pressure and subpolar low pressure are highly  correlated with
              precipitation in Morocco.  Because Morocco is  physically located at the
              southern extremity of the NAO system,  slight perturbations in the system are
              recorded in the Moroccan  precipitation records.  The tree rings record
              variations in the  state of the NAO through the changing direction of
              associated  atmospheric moisture transport.  Three-ring data from western 
              Europe and eastern North America, as well as Greenland ice core  data and
              regional sea ice extent also show a high degree of  response to the state of
              the NAO, and thus, can be used to assess  the more northern extremity of the
              oscillation.  The tree-ring  construction of the NAO index will place recent
              NAO trends in a  long-term perspective.  Of particular interest is comparison
              of the  recent NAO trend with NAO variations during the Little Ice Age and 
              other periods of climate extreme.  A final product of the project  will be a
              long-term synoptic climatology showing various states of  the NAO along with
              their associated North Atlantic synoptic weather  conditions and North Atlantic
              SST anomaly fields.
