Title       : U.S.-India Collaborative Research: Metastable State Dynamics of Hard Spheres,
               Award in U.S. and Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9615767

Award Number: 9615767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27039              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Dufty dufty@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9615767  Dufty  Description:  This is a U.S.-India research collaboration
              entitled   Metastable State Dynamics for Hard Spheres.  The project is under
              the  direction of James W. Dufty, University of Florida and Shankar P. Das, 
              Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi.  The investigators will study the 
              long-standing problem of describing glass formation and the properties of 
              glasses.  Their objectives are to identify qualitative mechanisms  responsible
              for very slow dynamics and to develop practical methods for  quantitative
              analysis.  They will limit their study to the idealized hard  sphere system in
              order to take advantage of recent developments which  permit accurate
              theoretical analyses of the dynamics in both dense fluid  and crystal phases,
              not available for any other atomic or molecular  systems.  These prototype
              studies will address some of the most basic  questions relevant to glass
              formation and their properties.  Glasses and  related composites play an
              essential role in the development of new  materials in a wide range of
              applications.         Scope:  This collaboration is driven by the research
              interests of two highly  competent investigators who have worked together on
              closely related  research for the past six years.  The unique approach they
              have developed  for solving a significant problem has excellent potential for
              scientific  breakthrough.  The support requested is primarily for travel and
              per diem.   Postdocs and graduate students involved in the program will be
              supported  by their respective institutions.    ***
