Title       : Implementation Issues of Structural Control for Near Field Earthquakes: Hardware
               Malfunction and Saturation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9615731

Award Number: 9615731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faryar Jabbari fjabbari@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jann N. Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Schmitendorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9615731  Jabbari  This project will address critical implementation issues 
              associated with active control for urban seismic hazard  mitigation,
              particularly excitations due to near-field  earthquakes.  These issues include
              hardware malfunction and  actuator saturation, which arise in the
              performance-based design  of control systems.  The recent near-field
              earthquakes of  Northridge and Kobe have raised great concerns regarding the 
              applications of both passive base isolation systems (such as  rubber-bearing
              isolators) and active/hybrid protective systems.   The characteristics of near
              field earthquakes, including  unexpected large peak ground acceleration and
              shock-type time  histories, may render both passive isolation systems and 
              active/hybrid protective systems ineffective or even detrimental.    In the
              implementation of active control systems possible  malfunction of hardware,
              such as actuators or sensors, may occur  due to the infrequent use or due to
              shock-type excitations, such  as that of near-field earthquakes.  Due to the
              limited capacity  of any actuator, as well as the random nature of earthquake 
              excitations, the actuator may become saturated, particularly  under the
              near-field earthquakes.  Further the robust controller  design for the
              reduction of peak structural response needs to be  carefully addressed.  This
              project will attempt to establish  control design methods that guarantee high
              performance in the  presence of potential hardware malfunction and actuator 
              saturation.  The performance obtained depends explicitly on the  reliability
              (or malfunction) characteristics of hardware,  actuator capabilities and the
              design earthquake.  Consequently,  the evaluation of costs and benefits for
              implementing an active  control system becomes possible.  Finally, a
              comprehensive  experimental test program will be conducted suing the state-of- 
              the-art shaking table at the University of California-Irvine to  verify and
              demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed  techniques.    A di stinguished
              feature of our technical approach is that all the  issues to be addressed,
              including the malfunction of hardware  systems, actuator saturation, peak
              response reduction and system  robustness, can be formulated in a unified and
              comprehensive  framework.  The main thrust of the project can thus be
              summarized  as developing a comprehensive control design methodology that  will
              provide reliability with respect to actuator/sensor  malfunction, high
              performance with actuator saturation,  robustness and peak response reduction,
              and experimental  verification and evaluation.  ***
