Title       : Infants' Understanding of Noncohesive and Particulate Substances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9615922

Award Number: 9615922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael McCloskey                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gavin N. Huntley-Fenner ghuntley@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 1092,9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9615922  HUNTLEY-FENNER    This research will address two issues.  The first is
              the  development of physical knowledge in infancy, specifically when  and how
              infants come to distinguish between objects and  noncohesive particulate
              materials such as sand or flour.  The  second is the development of
              quantificational reasoning, such as  the distinction between "how much" and
              "how many."  There is  considerable evidence that infants have a sophisticated 
              understanding of the physical world.  Much of this evidence comes  from
              research focused on infants' understanding of objects.  But,  as adults, our
              physical reasoning encompasses an understanding  both of objects and of
              noncohesive and particulate substances.   Such substances are similar to
              objects, since both are material  entities subject to the constraints of space
              and time and, for  instance, neither can pass through a physical barrier. 
              However,  only objects cohere when moved.  The first part of this research 
              will address whether infants monitor the properties of a  stimulus, be it an
              object or not, and the properties of the  surface onto which it is lowered to
              judge whether the stimulus  will be supported or not.  The second part will
              build on the fact  that objects and noncohesive substances are quantified 
              differently, with objects being inherently individuated and  noncohesive
              substances continuing to be the same kind of stuff  whether they are separated
              into arbitrary pieces or whether  scattered portions are coalesced into one. 
              This part will  determine whether infants are capable of using both 
              quantificational strategies, such that in some cases judgments  are made about
              discrete quantities and in others made about  continuously measured abilities. 
              This research will, thus,  contribute to our understanding of the capabilities
              of very young  infants that afford their development into adults who can 
              function easily in our complex society.    ***
