Title       : Solid Phase Membrane Mimetics (III)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9615710

Award Number: 9615710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Pidgeon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                          ABSTRACT      Proposal No:   9615710  Proposal Type:  Investigator
              Initiated  Principal Investigator:  Charles Pidgeon  Affiliation:   Purdue
              University      This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification
              Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of
              the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.  The principal investigator is Dr.
              Charles Pidgeon of the Illinois Institute of Technology.  The investigator
              proposes to develop immobilized artificial membranes (IAMs) as solid phase
              analogues to fluid membranes, in particular phospholipid based biomembranes. 
              The objective is to quantify the environment a solute experiences in a lipid
              biomembrane, by using an accurate structural mimic that is less fragile.  The
              IAM can therefore be used in a chromatographic mode, with technological
              implications to biomolecule separations.    Lipid membranes are fragile and
              this makes it hard to study the partitioning and transport of molecules into
              and through the membrane.  By preparing a more structurally stable analog of
              lipid membranes, it becomes possible to characterize the environment of
              biomolecules that partition into these biologically very important,
              self-assembling systems.  Furthermore, these partitioning characteristics can
              be utilized in developing new chromatographic separation techniques. 
              Additionally, the IAMs can be used as drug delivery vehicles.  The project
              therefore, has the potential to contribute to both fundamental science, and to
              technology advancement.
