Title       : Nanostructured Magnetic Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9615026

Award Number: 9615026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48211              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Barnard jbarnard@mint.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9615026  Barnard    A simple method has been developed for fabrication of novel 
              nanostructured magnetic 'networks' which exhibit unique and  useful magnetic
              properties.  The networks are highly unusual  in that their dimensionality can
              be controlled continuously  at the nanometer scale allowing for exploration of
              confined  geometries ranging from zero dimensional 'dots' to one  dimensional
              porous networks to two dimensional films (as  well as topologies with
              intermediate dimensions) depending  on substrate nanostructure and network
              thickness.  In  preliminary studies on iron networks, dramatic enhancements  in
              coercivity have been observed (two orders of magnitude  higher than the
              equivalent thin film value) which are a  direct result of the confinement of
              the iron to a network  topology with critical dimensions in the range of tens
              of  nanometers.  In this research program the role of both the  network
              material and the nanostructure of the substrate will  be assessed.  Comparative
              studies of ferromagnets with  differing saturation magnetizations will be
              carried out to  determine whether  the strong shape anisotropy of the  network
              is the primary mechanism of coercivity enhancement.  The effect of the topology
              of the nanostructured substrate  on magnetic properties of the deposited
              network will be  studied using porous substrates with smaller pore diameters 
              and more variable porosity than is available commercially.  This part of the
              work will be carried out by anodically  oxidizing single crystal silicon
              wafers.  Electrochemical  process parameters will be used to independently
              control  pore diameter and arrangement as well as porosity.  Magnetic 
              characterization aimed at understanding the magnetization  (and magnetization
              reversal) process along with the magnetic  domain structure will be carried out
              using temperature and  time dependent hysteresis studies and magnetic force 
              microscopy. Precise dimensions of the networks and their  crystallography be
              determined by transmission electron  mic roscopy.  %%%  The simple fabrication
              of very thin, magnetically 'hard'  materials is important in the context of the
              development of  the next generation recording media.  The unique network 
              topology under study has important technological  implications.  For example, a
              particularly difficult  challenge is the striction problem encountered when
              flying a  recording head very close to the storage media.  Conventional thin
              film media are typically roughened by  mechanical or chemical means to minimize
              this problem.  The  unique surface topography of the networks should give rise 
              to low values of stiction without further processing which  will enable lower
              flying heights and higher recording  densities.  ***
