Title       : A New Approach for Rapidly Transient Evolutionary Seismic Spectral Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9615897

Award Number: 9615897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Y. Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A new method, the Hilbert-Huang Technique (HHT), is being developed to perform
              analysis of highly transient  time series from nonlinear, dispersive, and
              nonstationary systems.  Such data as typical of records on natural disasters
              for which the conventional Fourier and Fourier-akin (such as the various
              wavelet schemes) have severe drawbacks.  This new method consists of two parts:
               the Intrinsic-Mode Decomposition (IMP) scheme, and the Hilbert Spectral
              Analysis (HSA) technique.  The IMD generates the Intrinsic Base Functions from
              the raw data; and the HSA then concerts the IBF into an energy-frequency-time
              distribution through the Hilbert transform.  The result yields the Hilbert
              Spectrum depending on both time and time varying-frequency as two spectral
              independent variables.    This project will conduct the following research: 
              First, a thorough understanding of the physical characteristics of the HHT in
              seismic data analysis will be established.  For this purpose, both rigorous
              theoretical analyses and controlled laboratory tests will conducted.  Second,
              the HHT method will be applied to seismic data and explore the potential
              applications in the specific take of determining site-specific spectra.  Data
              collected during the Northridge earthquake (1994) and those collected from
              Taiwan including the SMART-l and SMART-2 network will be used.  Specific tasks
              include:  (a) To derive accurate information on strong-motion and weak-motion
              evolutions due to the geophysical effects along the paths of propagation, and
              the site effects on seismic waves. (b) To determine the energy-frequency-time
              history of the seismic activities and their response spectra; to evaluate the
              nonlinear wave evolution and surface wave dispersion due to complex earth
              structure. (c) To clarify the role of the suspected excessive vertical motion
              by comparison with the known earthquake damages.  (d)  To establish a
              methodology for evaluating the site-specific spectra based on the HHT and the
              data analyzed above.  The data will be classified by their sources and grouped
              by the seismic strengths to isolate the propagation effects through earthquakes
              of all sizes.  Specific attention will be on the identification of propagation
              path and site-specific geo-engineering properties of the site.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
