Title       : Board on Behavioral, Cognitive and Sensory Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9615656

Award Number: 9615656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine R. Hartel  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney R. Cocking  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Alexandra K. Wigdor swigdor@nas.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2001 Wisconsin Ave.
	      Washington, DC  20007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences has been established at
              the National Academy of Sciences in response to public policy needs that
              coincide with scientific developments in these fields.  This Board will focus
              on improving policy decisions by drawing together the collective expertise of
              diverse fields of developmental psychology, social processes, perceptual and
              sensory sciences, biopsychology and biotechnology, neuroscience and
              computational sciences.  A Board strengthens communications, broadens the
              databases, and makes scientific information more accessible to wider audiences.
               Board activities simultaneously improve research by probing issues from
              diverse perspectives.  Because distinguished scientists volunteer their
              services as members of NAS-NRC Boards, such Boards become a mechanism for
              cross-fertilizing disparate research domains to inform public policy.  A Board
              directly benefits science in a number of ways.  Scientific disciplines,
              typically driven by the issues and methods of their respective fields, have
              yielded increasing productivity when jointly considering problems from an
              interdisciplinary approach.  However, the mission-orientation of most
              government agencies has mitigated against mutually shared scientific planning. 
              Thus, the benefits of such a Board include: (1) providing linkages across
              federal agencies and the separate behavioral, social, cognitive, sensory, and
              technology research communities; (2) involving nationally-prominent academic
              scientists in improvements and developments in the behavioral, cognitive, and
              sensory sciences; (3) providing a forum for information exchange relating to
              science and public policy; and (4) advancing behavioral, cognitive, and sensory
              sciences within the NAS-NRC and through the Board's activities with Congress
              and the diverse program offices and research programs across the federal
              complex.  The Board seeks funding for its core activities from NSF.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
