Title       : Genetic Structure of a Primate Hybrid Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a9615150

Award Number: 9615150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford J. Jolly cjj1@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd R. Disotell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane E. Phillips-Conroy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jolly/Disotell/Phillips-Conroy  When two natural populations interbreed, they
              tend to become genetically homogenized.  If, however, individuals of mixed
              ancestry are relatively unfit, a narrow, intervening hybrid zone may persist
              for generations, filtering gene-flow between the populations.  Many such hybrid
              zones are known, but few involve primates, even though hybridization was
              probably important in human prehistory.  Our study brings together
              investigators at New York University, Washington University in St. Louis, and
              Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia.  It combines powerful, new techniques of
              genetic analysis with field observation to investigate hybridization between
              two baboon populations, strikingly different in both behavior and appearance,
              whose ranges meet in Ethiopia.  We have already collected and stored DNA from
              about a thousand baboons, of four generations.  In three more field seasons we
              shall complete this dataset, and clarify ecological influences on hybridization
              by mapping the hybrid zone more widely.  Each animal will be typed for
              hypervariable DNA markers.  Their distribution will show how social behavior
              affects the genetic structure of the populations, reveal patterns of
              inter-group migration, and indicate the darwinian fitness of cross-breeders and
              their offspring.  The result will be a unique picture of the dynamics of
              natural hybridization and the genetics of evolutionary divergence.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
