Title       : Preliminary Exploration of Molecular Methods for the Specific Detection and
               Differentiation of the Bdellovibrios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1996 
File        : a9615515

Award Number: 9615515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry N. Williams hnw001@dental.umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               1      WWilliams  9615515           Bdellovibrios are procaryotic, parasitic
              predators which prey  on susceptible gram-negative bacilli. Based on the
              observation that  bdellovibrios reduce the population of its prey in laboratory
               vessels, a logical question is, does the predatory bacterium play  some role
              in the control of microbial populations in nature?  Adequate experimentation to
              resolve this question has not been  reported. This is largely due to the
              limitation in technology to  detect and monitor the predator in the
              environment. The only method  currently available for the specific detection of
              bdellovibrios is  the culture technique. As with nearly all cultural methods
              this  technique has substantial limitations.       Serological and molecular
              probes and polymerase chain reaction  (PCR) primers which allow for the
              specific detection of a number of  bacterial species have been constructed.
              However such probes have  not been developed for the bdellovibrios. A probe for
              the  bdellovibrios willould allow studies which monitor the numbers of  these
              predators in the environment. The ability to detect those  which are parasitic
              within host cells would allow an estimation of  the number of infected cells in
              the environment and hence define  the impact of bdellovibrios on populations of
              susceptible bacteria.  -       The aim of this researchproposal is to develop a
              genetic probe  and PCR primers which can be used for the specific detection of 
              bdellovibrios in aquatic environments. Initial efforts will be made  to
              identify unique sequences among known nucleic acid sequences for  bdellovibrios
              and to test these as probes and as PCR primers.       The objectives and
              experimental approaches to developing a pr  obe specific for the bdellovibrio
              group or subgroups of these  organisms are described below.       1.
              Identification and synthesis of specific DNA  oligonucleotide sequences for use
              as detection probes and PCR  primers; identification of candidate genomic
              restriction fragment  sequences for  use as DNA probes and their production by
              cloning  and/or PCR synthesis; identification of candidate rRNA sequences  and
              construction of rRNA probes.       2. To examine the use and sensitivity of PCR
              to detect  bdellovibrios in laboratory microcosms.       3. To examine the use
              of genus and species specific probes to  confirm the identification of plaques
              (colonies) of bdellovibrios  recovered on culture medium.
