Title       : Constraints on the Tectonomagmatic Evolution of the Pacific Margin of Gondwana
               from U-Pb Geochronology of Magmatic Rocks in the Transantarctic Basement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9615398

Award Number: 9615398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48292              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Encarnacion jpe@eas.slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Encarnaci_n  OPP 9615398    Abstract  Basement  rocks of the Transantarctic
              Mountains are  believed  to  record  a change in the paleo-Pacific margin of
              Gondwana  from  a  rifted  passive  margin  to a tectonically  active  margin 
              (Ross  orogen).  Recent hypothesis suggest that the passive margin phase 
              resulted from Neoproterozoic rifting of Laurentia from Antarctica  ("SWEAT" 
              hypothesis).  The succeeding active margin phase  (Ross  orogeny)  was  one  of
               several tectonic  events  ("Pan  African"  events)  that resulted from plate
              convergence/transpression  that  was  probably a consequence of the assembly of
              components of  the  Gondwana  supercontinent.  Although these basement units 
              provide  one  of  the keys for understanding the break up and assembly  of 
              these major continental masses, few precise ages are available to  address the
              following important issues:    (1)  Is  there any pre-rift high-grade cratonal
              basement  exposed  along  the Transantarctic Mountains, and what is/are its 
              precise  age?  Is this age compatible with a Laurentia connection?  (2)  What 
              is the age of potential rift/passive margin  sediments  (Beardmore  Group)
              along the Queen Maud Mountains sector  of  the  orogen?  (3)  What  is  the
              relative and absolute timing of magmatism  and  contractional  deformation of
              supracrustal units in  the  orogen?  Was   deformation  diachronous  and  thus 
              possibly  related   to  transpressional  tectonics, or did it occur in a 
              discrete  pulse  that is more compatible with a collision? How does contraction
              of  the  orogen  fit in with emplacement of voluminous  plutonic  and  volcanic
              rocks?    The  answers to these questions are central to understanding  the 
              kinematic evolution of this major orogenic belt and its  role  in 
              Neoproterozoic-Early  Paleozoic continental  reconstructions  and  plate 
              kinematics. Hence, this award supports funding for precise  U-Pb dating, using
              zircon, monazite, baddeleyite, and/or titanite  from  a  variety  of magmatic
              rocks in the Queen Ma ud  Mountains,  which can address the foregoing problems.
                 In addition to the issues above, precise dating of volcanics that  are
              interbedded with carbonates containing probable Middle  Cambrian fauna could
              potentially provide a calibration point for  the Middle Cambrian, which will
              fill a gap in the absolute time  scale for the early Paleozoic.
