Title       : Fundamental Studies of Preparation/Structure Relationship and Transport and
               Reaction of Mixtures in CMS Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9615754

Award Number: 9615754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338392             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore T. Tsotsis tsotsis@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul K. T. Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Muhammad Sahimi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Scott Shaffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              				ABSTRACT

Proposal No:  			9615754
Proposal Type:		               
              GOALI
Principal Investigator		Theodore T. Tsotsis
Affiliation:			University
              of  Southern California


This grant is awarded through the Interfacial,
              Transport and Separations Processes Program of the Chemical and Transport
              Systems Division, and the NSF Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
              Industry (GOALI) Program.  The Principal Investigator is Dr. Theodore Tsotsis
              of the University of Southern California.  An academic and industrial
              collaborative research program is to be implemented aimed at developing a
              better fundamental understanding of the phenomena involved during the
              preparation of carbon molecular sieve (CMS) membranes.  These membranes show
              excellent promise for many reactor and separation applications and are made via
              the carbonization in inert and/or reactive atmospheres of polymeric thin films
              which are either self-supported or coated on various porous substrates.  The
              emphasis in this project   is the  understanding of the factors in the
              preparation procedure which are  critical to the ability  of these materials to
              effect separation of mixtures based on differences in molecular mobility within
              the membrane.

Carbon molecular sieve membranes have tremendous potential in
              the separation of hydrocarbon and reformate mixtures.  The ability to tailor
              the structure of a particular membrane to fit a particular separation and /or
              reactor application will greatly enhance the technological significance of
              these systems and expand their use into many new applications.  A key
              requirement here is the development of predictive models of the pore structure
              and of transport and sorption characteristics of reactant mixtures.  This is a
              main area of emphasis in the project, which will significantly advance the
              technological base in this area.

