Title       : Global Change and the Carbon Balance of Arctic Ecosystems: The Importance of
               Carbon-Nutrient Interactions in Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9615563

Award Number: 9615563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $742776             (Estimated)
Investigator: Knute J. Nadelhoffer knute@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Giblin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaius R. Shaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9251,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                            9615563            Nadelhoffer            Changes in terrestrial
              carbon cycles are often tightly  constrained by interactions between C and
              other elements,  especially N and P. The aim of this research is to improve the
               understanding of how carbon/nutrient interactions in soils  might affect the
              responses of arctic tundra ecosystems to  global environmental change. The
              research centers on the  question, "What controls the amount of C lost from
              tundra soils  per unit N made available for plant uptake?" This question is 
              important because plant C gain in tundra ecosystems is often  strongly
              N-limited, and virtually all of the N made available  to vascular plants in
              tundra ecosystems comes from microbial  mineralization of soil organic matter.
              Thus the overall C  balance of the ecosystem is largely determined by the
              balance  of plant C gains associated with N uptake versus C losses due  to soil
              respiration.    The design of the research is guided by a simple conceptual 
              model, in which the large amount of soil organic matter in tundra  ecosystems
              is viewed as being composed of three interacting  organic matter pools with
              different turnover times and  characteristic C:N ratios (microbes are a fourth
              pool that  mediates turnover of the other three, but which is also much 
              smaller than the other three). The overall hypothesis is that the  balance of 
              C lost: N made available  in tundra soils is  controlled by interactions
              between the chemical quality of soil  organic matter (including fresh litter)
              and environmental factors  that determine the relative rates of decomposition
              and  interconversion of the various organic matter pools. Additional 
              hypotheses deal with the individual effects of (1) soil organic  matter
              quality, (2) drainage and associated aerobic/anaerobic  conditions, and (3)
              temperature.    These hypotheses will be tested by measuring C losses and N 
              made available in soils from contrasting tundra ecosystem types  that are
              already known to differ in initial organic matter   quality. A field experiment
              will compare wet, moist, and dry  heath tundras, and two laboratory experiments
              will compare wet  and moist tundras. One laboratory experiment will be on whole
               plant-soil monoliths transported from the field, and the other  laboratory
              experiment will be on soils only; treatments will  include manipulations of
              temperature, drainage, and N and P  availability. Isotopic tracers and natural
              abundances of  C & N  isotopes in various soil organic matter fractions will be
              used  to help estimate interactions and turnover rates of the major  organic
              matter pools. Because the experiments are long-term  (the laboratory experiment
              will simulate 4 full growing seasons  over the 3 years of the research, and the
              field measurements  will be made in the 10th through the 12th years of an 
              experiment begun in 1988), it may be possible to document  changes in
              characteristics of organic matter pools themselves,  as well as the fluxes into
              and out of them. In addition to  direct tests of the hypotheses with data, a
              simulation model  (MBL-GEM) will be used as a synthesis tool and for
              longer-term  prediction and integration with past research on vegetation C-N 
              interactions.
