Title       : The Paleoenvironment of the Meyer Desert Formation, Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a9615252

Award Number: 9615252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103471             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan C. Ashworth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                OPP 9615252  Ashworth    Abstract    The Meyer Desert Formation crops out in
              the Oliver Bluffs region  of the Dominion Range in the central Transantarctic
              Mountains,  latitude 85 degrees South, about 500 km from the South Pole.  The 
              site is on the Beardmore Glacier near the margin of the Polar  Plateau.  The
              polar desert climate is too cold and too dry to  support higher forms of life. 
              This award support studies of  fossils that will be extracted from siltstones
              containing wood,  and from peat and marl deposits discovered in 1995.  Fossils 
              discovered in earlier studies include: pollen, wood, and leaves  of Nothofagus
              (southern beech), seeds of 4 species of vascular  plants, stems and leaves of
              mosses, leg parts of a flightless  beetle, valves of ostracodes, shells of
              gastropods and bivalves,  and a fish tooth.  A cushion of a woody vascular
              plant in its  original growth position demonstrates that the fossil assemblage 
              is in situ and not transported to the site.  The diverse  organisms represented
              by the fossils lived at latitude 85 degrees  South during a time when the
              Antarctic ice sheets were smaller.  Stratigraphic evidence suggests an
              environment that included a  lake with vegetation-covered moraines, near a
              glacier margin.  There is a question of how warm temperatures were at the site.
               Studies of the Nothofagus fossils suggest a harsh climate at the  limits of
              plant growth.  That interpretation, however, does not  agree with the diversity
              of organisms represented by fossils.  Also, the occurrence of fish in the lake
              indicates that it did  not freeze to the bottom.  The Magellanic Moorland of
              southern  South America, with a mean annual temperature of at least 23  degrees
              Celsius higher than the Oliver Bluffs location today, is  a possible analog for
              the paleoenvironment.  Biogeographically,  the organisms also seem to have
              closer evolutionary links with  southern South America.  Based on 250 kg of
              sediments collected  at the site in 1995, a series of paleontological and
              geochemical  s tudies will be undertaken to determine how warm the climate was.
                 The question of when these organisms inhabited the Beardmore  Valley is very
              important to answer because of the question of  stability of the ice sheets. 
              The best estimate for the age of  the sediments is Pliocene based on
              transported marine diatoms.  This implies that the existing configuration of
              the Antarctic ice  sheets is a relatively recent feature, developing during the
               Quaternary.  Other evidence from Antarctica and the Southern  Ocean suggests
              that the polar ice sheets are much older and that  the landscapes of the Dry
              Valleys region have not changed much  since the Miocene.  The Pliocene is known
              for its globally high  sea levels and warmer climates in the Arctic.  Did this
              warming  cause a major disintegration of the Antarctic ice sheets during  the
              Pliocene or did they remain stable?  This question is  especially important to
              answer in regard to our present concerns  about global warming.  The Pliocene
              age that has been assigned to  the Meyer Desert Formation, with its in situ
              fossils of  terrestrial organisms indicating much warmer conditions, is 
              critical to this question.  The age needs to be confirmed and a  series of
              exploratory projects will be undertaken to attempt to  date the deposits using
              the biostratigraphy of the fossils of  terrestrial organisms, amino acid
              analysis of the gastropod and  bivalve shells, and argon/argon analysis of
              crystals growing  inside the seeds.    The fossils are very important to test
              hypotheses about Southern  Hemisphere biogeography.  These hypotheses have
              attempted to  explain the distribution of related organisms between South 
              America, Australasia, the Subantarctic Islands, and Antarctica  but until now
              they have been untestable because of an absence of  Neogene terrestrial fossil
              data.
