Title       : Direct and Indirect Effects on Community Resilience in Oak Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2001    
File        : a9615414

Award Number: 9615414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Ostfeld rostfeld@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clive G. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry O. Wolff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Turchin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ostfeld, R. S.   DEB-9615414    The PIs propose to test the importance of direct
              and indirect effects in oak forests of southeastern New York State.  Episodic
              mast production by oak trees appears to cause transient increases in the
              density of rodent populations.  Rodents, in turn, appear to regulate
              low-density gypsy moth populations and are the primary reservoirs of the tick
              that carries Lyme disease.  The PIs will simulate mast production and measure
              the response in rodent population levels.  The effect of changes in mouse
              population densities will be determined for survival of gypsy moth pupae and
              density of egg masses, and parasitization rates of larval ticks and nymphal
              tick abundance.  The PIs will conduct rodent removal experiments to test the
              hypothesis that rodent population density regulates gypsy moth population
              dynamics only during the low phase of the moth cycle.  Modeling of the
              interaction will determine the sensitivity of system behavior to variation in
              the functional response of rodent predation and acorn consumption and to
              variation in the rhythm of the masting cycle.    In addition to contributing to
              a more complete understanding of the factors determining the structure and
              dynamics of ecological systems, the results of this study will be applicable to
              the management of  deciduous forests and to two factors affecting quality of
              life in the northeast - gypsy moth defoliation and the rapid spread of Lyme
              disease.
