Title       : Workshops in Molecular Evolution 1997-1999, Woods Hole, MA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1997   
File        : a9615098

Award Number: 9615098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell L. Sogin sogin@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. Davison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9615098  Sogin   The Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, MA, continues
              to support a valuable interdisciplinary series of summer workshops in Molecular
              Evolution for the years 1997 through 1999. The workshops provide training in
              molecular phylogenetics and evolutionary biology and promote collaborative
              efforts among molecular, cellular, and developmental biologists, physiologists,
              systematists, and theoreticians. Leaders in the fields of Molecular Evolution,
              Population and Systematic Biology, Developmental Biology, and Computational
              Biology present a lecture series that is integrated with a computer laboratory.
              During the first phase of each year's workshop, 60 students will attend a
              two-week lecture and laboratory session; in the second phase, up to 15 students
              will participate in a one-week special projects session. Topics covered reflect
              the expertise of the large staff of lecturers and track pioneering developments
              in the field, but usually include the theory of origins of life, phylogenetic
              reconstructions from molecular data, macromolecular sequence alignment
              techniques, current trends in molecular systematics, evolution of developmental
              pathways, and comparative genomics. In the computer laboratory, high-speed
              machines running a variety of operating systems are used to test theoretical
              concepts described in the lecture series. Guided by authors of phylogenetic
              analyses and designers of computer packages for gene sequence comparisons, the
              students explore a wide array of analytical techniques for the study of
              evolutionary phenomena using molecular data.   The opportunity to implement
              concepts described in the lecture series using diverse "state of the art"
              hardware frees the students from platform restrictions and is a distinguishing
              feature of this workshop. The special topics session will allow up to 15
              students to work on their individual research data sets under the guidance of
              leaders in the field of molecular evolution, including the two project
              directors, Drs. Sogin and Davis on. The course is designed for established
              investigators, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students from diverse
              biological fields, with attention as well to members of the biometrics
              community and faculty from undergraduate institutions.
