Title       : Geochemical Evolution of the Lithospheric Mantle Beneath East Antarctica:
               Connections to the Plate Tectonic Development of Eastern Gondwanaland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9615274

Award Number: 9615274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel B. Mukasa mukasa@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9615274  Mukasa  Ultramafic xenolith suites from Jetty Peninsula, East
              Antarctica,  provide an unparalleled opportunity to examine and describe the 
              consequences of magma/rock reactions equilibrated at  subcontinental mantle
              temperatures and pressures during the  lithospheric extension that fragmented
              eastern Gondwanaland at  the end of the Jurassic and beginning of the
              Cretaceous.  The  samples to be used in this study were collected by
              Soviet/Russian  expeditions during 1982-83, 1983-84 and 1986-87 and have been
              put  entirely at our disposal by Dr. Alex Andronikov of the Department  of
              Antarctic Geology, VNII Okeangeologia, St. Petersburg, Russia  (now on leave at
              the University of G ttingen, Germany).  This  award will support analytical
              work to determine the Nd, Sr, and  Pb isotopic compositions and Rb/Sr, Sm/Nd,
              and U/Pb elemental  ratios for clinopyroxene (cpx) and glass taken from garnet 
              lherzolite and spinel lherzolite xenoliths, and to perform the  same
              measurements on whole-rock samples from the host magmatic  rocks which are
              alkaline picrite, aln ite, and nephelinite in  composition.  In addition, the
              analytical program will include  concentration measurements, using secondary
              ionization mass  spectrometry (SIMS), of the rare earth elements (REE) and Ba,
              Cs,  Cr, K, Nb, Rb, Sr, Ti, V, Y and Zr (in different combinations) in  cpx,
              garnet and the various glasses present in some of the  xenoliths.  With his
              recent award of a fellowship by the  Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Dr.
              Andronikov will carry out  complementary studies on the same materials at the
              University of  G ttingen, Germany, focusing on xenolith mineral chemistry 
              determined by electron microprobe, and the major and trace  element
              compositions of the host rocks measured by X-ray  fluorescence spectrometry and
              Inductively Coupled Plasma-mass  spectrometry, respectively.    The combined
              data will allow, for a subset of the xenoliths,  assessment of the degree and
              effects of partial melting in  lherzolites derived from  different depths in
              the upper mantle,  and, for a glass-bearing subset, characterization of the 
              compositions of the melts which intruded the mantle lithosphere  and altered
              its composition by infiltration.  Through analysis of  these results, this work
              will lead to better understanding of the  scale of chemical interactions
              between melts and adjacent wall  rocks at mantle depths in the Earth.  The
              principal objectives of  this work are to model the magmatic processes which
              affect  subcontinental mantle lithosphere during rifting, reconstruct the 
              thermal evolution of the lithosphere during such deformation,  determine the
              provenance of magmas which intrude the lithosphere  at various times during its
              evolution, and with model ages,  establish a connection between the evolution
              of the lithospheric  mantle beneath East Antarctica and the plate tectonic
              history of  eastern Gondwanaland.  In addition to the importance of this work 
              to regional geologic models, understanding the processes that  control
              lithospheric evolution during extension will provide  important general
              constraints on thermo-mechanical models of  rifting, and on chemical evolution
              of the mantle beneath  continents.
