Title       : Highly Unsaturated Fatty Acids: The Missing Link in Aquatic Food Webs?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9615888

Award Number: 9615888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Goldman crgoldman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Brett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9615888  Goldman    In aquatic food webs, the flow of energy across the
              plant-herbivore interface is highly variable and the factors controlling the
              efficiency at which phytoplankton is converted to zooplankton biomass are
              poorly understood.  The objective of this research is to improve understanding
              of processes that regulate efficiency of energy transfer, secondary production
              and strength of trophic cascades.  The central hypothesis is that the highly
              unsaturated fatty acid (HUFA) content of seston strongly influences these
              processes. The biological significance of HUFA is a promising and rapidly
              developing area of research in a very wide variety of fields including animal
              cell membrane physiology, hormonal synthesis, human health and nutrition, and
              aquaculture.    HUFA are important for two principal reasons: first, they have
              a large impact on animal cell membrane fluidity and are precursors for
              eicosanoids (which includes prostaglandins, luekotrienes and other animal
              hormones), and second, they are only produced by plants.  Unlike many lipids,
              HUFA are not used for energy storage.  These facts lead to the specific
              prediction that during periods when the seston is dominated by phytoplankton
              with high HUFA content, coupling will be tight and energy transfer will be
              efficient, while during periods with low-HUFA seston, coupling will be weak. 
              This pattern has already been observed in comparisons among lake types, with
              very weak coupling in lakes dominated by HUFA-poor cyanobacteria and tight
              coupling in lakes dominated by HUFA-rich diatoms and cryptophytes.  In this
              research, controls on these patterns will be tested in a series of experiments
              to examine the relationship between seston elemental and biochemical
              composition and zooplankton growth and growth efficiency.
