Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language Ideology, Socialization and Pedagogy in
               a Haitian Rural Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9615518

Award Number: 9615518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bambi B. Schieffelin bs4@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     Currently, Haiti is undergoing vital political, social, and  linguistic
              reengineering. A new definition of national identity,  one which takes into
              account the voices --silenced for too long--  of the non-elite strata of the
              population, is being actively  negotiated. Central to ,the social construction
              of Haitian  identity is the ongoing debate regarding the status and roles of 
              Haitian Creole (Kreyol) and French. Placed within this larger  sociopolitical
              context, this research is ethnographic and  sociolinguistic, designed to
              examine the social construction of  Haitian identity. Focusing on six Haitian
              teachers working in a  rural primary school, the use of different registers in
              Kreyol  both within and outside the formal setting of the classroom will  be
              studied. Using the language socialization paradigm, studies  will analyze how
              the language choices and language practices of  teachers interacting both with
              students and their own children,  and students interacting with peers, are
              shaped by local  ideologies of linguistic variation and how they intersect with
               language ideologies held at the macrosociological level. In  addition to
              contributing an anthropological perspective on how  individuals assign meaning
              to their discursive practices, this  research will offer a case study of
              educational language politics  in a post-colonial nation of the Caribbean. It
              will also yield  empirical data in the largely unexplored area of register 
              variation in Kreyol. This project is funded jointly with the  Wenner-Gren
              Foundation.
