Title       : Mathematical Sciences: VIP/ Virtual Integrated Processing ofYBCO Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9615858

Award Number: 9615858
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2801691            (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Goodwin dgoodwin@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a multidisciplinary project focused on modeling, simulation, and control
              of metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) of YBa2Cu3O7-x (YBCO) thin
              films. The project team is composed of senior investigators from four
              universities (California Institute of Technology, New York University's Courant
              Institute, the University of Minnesota, and the Colorado School of Mines),
              working together with an industrial partner, Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
              (STI).    Superconducting thin film devices have enormous economic potential in
              several applications, for example as compact, high-performance microwave
              filters. However, to make this technology economically viable, a
              high-throughput, low-unit-cost superconducting thin film deposition process
              must be developed. One promising technique is metalorganic CVD.    The goal is
              to use mathematical tools and methods to enable virtual prototyping and control
              of a robust, high-throughput MOCVD process for manufacturing YBCO thin films
              suitable for microwave filter devices. The work will span several fields, and
              will include    *  fundamental investigations of epitaxial YBCO film growth   
              *  development of predictive models for MOCVD of YBCO based on fundamental
              principles,    *  simulation-driven design and construction of an advanced,
              prototype MOCVD reactor with integrated sensing and control    *  and
              development and experimental validation of model-based process  control
              strategies.    Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the NSF
              Engineering Directorate, and by DARPA.
