Title       : Dissertation Research: Prevalence & Etiology of Linear Enamel Hypoplasia in
               Non-Human Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9615006

Award Number: 9615006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7761               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Lukacs jrlukacs@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Lukacs/Guatelli-Steinberg  Linear Enamel Hypoplasia (LEH) is a dental defect
              appearing as one or more lines on a tooth's enamel surface. While a tooth is
              being formed, disease or poor nutrition can disturb enamel production resulting
              in LEH defects.  Many anthropological studies have used LEH as a tool for
              assessing levels of disease and/or nutritional stress in human populations. 
              Relatively little is known, however, about the prevalence and causes of LEH in
              non-human primate populations.  This study addresses questions regarding the
              distribution and causes of LEH in prosimians, monkeys, and apes. The following
              questions are examined using a variety of species from several museum
              collections:  1) Does the height of the tooth and the length of time a tooth
              takes to form have an influence on the variation in LEH patterns across
              different primate species?  2) Do males and females have differences in the
              degree to which they are affected by LEH and if so, does the difference relate
              to the tooth's height and/or its duration of formation?  3) Does captivity, and
              particularly the process of being transferred into captivity, have an influence
              on the frequency of LEH?  4) Does low ranking social status in a social group
              have an influence on the frequency of LEH?  The proposed research will help to
              provide an evaluation of LEH as a physiological stress indicator in non-human
              primates, and the comparative data will help resolve questions about LEH in
              humans. This research also will contribute to current knowledge about the
              degree of stress in nonhuman primates associated with a variety of living
              conditions, including the stresses of living in captivity or having subordinate
              social status.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
