Title       : There Goes the Neighborhood: Complex Interactions Between Squirrels, Crossbills
               and Conifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9615097

Award Number: 9615097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig W. Benkman cbenkman@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              It has been argued that the complexity of interactions among species in
              communities limits the potential for pair-wise coevolution.  There are,
              however, few studies that have tested specific hypotheses of how  other
              species' interactions influence coevolution between particular species pairs. 
              Red squirrels and red crossbills compete for pine seeds.  The investigator will
              test whether the red squirrels impede the coevolutionary interaction between
              red crossbills and pines by examining characteristics of seed and cone
              morphology of lodgepole pine where one or both competitors are present (or
              absent).  This research will extend studies of complex species interactions by
              determining the evolutionary significance of indirect interactions.  Second, it
              will distinguish among several potential explanations for why pair-wise
              coevolution may be uncommon. Third, it will distinguish between alternative
              hypotheses of coevolution.    This study will provide an understanding of the
              impact of various seed predators on geographic variation in an important
              commercial pine species, lodgepole pine, and will help elucidate the importance
              of different seed predators on pine evolution and diversity.  Second, it will
              provide the basis for understanding why the absence of species from communities
              can lead to rapid evolutionary change in the remaining species in these
              communities.  The implications are that introductions of formerly absent
              species may result in increases of the introduced species to the point where
              they become pests, may lead to local extinctions of unique species, and may
              result in the homogenization of formerly unique communities.
