Title       : Research Planning for Spatial Evaluation of Geotechnical Earthquake Hazards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9615707

Award Number: 9615707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17774              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronaldo Luna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Luna  9615707  This project is for research planning, submitted in response  to
              the Minority Research Planning Grant Program  Announcement, NSF 94-147, to
              support preliminary studies  related to the development of a competitive
              research project  and proposal.    During the past five years there have been a
              number of  research initiatives to model the spatial distribution of 
              geotechnical earthquake hazards. This interest in spatial  hazard modeling was
              due primarily to the increased use of  geographic information systems (GIS) by
              the engineering  community. A GIS is an ideal platform to analyze spatial  data
              and information that can aid in the decision making  process of engineers and
              officials. On the other hand,  agencies that respond to the catastrophes
              produced by these  hazards have moved forward to implement disaster response 
              systems that serve the areas in a state of emergency. An  integration of these
              two approaches will incorporate  engineering analyses into the procedures for
              mitigation and  response of earthquake damage, injuries, and loss of life.   
              The goal is to enhance an existing spatial analysis system  that evaluates the
              potential for soil failure through  liquefaction by adding a liquefaction
              deformation analysis  capability and by introducing two additional hazards:
              ground  motion amplification and slope instability.    The overall goal is to
              study spatial geotechnical earthquake  hazard models in the context of damage
              assessment and  disaster (emergency) response systems. The following are the 
              specific objectives for the first phase, namely proposal  development, of this
              project:    * Identify publications, research activities and individuals 
              related to hazard modeling in the area of geotechnical  earthquake engineering,
              and evaluate the implementation of  these models in a spatial framework. A
              focus on liquefaction  deformation analyses is anticipated.    * Study the
              current development of damage assessment and  disaster response systems,
              identify collaborators, system   developers and establish contacts with
              national emergency  agencies.    * Evaluate the integration of the hazard
              modeling with  disaster response systems.    * Prepare a comprehensive proposal
              to NSF focused on the  development of these geotechnical earthquake hazard
              modules  and their use with damage assessment and disaster response  systems.
