Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Procurement Problem Solving Modeling in Futuristic
               Enterprise Supply Chains Using Multi-Agents, Stochastic Programming and Game
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0075584

Award Number: 0075584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Soundar R. T. Kumara skumara@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vittaldas V. Prabhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Manufacturing companies need to make decisions regarding the choice of suppliers
              providing materials and the manufacturing sites for producing the final
              products. This decision-making problem in a supply chain is called the
              procurement problem.  The solution to the procurement problem mainly consists
              of the least cost transportation between the suppliers and the manufacturing
              sites, and between the manufacturing sites and the customers.  This research
              project  tackles the procurement problem when the manufacturing company uses
              freight companies as third party transportation.  The fundamental issues
              addressed are: (1) minimization of bid (transportation cost) for the
              manufacturing company, (2) maximization of payoff to the freight companies, (3)
              cost-optimal and cost-reliable estimation of the task-to-vehicle assignments by
              the freight companies, and (4) reliable fulfillment of the orders by the
              drivers of the vehicles.  The research seeks to  develop the problem solving
              model, communication mechanism and the solution process by using multi-agent
              paradigm, game theory and stochastic programming.  The approach will be to use
              the driver's local behavior along with travel time and service time acquired in
              real-time through on board sensors for determining the bottlenecks on a
              feasible route, and announce collaboration requests for contingencies.

This
              work will provide the basis for a scalable information intensive modeling and
              problem solving architecture for real-time procurement problem solving. 
              Results of this research can be extended to build an integrated supply chain
              infrastructure (in real-time), in the e-business world.

