Title       : Linking Rarity, Extinction Dynamics, and Life-History Traits: Across-Scale
               Investigations with Desert Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0075667

Award Number: 0075667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205138             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Fagan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendell L. Minckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              William Fagan

DEB 0075667

ABSTRACT

Extinction is one of the most
              fundamental processes in ecology-it shapes evolution, community structure, and
              patterns of biodiversity.  Yet studies of extinction are scarce, and studies
              involving hard data rather than theoretical models are almost totally lacking. 
              We will take advantage of an extraordinary database concerning Sonoran Desert
              fishes to investigate relationships between extirpation and patterns of rarity
              and life-history traits.  Key to our project is the development of new methods
              for quantifying patterns of rarity that are independent of the spatial scale of
              analyses.  Investigations of rarity are important because most species are in
              some way rare.  The details of how species differ in the "way in which they are
              rare" (e.g., in numbers, in spatial distribution) may be key to understanding a
              diversity of issues in ecology, including the assembly of communities and how
              species persist in the face of disturbances. 
Our unique database includes
              over 25,000 locality records spanning 160 years of field research for all 50
              known taxa of Sonoran Desert fishes. These fishes collectively constitute a
              gravely endangered biota for which data on the linkages among rarity,
              extinction-proneness, and life-history traits are of critical conservation
              importance.  The methods we apply are modifications of Kunin's (1998) notion of
              "scale-area curves," which provide a means of quantifying rarity patterns
              across spatial scales. Specifically, we will examine how the patterns of rarity
              these fish exhibit relate to their extinction dynamics (e.g., frequency and
              spatial pattern of extirpation events) and current levels of endangerment.  We
              will also determine the extent to which patterns of rarity and extinction can
              be predicted by life-history attributes.  
Biodiversity databases are an
              untapped storehouse of information on distributions of species.  They allow us
              to ask questions at different scales and with greater taxonomic breadth than
              any experiment or focused field study can.  They also allow us to ask
              altogether different questions-such as questions about extinction.  The
              research proposed here will explore linkages between rarity, extinction risk,
              and life-history traits, along the way defining limits on how existing
              databases can be used and clarifying how to improve development of new
              databases. 


