Title       : A Revisionary, Systematic Monograph of the Drosophila melanogaster Species Group
               (Insecta: Diptera: Drosophilidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0075360

Award Number: 0075360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Grimaldi grimaldi@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie Schawaroch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB- 0075360
David A. Grimaldi

Drs. David Grimaldi and Valerie Schawaroch of
              the American Museum of Natural History have been awarded a grant to study the
              anatomy, habits, distribution, and evolutionary relationships of a group of
              fruitflies used as an experimental foundation by many researchers in genetics
              and developmental biology. The common laboratory fruitfly, Drosophila
              melanogaster, is probably better known than any other animal species on earth. 
              Serious study of the fly began in 1910, when it was first used as the model
              organism for genetics.  Drosophila melanogaster actually belongs to a group of
              175 named species, the melanogaster species group, all of which live naturally
              in tropical forests of Africa, Eurasia, Australia, and Pacific Islands.  Some
              species, like D. melanogaster, breed in a great variety of fruits and
              vegetables, and have become widespread (even agricultural pests) wherever
              people have settled.  The diversity of species and habits, their ease of lab
              culture, and unique knowledge of the model species, has made the melanogaster
              species group an ideal subject for all aspects of comparative
              biology.

Nevertheless, accurate identification of species by specialists and
              especially other biologists like geneticists is very difficult. Distributions
              of individual species are poorly documented, and introductions of exotic
              species are therefore difficult to detect.  Collections of major natural
              history museums already harbor new species, awaiting complete description,
              naming, and classification.  The goal of the PIs is to rectify deficiencies in
              the basic systematics of the melanogaster species group, by production of a
              hard copy and digital synthetic monograph which will treat the anatomy, habits,
              distribution, and relationships of each species in detail, including newly
              described ones.  This monograph will stand as a major reference, and will be
              accompanied by an interactive, lavishly illustrated CD-ROM for identification
              of species.  The package will be of widespread use to students, laboratory
              technicians, quarantine entomologists, and various biologists, and will greatly
              facilitate all aspects of comparative biology wherever these flies are used,
              from genetics and physiology to development and evolution.
