Title       : POWRE: Differentials, Singularities and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0075057

Award Number: 0075057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne V. Shepler ashepler@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth I. Michler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE award supports a Visiting  Professorship at the Department of
              Mathematics at Northeastern University to study differentials  of isolated
              hypersurface singularities.  This award will allow the PI
to interact with
              several leading researchers in her field.  As part of the human resource
              development activities she will also sponsor the local graduate student seminar
              at Northeastern.

This research project combines theoretical expertise from
              cyclic homology  and K-theory and computer algebra techniques to  gather 
              information about invariants of isolated hypersurface singularities.  The most
              salient invariant of isolated hypersurface singularities is the so-called
              Tjurina number, or the dimension of the torsion module of differentials. She
              has identified the torsion module of differentials both as a Hodge-component of
              cyclic homology and as an ideal quotient. The latter identification has led to
              an efficient algorithm for computation of the number of generators exploiting
              Matlis duality in Gorenstein Artin Algebras. 

As part of her research
              activities the PI will  undertake the following  three-part project:


1. 
              The structure of isolated singularities:
The anticipated outcome of this
              research will be  an  upper bound for the number of generators and the length
              of  the module of differentials for 3 dimensional hypersurface singularities.
              

2.  Residues and Duality for isolated hypersurface singularities:
The goal
              will be an explicit description of residues and an investigation of the
              connection with inverse systems.

3.  Description of the module of
              logarithmic differentials and  connection with hyperplane/surface
              arrangements:
This part of the project will be  computational in nature and
              will focus on the use and development of algorithms for Groebner basis
              computations in exterior algebras.

This POWRE project is jointly supported
              by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS). 

