Title       : Design of Oxidative Capacities in Hymenopteran Flight Muscles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0075817

Award Number: 0075817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243534             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul K. Suarez suarez@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Flying insects achieve the highest known mass-specific rates of aerobic
              metabolism in the Animal Kingdom.  How these high metabolic flux rates are
              achieved to support flight is poorly understood.  During flight, steady state
              rates of mechanical work define rates of ATP hydrolysis and resynthesis.  The
              applicant asks how capacities for ATP synthesis are related to ATP requirements
              for flight.  In previous studies using honeybees (Apis mellifera), the
              applicant found remarkably close matches between enzymatic capacities for
              glycolysis and glycolytic rates achieved during flight.  As an extension of
              these studies, further research will be
conducted to determine how closely
              mitochondrial oxidative capacities match requirements during flight.  An
              important question is whether honeybee flight muscle mitochondria possess
              inherently higher capacities for respiration and oxidative phosphorylation than
              mitochondria from vertebrate homeotherm muscles.  Honeybee mitochondria will be
              isolated and characterized to determine how oxidative capacities are related to
              the respiration rates achieved in flight.  Further studies to investigate the
              basis for high respiration rates in honeybees will involve mechanistic studies
              of electron transfer reactions in isolated muscle mitochondria.

The
              relationships between biochemical capacities and physiological flux rates will
              be further explored in a comparative study using various species of Euglossine
              (orchid) bees, which vary greatly in size and are known to display an inverse
              relationship between body mass and mass-specific metabolic rate during flight. 
              It is proposed that in Euglossine bees, the inverse relationship between body
              mass and mass-specific aerobic metabolic rate is achieved partly through
              variation in mitochondrial content and structure, as well as higher enzyme
              turnover rates (electron transfer rate per enzyme molecule) with declining body
              mass. 
 
These unique studies will shed light upon how metabolic enzymes
              function in vivo and the principles governing the design of biochemical
              capacities.  The rules that govern how much enzyme is "enough but not too much"
              are poorly understood.  The applicant's research program is based on the belief
              that progress towards this goal is of fundamental importance to biology.
              





