Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research Grant: Cut Marks as Evidence of Precolumbian
               Human Sacrifice and Postmortem Bone Modification on the North Coast of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0075174

Award Number: 0075174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3241               (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Verano verano@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurel S. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	This project seeks funding for the analysis of osteological remains with cut
              marks associated with the Moche (A.D. 100-800) culture of ancient Peru.  The
              principal goal of this study is to investigate Moche human sacrificial
              practices as represented by physical evidence, and compare them to idealized
              behavior depicted in Moche iconography.  Recent archaeological discoveries have
              lent support to the argument that scenes of prisoner torture, sacrifice,
              mutilation, and dismemberment present in Moche iconography may depict actual
              events.  Studying the relationship between actual and idealized ritual behavior
              will result in a more complete understanding of the interrelationships between
              Moche technology, iconography, and ideology in particular, and of Moche culture
              in general.  This project will provide the baseline data necessary to address
              larger issues such as Moche socio-political relationships and religious
              cosmology.  
	In this proposed study, macroscopic and microscopic techniques
              will be used to analyze cut mark morphology and patterning from human skeletal
              remains excavated from Moche sacrificial contexts.  The human remains included
              in the primary data sample are from the Huaca de la Luna in the Moche Valley,
              El Brujo in the Chicama Valley, and Dos Cabezas in the Jequetepeque Valley. 
              For comparative purposes, human bones from a Lambayeque (A.D. 800-1375) mass
              burial and butchered faunal remains from Moche and Lambayque sites are included
              in this study.  Cut marks will be recorded in terms of frequency, location,
              morphology, length, orientation relative to one another and to the long axis of
              the bone, anatomical association, and inferred activity.  Casts of selected cut
              marks will be examined under a light microscope and a scanning electron
              microscope to record more detailed information on cut mark morphology and tool
              type (i.e., metal vs. stone).
	This dissertation research project will address
              questions of cut mark frequencies, patterning, differential treatment of
              sacrificial victims, and tool type.  It will also compare the patterns of cut
              mark location and frequency on human remains with those on butchered camelid
              remains and look for changes in the treatment of sacrificial victims
              cross-culturally through time.  In addition, this project will include an
              examination of cut mark patterns to see if they can be used to identify
              different types of ritual activities, and how the physical evidence compares
              with iconographic representations of ritual behavior.
	

