Title       : RUI: Phase Separation Behavior of Polymer Blends Modified by Copolymer Additives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0075968

Award Number: 0075968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Waldow waldowda@plu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific Lutheran Univ
	      
	      Tacoma, WA  984470003    253/531-6900

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This RUI award focuses on equilibrium thermodynamics and kinetics of phase
              separation in binary polymer blends with additives of various copolymer
              structures and concentrations.  The goal of this work is to better understand
              how copolymers can influence phase evolution and thermodynamic boundaries. 
              Expanding on previous research, scattering and simulation techniques will be
              employed.  The copolymers to be studied include random, block, multi-block, and
              graft copolymers.  The monomer composition of the copolymer will also include
              both symmetric and asymmetric compositions for some of the copolymers.  The
              specific experimental ternary system is a blend of polybutadiene, polystyrene,
              and various copolymers of butadiene and styrene.  The molecular weights of the
              homopolymers will be in two classes, a low molecular weight blend and a blend
              with molecular weight greater than the entanglement molecular weight.  These
              systems will be studied experimentally using temperature jump wide-angle light
              scattering as well as small angle neutron scattering (SANS) techniques when
              appropriate.  Lastly, Monte Carlo computer simulation techniques will be
              employed to model the experimental polymer systems.
%%%
The development of
              new polymer-based materials with tailored properties is often attempted through
              the mixing of currently existing materials.  Successful mixing has often been
              challenging to accomplish and to aid in the mixing an additive is commonly
              introduced as a compatibilizer.  In this work, the effects various
              compatibilizers have on the mixing of polymer materials will be studied with
              the goal being to better understand the fundamental processes involved.  As
              these effects are better understood, the knowledge can be applied to industrial
              systems with the aim of improving the processing and performance of
              polymer-based materials.

