Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: The Call to Mediumship: Social, Psychological, and
               Psychobiological Characteristics of Participant in an Afro-Brazilian Religion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0075796

Award Number: 0075796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Worthman worthman@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research, which rests at the interface of anthropology, psychobiology, and
              mental health, will make an important contribution to our understanding of the
              social, cultural, and biological dimensions of religious experiences. 
              Specifically, this project asks what characteristics distinguish religious
              adepts from other religious participants, and what if any relationship exists
              between certain types of religious participation, and mental illness, among
              members of a Brazilian religion.  Religious adepts, or mediums, have typically
              been viewed as socially and/or psychologically marginal individuals who use
              religious participation as a sanctioned outlet for tendencies often equated
              with western categories of mental illness. The biological nature of the altered
              states of consciousness often associated with this type of religious
              participation suggests that physiological antecedents might be among the
              factors that distinguish these individuals from other religious participants.
              The contribution of social and psychological factors to the development,
              expression, and experience of such physiological predisposition needs to be
              examined in contexts like Salvador Brazil, in which religious belief systems
              affect concepts of deviance and normality, and may shape different outcomes for
              such individuals than in environments dominated by psychomedical paradigms. 
              

This 12-month psychobio-cultural study proposes to employ a combination of
              ethnographic, psychological, and psychobiological methods to explore the
              confluence of three domains in the lives of adepts who play the role of spirit
              medium in Brazilian Candomble : social factors, including demographic and life
              history variables; psychological characteristics, including personality traits
              and psychological symptoms; and psychobiology, in the form of patterns of
              attention and arousal regulation.  This study will contribute to the following:
              1) explore factors that predispose individuals to mediumship, 2) address
              questions surrounding the relationship of ritualized altered states of
              consciousness to psychopathology, and 3) contribute information that could help
              improve psychomedical approaches to mental illness in non-western contexts.

