Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Emergent Organizational Structures in Multi-Agent
               Scalable Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0075462

Award Number: 0075462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhijit V. Deshmukh deshmukh@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ana Muriel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor R. Lesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith M. Whipple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of models of emergent
              enterprises that capture the independent behavior of each decision agent
              involved, as well as the effect of the interactions among agents. The modeling
              approach entails several steps. First, a representation scheme for the
              characteristics of individual participants will be developed. This
              representation will incorporate task information, organizational relationships,
              local and system level goals and possible changes in the environment.  Second,
              the agent representation will be transformed into a state space representation
              that is better suited for the overall study of the dynamics of the system. 
              Third, in order to incorporate the interactions between various agents, the
              problem will be formulated as an interacting particle system. A renormalization
              scheme will be used to reduce the system to a manageable size while maintaining
              an adequate level of accuracy. Different levels of aggregation will be tested
              to examine the tradeoffs between computational complexity  and accuracy.
              Finally, the modeling approach will be validated using data collected from
              leading companies in the food industry. These data will be used to construct
              agent representations and then to verify the performance estimates based on
              real world observations. Large scale multi-agent simulations will be used to
              empirically estimate the performance of a given organizational configuration
              and the results will be compared with the predictions of the analytical model.
              

If successful, the results of this research will allow  accurate prediction
              of the dynamics of emergent organizations and the performance of the system in
              the long run.  In addition, these models will provide insight into
              understanding the mechanisms that result in effective alliances and
              organizational designs. These models can be used by decision agents in an
              extended enterprise to estimate the performance of the enterprise resulting
              from different local decision strategies.

