Title       : LTREB: The Ecological Consequences of Forest Decline: Pattern and Process in Red
               Spruce Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0075610

Award Number: 0075610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100013             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Battles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075610
Battles
Forests throughout the world are experiencing worrisome
              increases in tree mortality. Some cases involve the introduction of exotic
              pests or exploitative land use practices. For others, the interaction of
              specifically ordered physical and biological factors produces a progressive
              loss of vigor that frequently ends in death, a phenomenon called forest
              decline. Atmospheric pollution often is implicated as a contributor to forest
              decline. The perceived threat to regional forest health concentrated research
              efforts on a search for causes. The consequences of decline on forest structure
              and function have received much less attention.
	The decline of red spruce in
              the northeastern United States presents an opportunity to study forest dynamics
              in the midst of an archetypal decline-disturbance. The extent, severity, and
              timing of spruce decline are such that the phenomenon can be tractably
              investigated from an ecological perspective. Given the weak factual foundation
              on which to build a conceptual understanding of the ecology of decline, a
              detailed case study quantifying pattern and process is necessary.
	This
              project will complete a 37 year record of vegetation change on Whiteface
              Mountain, New York - a record unparalleled in scope and scale for the
              northeastern subalpine forest biome. Re-measurement of 64 permanent forest
              plots stratified by land use, aspect, and elevation would provide robust
              estimates of growth, mortality, and recruitment rates for spruce and associated
              tree species. The health of the red spruce forests has been at the center of
              environmental, political and scientific controversies for two decades. Some of
              the arguments were about scientific findings that had to rely on inferential
              approaches to reconstruct the pre-decline status of the forest. Neither the
              knowledge base nor database existed to properly evaluate the magnitude of the
              decline and place it within an appropriate ecological context. The proposed
              research addresses these deficiencies and would perpetuate and preserve the
              best data available on forest population and community dynamics in this
              sentinel ecosystem.

