Title       : Phylogeny of the Genera of Entomobryidae (Collembola)Based on Nuclear DNA
               Sequences and Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0075548

Award Number: 0075548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Felipe N. Soto-Adames fsotoada@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0075548
Dr. Felipe Soto-Adames

Dr. Felipe Soto-Adames at the University
              of Vermont has received a grant to study the evolution of a highly unusual
              group of insects known as springtails (Collembola, non-insect hexapods).  
              Entomobryidae is the largest family of springtails  accounting for 21% of all
              species described in the class.  The family has a world wide distribution and
              in some tropical settings surpasses all other groups in number of species and
              individuals.  Despite this diversity relatively little work has been done to
              elucidate their evolutionary relationships.  This project is aimed at providing
              the first comprehensive estimate of phylogenetic relationships among genera of
              Entomobryidae using a data set that combines DNA sequences and morphology. The
              resulting phylogeny will accomplish three objectives: clarify relationships
              among the three largest groups of genera; test previous hypotheses suggesting a
              polyphyletic origin for Paronellidae; and provide a
much needed phylogenetic
              framework for future studies attempting to identify factors  contributing to
              the successful diversification of this family.  All genera of Entomobryidae
              will be examined to complete their morphological descriptions.  Because
              morphological characters alone may not resolve some relationships, this data
              set will be complemented with DNA sequences from two nuclear genes.  Elongation
              factor 1-alpha (EF1-a) and the small subunit of the ribosome (18S) are very
              conserved genes which allow rapid and consistent amplification via the
              polymerase chain reaction even for single individual springtails, some of which
              are 0.8mm long or less.  Despite their high degree of sequence conservation
              analysis of preliminary data shows that in combination with morphology these
              genes can resolve relationships at the subfamily level.  Resolution of the long
              standing problems of relationships among genera of Entomobryidae will result in
              a more stable classification, with more predictive power than the current
              system.  In addition, Dr. Soto-Adames will update the key to genera of
              Entomobryidae already available in the internet.  This key will be an excellent
              aid for agricultural entomologists given the recent increased use of Collembola
              as indicators of soil health.  Soil biologists will also benefit from
              clarifications of the taxonomy


