Title       : CISE Next Generation: Scalable Enterprise Systems: An Agent Based Modeling
               Framework for Scalable Interdependent Markets and Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0075506

Award Number: 0075506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alok Chaturvedi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elias N. Houstis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shailendra R. Mehta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charalambos D. Aliprantis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0075506
Alok Chaturvedi
Purdue University

CISE Next Generation
              Software: An Agent Based Modeling Framework for Scalable Interdependent Markets
              and Organization

ERP systems are ubiquitous in the world of business.  They
              are the source of competitive advantage that many companies enjoy today.  Yet,
              the process of installing and using them is time consuming, frustrating and
              costly, and often businesses are not able to capture the full value inherent in
              such systems.  We propose the construction of a scalable, agent based, virtual
              test bed for ERP systems.  The system that is proposed is called SEAS or
              Synthetic Environments for Analysis and Simulations.  When fully developed,
              SEAS used in conjunction with existing ERP systems will be helpful in creating
              a unified view of the business organization and its relation to the market
              mechanism.  Users will be able to better understand the complexities and
              usefulness of ERP systems

SEAS will enable researchers from around the world
              to create virtual firms, consumers and regulators.  Using the SEAS system we
              plan to model an actual industry, (for example the PC industry) to use it to
              examine the following issues:

The reconfiguration of the enterprise
              landscape as a result of electronic commerce-including questions of    
              dis-intermediation, and the reconstruction of the supply chain.
The creation
              computational models of competitive and cooperative behavior in a variety of
              market settings      involving the calibration of artificial agents against
              human players.

SEAS will also be used for teaching Economics and Management
              at all levels including high school, undergraduate, graduate and continuing
              education.



