Title       : Computational Methods in Laser Molecular Control and Parameter Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0075127

Award Number: 0075127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97377              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caixing Gu cgu@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip S. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will spend a year at the Center for Control Engineering and
              Computation (CCEC) of the University of California at Santa Barbara.  This will
              allow him to obtain a sound foundation in the fields of control systems and
              signal processing and apply this knowledge in his subsequent research.  The
              proposed work emphasizes the positive interactions between mathematics and
              engineering, and between theory and application.  

The investigator will
              initiate and collaborate on interdisciplinary research projects with members of
              the CCEC.  In particular, he will work with Professor Dahleh, the research
              director at the CCEC, in the area of control of molecular systems.  Based on
              the quantum models of the molecular systems they seek to answer the question of
              whether a certain chemical reaction rate is possible, and if so what sort of
              control input is needed.  This work will involve the determination of efficient
              computational algorithms for the assessment of controllability of realistic
              molecular systems.  

Along with Professor Chandrasekaran, also a member of
              the CCEC, the investigator will also develop fast and efficient algorithms for
              estimation and filtering problems.  A critical issue in estimation concerns the
              uncertainty model used.  If the uncertainty model does not give an accurate
              representation of the true uncertainty in the problem but rather overbounds it,
              then it will lead to overly conservative results with poor performance.  The
              investigator and Professor Chandrasekaran will explicitly include structured
              data uncertainties into least-squares type estimation problems.  Examples of
              structured uncertainties are displacement-structured (Toeplitz, Hankel and
              etc.) and block-structured uncertainties.  Displacement structures arise where
              there are LTI (linear time-invariant) systems.  Block structures are more
              common and will occur when there are sub-systems.  

The investigator will
              apply the newly acquired expertise in engineering and applied mathematics to
              supervise interdisciplinary senior projects for both mathematics and
              engineering majors and to better integrate mathematics into the engineering
              curriculum.   This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS).


