Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Scalable Algorithms and Distributed Agent
               Architectures for Adaptive Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0075572

Award Number: 0075572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vittaldas V. Prabhu prabhu@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Soundar R. T. Kumara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anand Sivasubramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for building highly scalable distributed algorithms
              for a new class of adaptive manufacturing enterprises using distributed agent
              architecture over the Internet. These algorithms will be used for reconfiguring
              work-in-process inventory levels and production schedules to adapt to changing
              market demands and supply-chain conditions.  Moreover, these algorithms and the
              necessary information will be embedded in agents geographically distributed
              throughout the enterprise.  The goal is to maintain responsiveness and
              effectiveness to enable the next generation of scalable enterprises.
              Scalability will be achieved through (1) distributed algorithms that are
              predictable and computationally efficient; (2) distributed agent architectures
              that support growth in size and capability; and (3) distributed clusters that
              provide rapid access to information using cost effective technologies. 
              Analytical models will be developed to predict the emergent behavior of such
              systems and stability and convergence properties of their computations.  These
              models will be used for assessing computational complexity, communication
              requirements, and scalability of the algorithms.  Distributed agent
              architecture will be developed in which clusters of similar agents will be
              identified based on task decomposition and task similarity.  An experimental
              prototype using a cluster of commodity PCs will be used to benchmark the
              computational load, communication network requirements, and overall scalability
              of the algorithms.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to
              effective integration of shop floor with enterprise software which is a
              critical issue in managing multiple enterprises effectively and optimally. 
              These research activities will involve active collaboration with several
              industry partners.  In the short-term, this work will provide a set of novel
              distributed algorithms and a suitable distributed agent architecture.  In the
              long-term, this work would provide mathematical and simulation models for
              designing the next generation of adaptive and reconfigurable enterprises by
              establishing scientific and technological insights into their scalability.

