Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: A User-Oriented Framework for Process and
               Performance Modeling of Enterprise Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0075588

Award Number: 0075588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manjunath Kamath mkamath@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy H. Lau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nikunj P. Dalal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Kolarik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the design, development, and testing of a
              user-oriented framework for process and performance modeling of enterprise
              systems.  This framework will integrate methods and technologies from the areas
              of engineering, process modeling, accounting, and distributed computing.
              Specifically, the framework will integrate Petri net theory, graphical process
              modeling techniques, activity-based management concepts, and the distributed
              computing paradigm of the Internet.  At the core of the framework is a set of
              graphical modeling constructs, a set of formal Petri net-based representation
              constructs, and a mapping scheme between the graphical models and Petri net
              representations.  A proof-of-concept Web-based software prototype of the
              framework will be developed using XML and object-oriented technologies.

The
              linkage between Petri net theory and graphical modeling techniques in a Web
              context represents a corner stone in the establishment of a theoretical
              foundation for user-oriented enterprise process modeling.  The research will
              bridge two distinct worlds, engineering and business, and will help in the
              design, control, improvement, and measurement of enterprise-wide processes.  In
              summary, the results of this project will provide a theoretical framework,
              which will further stimulate research and development of a new generation of
              business process and performance modeling tools that are user-oriented,
              graphical, scalable, and Web-based -- thereby impacting professional practice
              and stimulating business improvement.

