Title       : Molecular Studies of Cophylogeny: Microbes, Insects, and Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0075381

Award Number: 0075381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Hafner namark@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick A. Rainey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi L. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0075381
Mark S. Hafner

Dr. Mark S. Hafner, a zoologist at Louisiana
              State University, along with microbiologists Drs. Frederick Rainey and Naomi
              Ward-Rainey at the same institution have been awarded a grant to investigate
              the shared evolutionary history of three symbiotic organisms: small rodents
              called pocket gophers, the lice that live in the fur of the pocket gophers, and
              selected lineages of bacteria that live inside the lice.  Previous research by
              Hafner his other colleagues has established that the pocket gophers and their
              lice have been living together for millions of years, resulting in nearly
              identical phylogenies (family trees) for the gophers and lice.  The presence
              collaborative team now proposes to use molecular methods, including examination
              of DNA and RNA, to determine if the bacteria that live inside the lice also
              have shared a long history of association with their hosts. The major goal of
              this 2-year project is to characterize the bacterial community living inside
              the lice, and distinguish between lineages of bacteria that live more-or-less
              permanently inside the lice versus those that are mere transients passing
              through the louse's digestive tract.  This research will require careful
              examination and comparison of both intra-louse and extra-louse
              (gopher-associated and free-living) bacterial communities; hence, an important
              byproduct of this research will be characterization of the microbial
              communities associated with the entire pocket gopher burrow system.  The
              experimental approach will incorporate three lines of evidence: microscopic
              visualization of microbial communities inside the lice, culturing and DNA
              sequencing of bacterial lineages, and culture-independent molecular analyses of
              bacterial diversity. Ultimately, documentation of a long-term association
              between the bacteria and their hosts will allow for comparison of rates of
              genetic change in these two distantly related groups.

