Title       : Acquisition of a Helium Liquefier for Condensed Matter Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0075840

Award Number: 0075840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeevak M. Parpia jeevak@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wilson Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Reppy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel C. Ralph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0076508
Dean

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program to Tuskegee Institute, George Washington Carver Foundation is for the
              acquisition of two new instruments, a Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer (DMA) and a
              Thermomechanical Analyzer(TMA).  The DMA and TMA will establish new research
              capabilities at Tuskegee University and will be very useful in characterizing
              structure-processing- property relationships of advanced materials that are the
              focus of both current and future research.  Polymers and polymer-based
              composites are primarily studied at Tuskegee.  Several students in a newly
              established doctoral degree program in materials will benefit significantly
              from the use of these instruments in their dissertation research, with an
              additional eight (8) M.S. and six (6 ) undergraduate students in Chemistry,
              Mechanical and Chemical Engineering also using the instrumentation.  Use of
              these instruments will not only enable students to enhance the quality of their
              research, but will also allow them to strengthen the principles learned in the
              classroom with actual "hands-on" experience and significantly broaden their
              exposure to physical characterization of polymers and polymer-based composites.
              Undergraduate students involved in these projects will use their research to
              satisfy their senior project requirements.

This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research program to Tuskegee Institute, George
              Washington Carver Foundation is for the acquisition of two new instruments, a
              Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer (DMA) and a Thermomechanical Analyzer(TMA).  The
              DMA and TMA will establish new research capabilities at Tuskegee University and
              will be very useful in characterizing structure-processing- property
              relationships of advanced materials that are the focus of both current and
              future research.  Polymers and polymer-based composites are primarily studied
              at Tuskegee.  Several students in a newly established doctoral degree program
              in materials will benefit significantly from the use of these instruments in
              their dissertation research, with an additional eight (8) M.S. and six (6 )
              undergraduate students in Chemistry, Mechanical and Chemical Engineering also
              using the instrumentation.  Use of these instruments will not only enable
              students to enhance the quality of their research, but will also allow them to
              strengthen the principles learned in the classroom with actual "hands-on"
              experience and significantly broaden their exposure to physical
              characterization of polymers and polymer-based composites. Undergraduate
              students involved in these projects will use their research to satisfy their
              senior project requirements.

