Title       : Cofactor Role in Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0075902

Award Number: 0075902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pernilla Wittung-Stafshede pernilla@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wittung-Stafshede
MCB 0075902


This project aims towards probing the role
              of cofactors in protein-folding reactions. The targeted proteins are azurin,
              with a copper-ion cofactor, and flavodoxin, coordinating an organic flavin
              mononucleotide. Biophysical characterization by circular dichroism,
              fluorescence, and various biochemical methods will aid in revealing the effect
              of each cofactor on its corresponding protein stability and unfolded
              polypeptide structure. In each case, the effect on folding speed imposed by
              having the cofactor bound in the unfolded state will be probed by time-resolved
              experiments on the protein with and without the cofactor.  Time-resolved
              experiments will be performed using both stopped-flow mixing (ms time scale)
              and electron-transfer triggering (ms time scale) methods, the latter technique
              is based on laser-triggered photochemistry. Since oxidized azurin and
              flavodoxin are more stable than their reduced counterparts, rapid photochemical
              electron extraction from the unfolded, reduced protein at suitable denaturant
              conditions, may trigger folding of the newly oxidized protein. 

Mechanisms
              by which proteins reach their unique three-dimensional structures are still
              poorly understood. To reveal pathways governing the native forms of proteins,
              it is important to describe conformational preferences in the unfolded
              proteins. Any structural preference in the unfolded state will restrict the
              ensemble of conformations available to the polypeptide and therefore could
              guide, or direct, the folding process. Residual structure in an unfolded
              protein may exist due to coordination of a cofactor. This project will test if
              cofactors, in case of two selected cofactor-binding proteins, can act as
              nucleation points that influence speed and/or mechanism of polypeptide-folding
              reactions. 

