Title       : Investigations in Interior Point Methods and Convex Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0075722

Award Number: 0075722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osman Guler guler@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                           Abstract


The goal of this project is to develop algorithms and
              tools for interior point methods.  
The investigator will continue his ongoing
              research into interior point methods with 
the aim of advancing several
              outstanding topics in semidefinite programming (SDP) and 
related problems.  
              A better understanding of neighborhoods and paths is needed in SDP, 
and in
              programming over a symmetric cone in general.  This is necessary in order to
              
develop more efficient algorithms in terms of faster asymptotic convergence
              and numerical 
stability.  The investigator intends to develop effective
              mathematical tools to deal 
with these issues.  Programming over homogeneous
              cones and hyperbolic cones are likely 
to become the next emerging fields in
              interior point methods, and there is a need to 
develop efficient, long-step
              interior algorithms for such problems.  Eventually, 
interior point methods
              will need to deal with even more complicated industrial 
applications which
              must be solved efficiently.  The project will involve all of these 
areas of
              interior point methods; efficient algorithms will be devised in all cases,
              
and the needed mathematical tools will be developed.  The project also has
              two other 
goals. The first is an extension of duality theory beyond its
              traditional convexity, 
and the second one is the development of faster
              proximal point algorithms for convex 
programming.  
 

Interior point
              methods have been successful in solving many large scale industrial problems
              
in industry: in civil and electrical engineering, management, communication
              networks, 
finance, and others.  Further applicability of these methods
              depends on a better 
understanding of their behavior and continuous
              development of appropriate software.  This 
project aims to search for
              efficient algorithms and improved mathematical tools so that large 
scale
              optimization problems arising from diverse industrial disciplines can be
              efficiently 
solved. 















