Title       : LTREB: Evaluation of Landscape Patterns in Ecosystem Processes in Detrital-based
               Tropical Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0075339

Award Number: 0075339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine M. Pringle pringle@sparc.ecology.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Triska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075339
Pringle
The primary objective of this LTREB project is to understand
              the link between surface-subsurface water interactions and ecosystem processes
              in tropical streams in lowland Costa Rica. The focus is on how nutrient-rich
              groundwater affects microbially-mediated decomposition processes in streams
              where decomposing organic matter is the primary food source for higher trophic
              levels. The PI's will examine how landscape patterns in stream solute
              chemistry, resulting from variation in solute-rich groundwater inputs, affect
              patterns in growth and secondary production of stream-dwelling insects. First,
              the hypothesis that landscape-scale variation in insect secondary production is
              affected by inter-stream variation in the proportion of geothermally modified
              ground water will be tested. Second, to isolate the effects of phosphorus, a
              whole stream P enrichment study will be continued to evaluate phosphorus
              effects on insect growth rates, insect secondary production, rates of leaf
              decomposition, and microbial activity associated with leaf decomposition.
              Whether or not these processes become N limited as P availability increases
              will also be determined. The proposal studies will be the first to determine
              the long-term effects of nutrient enrichment in a detrital-based stream in the
              wet neotropics. In addition, this research will continue to build the only
              long-term data set on stream solute chemistry in primary lowland rainforest in
              Central America. Stream solute chemistry and ecosystem process-oriented data
              are of fundamental importance to understanding and management of tropical
              forest and in predicting effects of regional and potentially global
              environmental change on these threatened ecosystems. This long-term program has
              provided, and will continue to provide, critical information for other
              ecosystem studies, along with numerous opportunities for undergraduate and
              graduate research. 

