Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop: 25th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics
               and Contemporary Needs; Islamabad, Pakistan, June 24 - July 5, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a0075893

Award Number: 0075893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Talat S. Rahman rahman@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5943,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0075893 
Rahman

Description: This award supports the participation of US
              scientists in the 25th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and
              Contemporary Needs in Islamabad, Pakistan, June 26-July 15, 2000.  Dr. Syed
              Arif Ahmad, Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied Science, Islamabad,
              Pakistan is the organizer of the College.  Professor Riazuddin, Physics
              Department, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan is the College
              director.  Scientists from Europe, Pakistan and the United States will make
              presentations.  Attendees include scientists, mostly recent Ph.D.'s, from a
              number of developing countries in the region, including Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
              China, India, Iran, Nepal, Tajikistan, Turkey, as well as Pakistan.   They also
              include graduate students from Pakistan. The areas to be covered are frontiers
              of high energy physics; astrophysics, cosmology and relativity; and condensed
              matter physics.  Topics include the standard model of particle physics,
              supersymmetry and physics beyond four dimensions, precision electroweak tests
              and searches for the elusive Higgs particles, neutrino physics, evidence for
              neutrino oscillations from Super Kamiokandle and other detectors, superstrings
              and physics beyond four dimensions, heavy ion collisions and quark-gluon
              plasma, modern observations of the heavens using gamma astronomy, and gamma ray
              bursts.  Interactive sessions in the afternoons are planned as part of the
              College.  The organizers plan to publish a proceedings of the presentations.
              

Scope:  This award enables seven US scientists to participate in an
              important teaching and discussion exercise with scientists and students from
              several developing countries, thus contributing to capacity building within
              those countries.  This is the 25th year of the Summer College.  In previous
              years, in addition to support from Pakistani sources, the College has been
              sponsored by the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics in
              Trieste, Italy; the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing; and the Islamic
              Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 
              One of the expected outcomes of the Summer College is the generation of ideas
              for cooperative research projects among the participants.

