Title       : Localization in Semiconductor Heterostructures Studied by Charge Accumulation
               Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0075230

Award Number: 0075230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart H. Tessmer tessmer@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0075230
Tessmer, S.

This project exploits a novel technique, charge
              accumulation imaging (CAI) to investigate mesoscopic physics in two-dimensional
              electron systems (2DES) in GaAs-AlGaAs heterostructures.  CAI is a scanning
              probe method that permits minute amounts of electrical charge to be located
              with high spatial resolution in a cryogenic environment.  Although the
              technique is in its infancy, the initial experiments have shown that it can
              measure charging structures beyond the reach of other probes. The experiments
              address some of the more exciting topics in mesoscopic physics, with a central
              theme of studying electron-electron interactions and their interplay with
              disorder. To this end, we will perform two separate studies.  The first series
              of experiments will investigate electronic states in an applied magnetic field.
               At lower fields, we will probe the percolation patterns of the quantum Hall
              regime.  At higher fields, we will investigate the competition between
              fractional quantum Hall states and states in which individual electrons become
              localized.  The second series of experiments investigates the 2DES further
              confined by microfabricated gate electrodes to form quantum dots.  Using CAI,
              we can map-out the spatial characteristics of the dot's eigenstates --
              essentially imaging electron wavefunctions.  Hence, this study represents a new
              test of the quantum mechanics at play in these systems.
%%%

This research
              applies a novel scanning probe microscopy technique to probe the behavior of
              electrons confined to two dimensions in semiconductor systems.  By mapping out
              the electric field emanating from the semiconductor's surface, our technique
              can resolve the electronic structure, despite the fact that the electron layer
              is buried beneath the surface.  The goal of the project is to investigate the
              nature of interactions between electrons, and their interplay with defects and
              impurities within the semiconductor.  The research provides a challenging
              training ground for graduate and undergraduate students, as they master
              advanced microscopy and semiconductor microfabrication techniques.
***


