Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Contract-Market Enterprise Models - Factoring,
               Pricing and Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0075627

Award Number: 0075627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin O. Roundy robin@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Rappold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter L. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Muckstadt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo Gallego  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research considers an open view of enterprise based on the extreme premise
              that information is free - only physical transactions have cost.  This approach
              holds that specialized markets will become the
integrating element of supply
              chains, performing functions once performed by corporations.  Examples include
              markets that reserve capacity on manufacturing facilities at future points in
              time, or stockpile inventory in geographic regions to hedge against demand
              fluctuations. The modeling effort will postulate functions and services
              required by supply chains, and mechanisms by which contracts for these
              functions and services could be priced and traded in an open market. 
              Characteristics of Nash equilibria for these markets, such as a predicted shift
              in market power to consumers through the use of on-line auctions, will be
              studied analytically.  A computer simulation for studying the behavior of
              non-stationary, evolving contract markets in supply chains will be created. 
              Potential applications of the simulation include a market in which companies
              specializing in product design sell design services, and new generations of a
              product enter the market.  A game version of the market simulator will be
              created and disseminated for educational use.

Most enterprises have many
              activities that are shielded from the marketplace.  Enterprises that adopt an
              open view will increasingly price functions that they perform and consider
              contracting them out.  This
continuous competitive valuation of all services
              will drive dramatic improvements in economic efficiency.  This research will
              test the hypothesis that the benefits of centralized planning and vertical
              integration in supply chains can be obtained through dynamic markets.  It will
              identify new opportunities in e-business and supply chain integration.    It
              will gauge the potential for new markets and describe plausible rules
to
              govern these markets.  Finally, it will shed light on the capabilities that
              will allow enterprises to thrive in the future. 


