Title       : Fatigue of Nickel MEMS Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0075135

Award Number: 0075135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston O. Soboyejo soboyejo@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant is aimed at a fundamental understanding of the micromechanisms of
              fatigue crack initiation and growth in pure polycrystalline nickel MEMS
              structures produced by the LIGA method. The microstructures of the as-received
              and heat-treated nickel MEMS structures are studied using scanning and
              transmission electron microscopy techniques. The initial surface topologies are
              characterized with atomic force microscopy. Monotonic and cyclic deformation
              experiments are used to determine the constitutive behavior of the nickel MEMS
              structures. Micro-bending experiments measure the plasticity length scale for
              the subsequent modeling of deformation. Microstructural and substructural
              features associated with this length scale are elucidated via scanning and
              transmission electron microscopy. The fatigue lives of smooth (polished and
              unpolished) specimens are studied as functions of stress range and mean stress.
              The initial specimens are deformed continuously to failure to determine the
              number of cycles to failure. However, subsequent experiments will be stopped at
              different fractions of the measured number of cycles to failure to facilitate
              the incremental characterization of surface topology (atomic force microscopy),
              micro-texture (orientation imaging microscopy), and damage (scanning and
              transmission electron microscopy). At the senior high school level, the P.I.
              will interact with a senior class in a Princeton High School in a program
              designed to expose students to exciting MEMS technology. At the undergraduate
              level, two minority undergraduate students funded by the Princeton work/study
              program (per year) will work on the proposed program during the regular
              academic year,. Two additional undergraduate students (per year) from other
              institutions will be hired to work on the project during the summer, supported
              by NSF REU funds. 
%%%
The fundamental understanding gained from the
              experiments will guide the development of mechanism-based models for the
              prediction of fatigue crack initiation and growth. The implications of the
              models will be explored for damage tolerant design of Ni MEMS structures. The
              P.I. will develop a new graduate course on MEMS structures, including the
              fundamentals of MEMS fabrication, microstructures, textures, physical/
              mechanical properties and device considerations. Overheads and notes from the
              class will be made freely available to the global audience on the worldwide
              web. 
***

