Title       : Scalable Enterprise Sytems: Theory and Methodologies to Support the Operation of
               Flexible Production Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0075407

Award Number: 0075407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim Hammer jhammer@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel G. Conway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Geunes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Raymond Issa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1604,9147,9218,CVIS,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0075407
Hammer


This grant provides funding for developing fundamental
              theory and methodologies to support integrated operation of decentralized
              networks of firms producing goods under short lead times and variable demand. 
              Research under this grant is directed towards specifying a complete decision
              support and information architecture that enables automated negotiation among
              firms and improves overall performance of these Flexible Production Networks
              (FPNs). In support of this objective, the investigators have identified four
              high-impact research areas:
1)  Simulation, modeling, and analysis of FPN
              operation under imperfect information; 2) Capacity and cost models for firms
              that exist in multiple FPNs; 3) Generation of information 'wrappers' that tie
              firms' existing information systems to an information hub infrastructure; 4)
              Information models for representing complex FPN operations.  Each of these four
              areas is critical to achieving a feasible computational infrastructure that
              represents the diverse production technologies within the FPN, while addressing
              issues of scalability, rapid deployment, and decentralized
              operation.

Successful conclusion of this research will generate advances in
              operational support for firms existing within FPNs, as well as broader advances
              in theory concerning the deployment of information and decision support systems
              in a multi-firm environment.  Current industrial initiatives in
              extended-enterprise resource planning systems are a positive step towards
              deployment and simplification of electronic transactions; however, they lack a
              framework for analysis and decision support for production involving a network
              of firms. Research under this grant provides such a framework, with a focus on
              low overhead, dynamic deployment of a computational, and flexible and scalable
              decision support for decentralized, multi-firm operations.  Research in these
              areas will also broaden existing theory in decision support and computer
              science, where current models tend towards exact analysis and representation of
              limited or highly specific systems.  In a broad sense, this work will re-focus
              current capabilities towards supporting more complex, flexible systems.


