Title       : Complex Fluids With Extended, Rigid Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0075810

Award Number: 0075810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Russo paul.russo@chem.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project will lead to improved understanding of entanglements and tenuous
              structures in complex fluids containing rigid components.  It will include a
              study of the rotation and translation of rigid rods in entangling and
              non-entangling polymer solutions.  The model system here is composed of tobacco
              mosaic virus and linear or globular dextran.  Related experiments concern
              diffusive transport in liquid crystals, emphasizing synthetic polypeptides of
              variable length to determine the effects of flexibility.  Characterization of
              poly(stearylglutamate in dodecane will illuminate the unique properties of
              this, perhaps the simplest of all reversible gels.  Studies of self-assembling,
              two-directional arborols will emphasize basic properties such as stability. 
              Equally important are the mechanisms by which the self-assembly can be
              controlled.  Techniques include static and dynamic light scattering,
              fluorescence photobleaching recovery, pulsed field gradient NMR spectroscopy,
              and to-be-developed birefringence methods.

Complex fluids with rigid,
              extended components are important precursors to high-strength fibers and films.
               They also pose very challenging fundamental questions, such as the nature of
              entanglements.  The experiments will provide the observations to support
              theoretical developments elsewhere, creating together the underpinnings for
              rational design and processing of better materials.  Good chances for
              serendipitous discovery exist, particularly in the self-assembling arborols,
              which show preliminary signs of unusual long-range structures.  Potential
              applications include diffraction gratings and other optical devices, superior
              stationary phases for enhanced throughput in analytical separations, and more
              efficient systems for control of polymer/colloid stability, which is important
              in environmental remediation and nanofabrication.  Students and others will
              work in an atmosphere that blends classroom and practical laboratory education
              with fundamental research and partnership with industrial and other off-campus
              scientists.

