Title       : Acquisition of a Variable-Temperature Scanning Probe Microscope for Surface
               Science Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0075824

Award Number: 0075824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric I. Altman Eric.Altman@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor E. Henrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0075824
Altman

This is an award to the Departments of Chemical Engineering
              and Applied Physics at Yale University for the acquisition of a
              variable-temperature ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) scanning probe microscope (SPM).
              The SPM will be capable of acquiring scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and
              contact and non-contact scanning force microscopy (SFM) images at rates
              exceeding one image per second at temperatures between 100 and 1000 Kelvin. In
              addition, atom-tracking techniques will be implemented to enable diffusion
              measurements at hopping rates up to 104 per second, and to lock onto individual
              surface sites to allow catalytic processes occurring on the time scale of
              microseconds to be studied on a local level. The SPM system will be linked to
              two existing surface analysis systems and thus the complete system will enable
              the electronic and chemical properties of the same surface to be characterized
              by a wide range of techniques that probe different length and energy scales.
              This new system will be used to study problems in film growth, interface
              formation and dynamics, the electronic properties of interfaces, and
              heterogeneous catalysis. Both the construction of the new SPM system and the
              projects that will use the new equipment closely integrate research and
              education.
***
The Departments of Chemical Engineering and Applied Physics at
              Yale University will acquire a variable-temperature ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV)
              scanning probe microscope (SPM). By incorporating both scanning tunneling
              microscopy (STM) and scanning force microscopy (SFM) in a multi-chamber UHV
              system equipped with an array of surface preparation and analytical techniques,
              Professor Altman and co-workers will be able to investigate on the atomic-scale
              the full range of technically important and scientifically interesting surfaces
              and interfaces including insulators, semiconductors and metals. Further,
              varying the temperature between 100-1000 Kelvin will allow them to control the
              rate of surface kinetics enabling the characterization of the mechanisms and
              kinetics of surface phenomena such as catalysis by direct observation on the
              atomic scale. The results obtained with this equipment will impact our
              fundamental understanding of film growth and interface formation as well as
              heterogeneous catalysis. Both the construction of the new SPM system and the
              projects that will use the new equipment closely integrate research and
              education. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in all phases
              of the design, assembly and testing of the new system, providing them a unique
              educational opportunity to learn first-hand about the design of complex
              scientific equipment.


