Title       : POWRE: Molecular Mechanisms of Binding of Gd(3+) Complexes to Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0075042

Award Number: 0075042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatyana I. Smirnova   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Smirnova
MCB 0075042

The aim of this research is to understand molecular
              mechanisms of reversible binding of paramagnetic contrast agents (PCA's)
              developed for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to biological macromolecules,
              phospholipids and proteins, and the effort of these interactions on relaxivity
              of PCA's.  Contrast-enhanced MRI has wide applications in clinical work and is
              a powerful tool in research.  New applications are emerging in microimaging and
              developmental biology.  However not enough is known about structure-function
              relationships of PCS's, especially the molecular mechanisms of reversible
              binding of PCA to biological macromolecules, and the effects of biological
              environment on relaxivity of PCA's.  This research will characterize the
              binding interactions and investigate the effect of these interactions on
              relaxivity of PCA's through systematic studies of a series of lanthanide ion
              complexes (Gd(III) with different lipophilicity by a combination of
              spectoscopic techniques, including fluorescence, nuclear magnetic resonance,
              and electron magnetic resonance at multiple and high magnetic fields.  Model
              phospholipids will be used to see how lipophilicity affects the ability of
              PCA's to interact non-specifically with biological  membranes and how these
              interactions change relaxivity of the Gd(III) complex.  PCA non covalent
              binding with human serum albumin will use a combination of spin-labeling EPR,
              fluorescence, and  HF EPR to map the PCA binding sites over the albumin
              molecule and to study how changes in lipophilicity of these complexes affects
              the binding.  Fatty acid binding proteins, which have a single but very
              different binding site than albumin will also be examined.  This is a POWRE
              proposal, which will allow the PI who is trained as a physical chemist to
              extend her skills into molecular biology.

