Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Study of Nonlinear Nanoscale Localization
               and for Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0075930

Award Number: 0075930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91672              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Sievers sievers@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This is an award to Cornell University for the acquisition of instrumentation
              to study nonlinear nanoscale localization and student training. A pump-probe
              broad band spectrometer with associated detectors will be purchased to build a
              new experimental platform for the production and investigation of intrinsic
              nonlinear nanoscale localization of spin waves in both classical and quantum
              antiferromagnets.  This instrument will make possible both the production of
              intrinsic localized spin waves in C(2)CuCl4 and other antiferromagnets over a
              large frequency region. It will also permit time dependent and transport
              studies of these nanoscale objects down to the milliseconds and
              sub-milliseconds time regimes.  Both the high power and the large tuning range
              are essential features of this specialized instrumentation for the experimental
              investigation of a new fundamental nanoscale localization phenomenon in
              condensed matter physics. The general physical feature that such localization
              in periodic lattices depends only on nonlinearity plus discreteness ensures
              that graduate and undergraduate students working in this area will have
              training in nonlinear dynamics with applications spanning a variety of length
              scales, ranging from the nano- to the macroscopic ones.

This is an award to
              Cornell University for the acquisition of instrumentation to study nonlinear
              nanoscale localization and student training. This experimental instrumentation
              is directed at probing the underlying simplicity of the dynamics of nonlinear
              periodic physical systems by exploring large amplitude nanoscale excitations in
              atomic lattices.  The work is expected to influence other developing areas of
              nonlinear dynamics including intrinsic localized electromagnetic modes in
              optical switches in nonlinear photonic crystal waveguides, intrinsic
              localization in periodic Josephson junction arrays, mechanical localization in
              micro-electrical-mechanical systems, acoustic localization of energy in an air
              filled tube with a periodic array of resonators and, at the largest scale, the
              nonlinear localization within multibunch modes in high energy accelerators. 
              Graduate and undergraduate students working in this new research area will have
              training in condensed matter nonlinear dynamics with applications involving
              technologically important length scales.



