Title       : Collaborative Research: Postmating Reproductive Isolation Among Drosophila
               arizonae and Drosophila mojavensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a0075312

Award Number: 0075312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Therese A. Markow tmarkow@arl.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075312  
Markow

The crucial event for the origin of new species is the
              formation of reproductive isolation.  How one species splits into two
              reproductively isolated groups of organisms, however, is poorly understood. 
              Fruitflies of the genus Drosophila have been a model system for studies of
              speciation.  These studies have focused on premating or postzygotic isolating
              mechanisms, or those processes that determine whether or not males and females
              mate and whether or not they produce viable and fertile offspring,
              respectively.  The multitude of events occurring between insemination and egg
              fertilization has been largely ignored in studies of speciation.  Recent work,
              however, indicates that sperm, seminal fluid, and female reproductive tract
              characteristics that are of central importance for successful reproduction are
              rapidly divergent.
  
The investigators postulate that this divergence will
              cause diminished reproductive success whenever members of genetically
              differentiated populations interbreed, and they propose a series of experiments
              to explicitly test this hypothesis using D. arizonae and its sibling species D.
              mojavensis, both endemic to North America.  Because D. mojavensis from
              different geographic regions are considered to be incipient species, the
              investigators will take advantage of a naturally occurring continuum of
              reproductive isolation for testing their predictions.  Preliminary data
              indicate that populations of D. mojavensis differ significantly in the traits
              to be measured.  By conducting laboratory crosses between members of different
              populations and species with known reproductive characteristics, the
              investigators will determine how these characteristics lead to reproductive
              barriers central to the formation of new species.  Results of these experiments
              may have important implications for the formation of new species.


