Title       : RUI: Thermal and Opto-rheological Studies of Poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV)
               and PPV Derivatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0075820

Award Number: 0075820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia A. Arbuckle-Keil   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Poly(p-phenylene vinylene)(PPV) and PPV derivatives are of interest for their
              potential in a variety of electronic and optical device applications.  Because
              the final PPV polymer is highly conjugated and insoluble, the preferred
              synthetic method follows a precursor polymer route.  The routes are referred to
              as: sulfonium precursor route (SPR), xanthate precursor route (XPR) and
              chlorine precursor route (CPR).  In this project, PPV and PPV derivatives will
              be synthesized via each of these routes depending on the desired product.  PPV
              will be synthesized from the xanthate precursor which results in a more
              amorphous polymer.  The thermal elimination reaction mechanism and the kinetics
              of the reaction will be analyzed.  This will provide the half-life (shelf-life)
              of the precursor which is important for commercial application of the polymer. 
              A full understanding of the thermal elimination reaction is important because
              the conditions of the thermal elimination reaction influence the properties of
              the final product.  Other PPV derivatives that will be synthesized include, for
              example: poly(2,5-dimethoxy-p-phenylene vinylene)(DM-PPV);
              poly(phenoxyphenylene vinylene)(PO-PPV) and poly(2,3 diphenyl phenylene
              vinylene)(DP-PPV).  Their thermal properties will be analyzed as discussed
              above for the xanthate precursor.  In addition, the opto-rheological technique
              that will be employed is referred to as dynamic infrared linear dichroism
              (DIRLD) and has only recently been applied to the analysis of electroactive
              polymers.  This study will relate the molecular motions (vibrational modes in
              the infrared region) to the bulk macroscopic properties observed by dynamic
              mechanical analysis (DMA).
%%%
Students will be actively engaged in materials
              research from the synthesis of the polymer precursor through to
              characterization by thermal analysis and DIRLD.  Undergraduate students will
              work with a graduate student and the PI.  Results will be discussed at weekly
              group meetings where ideas can be exchanged and questions answered.  The
              research will be formally presented at the local, regional and national levels
              with publications submitted to referred journals for dissemination to the
              materials science community.

