Title       : POWRE: Novel Pectin Metabolizing Enzymes in Ripening Tomatoes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0075074

Award Number: 0075074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerry A. Prody prody@chem.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT

Novel Pectin Metabolizing Enzymes in Ripening Tomato
              Fruit
Proposal: 0075074
Gerry Prody, PI

The focus of this project is the
              isolation and characterization two pectin hydrolyzing enzymes, 
              rhamnogalacturonase and pectin acetylesterase, in ripening tomato fruits. The
              investigator plans to (1) trace the development of these enzyme activities as
              fruits begin to ripen and (2) begin purification of one or both of these
              proteins.  If successful, this work will help to explain why fruit cell wall
              pectins are extensively solubilized before the more well-known
              polygalacturonase enzymes are produced during ripening. 


Many biochemical
              changes occur as a fruit ripens.  In this study, the investigator will look at
              one or more of these biochemical events during ripening of tomato fruit.  As
              ripening occurs, the fruit turns red, develops flavor and aroma, and softens. 
              One of the events involved in this softening is the breakdown of the cell walls
              in the fruit.  Cell walls consist of complex arrays of sugars strung together
              and cross-linked to one another to make a fairly rigid assembly that protects
              the cell from damage and helps maintain the structure of plant tissues.  As
              cell walls deteriorate, small chains of sugars, called oligosaccharides, are
              released.  Some of these oligosaccharides may further stimulate the ripening
              process.  In this study, the investigator will attempt to purify and
              characterize one or more of the enzymes involved in cell wall degradation
              during ripening.  In particular, she will study an enzyme that degrades pectin,
              one of the carbohydrate components of plant cell walls.  The enzyme,
              rhamnogalacturonase, cleaves bonds between the sugars rhamnose and galacturonic
              acid in pectin.  This enzyme can serve to promote softening by degrading the
              pectin molecules and to regulate ripening by releasing stimulatory
              oligosaccharides.  In addition to revealing important aspects of
              ripening-related biochemistry, this project has relevance to applied
              post-harvest biology.  The most important problem that limits storage and
              transport of harvested fruits is premature softening.  This project may
              identify important targets for technologies aimed at manipulation of fruit
              ripening.  This is a POWRE project; the award will enable Dr.Prody to acquire
              the expertise necessary to establish this new line of research in her
              laboratory.



