Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of Fatty Acids and Limiting Elements in
               Biogeochemical Cycling and Food Web Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0075591

Award Number: 0075591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Goldman crgoldman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

00-75616
Brett

Collaborative Research - The Role of Fatty Acids
              and Limiting Elements in Biogeochemical Cycling and Food Web Dynamics

The
              food quality of plants for herbivores may have profound impacts on a wide
              variety of processes.  These include eutrophication (or nuisance algal blooms),
              the strength of interactions between different levels in the food web (i.e.
              plants and herbivores), biomass accumulation at each trophic level, and
              fisheries production.  The objective of this research is to determine the role
              essential fatty acids and elements such as phosphorus and nitrogen play in
              regulating these processes.  Experimental and modeling results suggest that
              when algal essential fatty acid content is high, zooplankton grow rapidly and
              build up a biomass sufficient to suppress plants.  This results in relatively
              high water quality (high water clarity due to low algal biomass) and high
              fisheries production. Alternatively, algae with low essential fatty acid
              content will result in poor water clarity and zooplankton growth, and reduced
              fisheries production.  The investigators plan to use fatty acid analyses to
              examine energy flow through aquatic food webs: from plants to herbivores to
              carnivores to economically important fish.



              

Abstract

00-75591
Goldman

Collaborative Research - The Role of Fatty
              Acids and Limiting Elements in Biogeochemical Cycling and Food Web
              Dynamics

The food quality of plants for herbivores may have profound impacts
              on a wide variety of processes.  These include eutrophication (or nuisance
              algal blooms), the strength of interactions between different levels in the
              food web (i.e. plants and herbivores), biomass accumulation at each trophic
              level, and fisheries production.  The objective of this research is to
              determine the role essential fatty acids and elements such as phosphorus and
              nitrogen play in regulating these processes.  Experimental and modeling results
              suggest that when algal essential fatty acid content is high, zooplankton grow
              rapidly and build up a biomass sufficient to suppress plants.  This results in
              relatively high water quality (high water clarity due to low algal biomass) and
              high fisheries production. Alternatively, algae with low essential fatty acid
              content will result in poor water clarity and zooplankton growth, and reduced
              fisheries production.  The investigators plan to use fatty acid analyses to
              examine energy flow through aquatic food webs: from plants to herbivores to
              carnivores to economically important fish.


