Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: An Enabling System for Market-Driven Collaborative
               Product Design and Recycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0075575

Award Number: 0075575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Ryan smryan@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo Min  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abir Z. Qamhiyah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas D. Gemmill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sigurdur Olafsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pius J. Egbelu  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to investigate how enterprises can use the Internet
              to collaborate on design for recycling and cooperate in reclaiming valuable
              parts and materials from retired products. The project's goal is to lay the
              information system foundation for a new industry sector of return centers for
              electronic products. These centers would be supported by manufacturer
              involvement with a management and archival (MA) subsystem and a product design
              advisory (PDA) subsystem. By subscribing to the MA subsystem, manufacturers
              could employ independent return centers as their agents for collecting their
              retired products.  The PDA subsystem would archive design principles and
              disassembly methods for a consortium of manufacturers that collaborate on
              product design research. The current exploratory phase of research focuses on
              designing scalable system architectures for the MA subsystem, developing an
              integrated design database for the PDA subsystem, and choosing methods to
              ensure systems security.  The research tasks include requirements analysis,
              preliminary functional analysis and requirements allocation, model development,
              initial prototyping, testing and initial specifications for a conceptual design
              of the system.

Implementation of the results of this research, if
              successful, will allow a return center to consult the PDA archive to retrieve
              methods for disassembly, query the MA subsystem to determine the best market
              value for components and materials, and track the locations and identities of
              the products manufacturers and recyclers.  The MA subsystem will handle and
              archive all financial transactions between the return centers and manufacturers
              who buy back their retired products, components, and materials.  The system
              will encourage manufacturers to collaborate in research on product design for
              recycling, consumers to return retired products for recycling, and investors to
              establish retired product collection and recycling enterprises.  The results
              concerning scalability, database design and security will apply to other
              enterprise computing applications as well.

