Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: A Modular, Scalable Approach to Modeling and
               Analysis of Semiconductor Manufacturing Supply Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0075655

Award Number: 0075655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Fowler john.fowler@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan L. Shunk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl G. Kempf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Ellram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dieter H. Armbruster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The semiconductor manufacturing supply chain is very complex spanning multiple
              manufacturing sites in various locations around the globe. This grant provides
              funding that will allow the multidisciplinary research team to use experience
              gained in factory control to develop control regimes for semiconductor supply
              chains. The goal is to efficiently and effectively a) model and simulate the
              physical entities, b) model and simulate the range of decision algorithms, and
              c) interface the two. The research team has taken a first step toward this. To
              depict the physical system a basic module was developed that could be used to
              represent a factory, a transportation link, or a warehouse. The basic module is
              made up of capacity and delay sub-modules. A supply chain is modeled by
              connecting basic modules together in series or parallel. This approach provides
              reasonable execution times while still capturing the qualitative behavior of
              these systems. Therefore, the research team will first determine reasonable
              ways to parameterize the basic module. Next, software architectures to support
              the modeling and analysis of semiconductor supply chains and ensure scalability
              will be investigated. Real semiconductor supply chain problems (supplied by the
              industrial participants) will be used in addressing both the parameterization
              and architecture issues. Finally, how the approach can be implemented in
              next-generation ERP systems will be studied.

If successful, this research
              will have an impact on the System Architecture of next-generation ERP systems
              by determining how to include scalable "what-if" capabilities in these systems.
              It will also facilitate Collaborative Decision Making in scalable enterprise
              systems by allowing one group of people to describe the way their factories
              work and another group of people to specify enterprise decision policies.
              Finally, it will allow for the analysis of various Supply Chain Design issues
              by providing new modeling and analysis capabilities. 

