Title       : Pseudoconcave Sets and Positive Closed Currents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a0075154

Award Number: 0075154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95560              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew Slodkowski zbigniew@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:
   The general aim of this project is to study the structure of
              positive 
closed currents supported by topologically thin pseudoconcave sets,
              focusing 
primarilly on the relationship between properties of currents and
              their 
supports. Topologically thin sets in two complex dimensions are those
              fibered 
along  nowhere dense sets by a family of complex lines; their most
              important 
subclass is formed by pluripolar pseudoconvex ones. The specific
              questions to 
be considered group around the problems of characterization of
              supports of 
positive closed currents, characterization of positive closed
              currents in 
topological terms, uniqueness phenomena  for positive closed
              currents, and 
related problems of branching structure of thin pseudoconcave
              sets. Problems 
involving the branching structure concern analogs of the
              mondromy group for 
thin pseudoconcave sets and properties of the order
              structure on the reduced 
homology group of the complement of the set in the
              ambient complex projective 
space.
   In the general context the problems
              addressed in this project concern the 
the structure of currents with the
              singular supports. Currents are 
generalizations of distributions to the
              geometrical setting and, as such, are
useful to analize low regularity
              phenomena that are studied with increasing
frequency in modern science. The
              broader aim of this project is to contribute 
to the understanding of the
              notion of current and to increase its applica- 
bility.


