Title       : Interfacial Creep in Multi-Component Materials Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0075281

Award Number: 0075281
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Indranath Dutta idutta@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    408/656-2099

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0075281
Dutta

Although interfacial sliding has been noted in many materials
              systems, a clear mechanistic picture of the phenomenon is yet to emerge. Part
              of this is associated with the difficulty of designing experiments which allow
              the strain response of the interface to be distinguished from obfuscating
              superimposed effects (such as creep of one or both components adjoining the
              interface). In previous NSF work, it was demonstrated that this challenging
              task could be accomplished by a combination of carefully designed experimental
              and analytical approaches. The current research aims to: (1) develop
              experimental and analytical approaches to study interfacial creep in both bulk
              and thin film materials systems; (2) develop mechanistic insight into
              interfacial sliding by correlating the sliding kinetics with the interfacial
              morphology, structure and chemistry; (3) generate sliding kinetics data for
              selected interfaces of practical importance, and (4) evaluate the impact of
              sliding on the performance of two engineering systems of importance (fibrous
              composites and film-substrate systems). 
%%%
Interfaces between dissimilar
              materials are critical to the performance of many engineering materials. Often,
              large shear stresses exist at the interface, and at least one of the materials
              adjoining the interface can be subjected to high homologous temperatures during
              service. This enables diffusionally accommodated interfacial sliding
              (interfacial creep) to occur, with potentially severe impact on the dimensional
              stability and reliability of the system of interest. Possible examples include
              metal-matrix composites subjected to thermal cycling, thin-film microelectronic
              devices subjected to Joule heating during service or thermal cycling during
              fabrication, and flip-chip solder joints in power electronic packages subjected
              to thermal excursions during on/off cycles.
***



