Title       : SGER: Culture of Gigantic Bacteria: Prerequisite for Advanced Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0075738

Award Number: 0075738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57954              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Linn Montgomery Linn.Montgomery@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop pure cultures of giant Eubacteria
              (to at least 600 x 80 micrometers) which occupy the central intestines of
              tropical reef-dwelling surgeonfishes ("tangs" of the aquarium trade, Fam.
              Acanthuridae).  Only one species of these bacteria has been named (Epulopiscium
              fishelsoni from the Red Sea) although approximately 10 structural "morphs"
              (here termed "epulos") are distinguishable in a light microscope.  Epulos
              represent a distinct phylogenetic lineage related to Clostridium and
              Metabacterium, and exhibit a daily life cycle of cell growth and reproduction
              that tracks the feeding and resting behavior of the host fish.  Several
              characteristics emphasize the unique nature of these cells:  epulos possess a
              distinct nucleoid separated from the cytoplasm by an unidentified, thin,
              membranous structure; condensed DNA is arranged in elongate, chromosome-like
              structures with cross-striations similar to those seen in dinoflagellates,
              so-called "mesokaryotes;" the cytoplasm is packed with an intricately-folded
              system of what appear to be membranes; cells are highly motile, driven by a
              covering of bacterial flagella.  Cells are large enough to allow use of light
              microscopy at moderate magnification (100-400 x in most previous studies),
              manipulative and invasive techniques (e.g., microprobe, microinjection), and
              other methods normally tractable only with large cells.  Such techniques would
              complement standard physiological, biochemical and molecular microbiological
              methods used to study the "inner workings" of bacterial cells, as well as to
              understand:  factors which limit cell size and morphology in prokaryotes;
              vertebrate host-symbiont interactions in an essentially open system (gut vs.
              specialized culture organ); and bacterial dispersal and evolution in widespread
              but patchily distributed habitats (surgeonfishes).  Major advances on any
              front, however, are hampered by the inability to maintain them in pure culture.
               All prior work on epulos has been done on fixed cells or on live cells within
              about 1 hour of their collection at a tropical field laboratory.  Furthermore,
              all collections have required a diving ichthyologist to identify, capture and
              dissect the host fish and collect the bacteria.  In a preliminary attempt
              (Summer 1999) to overcome this "culture barrier," epulos remained alive, bud
              did not grow or reproduce.  The goal of this research is to build from the
              first step to (1) define complete culture conditions and (2) begin to identify
              gut environmental factors which cue cyclical daily changes in bacterial
              physiology and activity
