Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Exploratory Research on Reconfigurable and Scalable
               Enterprise Planning Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a0075512

Award Number: 0075512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99743              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohsen A. Jafari   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nabil R. Adam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas O. Boucher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Houshang Darabi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vijayalakshmi Atluri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This exploratory research grant provides funding for the development of formal
              methods that allow information system designers and system managers to design
              and implement software for Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and Manufacturing
              Execution Systems (MES) in e-commerce world.  The formalism will take a
              control-theoretic view of enterprise system and will be built on the principle
              that the business rules, which govern the operation of the enterprise, should
              only be soft-wired to the design of the information system, which supports ERP
              and MES. Furthermore, the formalism will provide the necessary theoretical
              foundation for re-configurable and scalable software system for enterprise
              operation.  Methods will be developed to take the business process and rules in
              the form of workflow system and translate them into finite automata. Formal
              methods will be developed, based on the theory of finite automata and discrete
              event systems, to synthesize control laws, which if imposed on the enterprise
              operation will guarantee conformance to the specified business rules. 
              Theoretical results will be developed, which if included in the synthesis
              procedure will provide the enterprise software system with such important
              properties as fault tolerance and self-recovery from failures.  Analytical
              methods will be developed to study conflicting business rules, redundancy in
              the business rules and requirements, and allocation of multi functional agents.
               At the conclusion of this research, a prototype system including the front end
              featuring the use of traditional process modeling tools such DFD/structured
              analysis and UML will be developed to demonstrate the formalism. The prototype
              will be beta sited on an existing enterprise with e-commerce
              capabilities.

If successful, the results of this research can be used to
              build a generic software environment, which encompasses synthesis, analysis and
              optimization while providing a blue print for implementation.  Software will
              allow for a dynamic information system design and will provide the management
              with the control laws for imposing changing set of business rules over the
              operation of the physical flows and information flows going on in the
              enterprise. At the front end, the IT engineer or enterprise manager will be
              provided with more traditional modeling tools for structured analysis and
              business process modeling and requirements specification. The translation to
              finite automata formalism will be automatic. At the core of this software there
              will be a computational engine, which will synthesize control laws and analyze
              them for desirable properties. Additional modules can be built to translate
              these control laws and feed them to ERP, MES and the supporting database.


