Title       : Cooperation and Conflict in the Evolution of Individuality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a0075296

Award Number: 0075296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Michod michod@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The evolution of multicellular organisms is the premier example of the
              integration of lower levels of function and selection into a single,
              higher-level individual or unit of fitness. Explaining the transition from
              single cells to multicellular organisms is a major challenge for evolutionary
              theory. We approach the origin of multicellularity through the understanding of
              cooperation and conflict among cells in cell groups. Coping with mutation is a
              critical factor during evolutionary transitions, since mutation enhances the
              scope for selection both within and between evolutionary units leading to
              conflict between levels of selection. We will study the evolution of the basic
              reproductive modes used in multicellular organisms from the point of view of
              coping with mutation. The way in which mutational variation is organized by the
              reproductive biology is a fundamental problem for the emergence of new
              evolutionary units. 

The general objective of this grant it is to understand
              the emergence of complex evolutionary units. The organization of the living
              world is hierarchical-lower level units group together and cooperate to form
              higher level units of organization (genes, chromosomes, bacteria-like cells,
              eukaryotic-like cells (cells in cells), multicellular organisms and societies).
              While it may be easy to agree on the basic role played by cooperation in the
              diversification of life, it remains a difficult interaction to understand.
              Cooperation has traditionally been approached from two different
              perspectives-within species and between species. The proposed work aims to
              bridge these different traditions.

