Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Network-Based Distributed Relational Decision
               Framework for Scalable Enterprise Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0075524

Award Number: 0075524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Graves graver@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Hardwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Advances in information technologies are driving fundamental changes in the
              processes and organizations of global enterprises.  Innovations in software,
              networks, and database systems enable widely distributed organizations to
              integrate activities, share information, collaborate on decisions, and execute
              transactions.  While many existing tools and techniques of information
              infrastructure may be adopted and implemented to support these enterprise
              applications, there has been little focused research to provide a scientific
              basis to support these developments.  This exploratory project develops a new
              framework to support enterprise-level decision-making in network-based scalable
              systems. This exploratory study will address:  (1) Basic Principles, (2)
              Architectures, (3) Simulation and Evaluation, and (4) Applications in the case
              study of design-supplier-manufacturing decisions with examples drawn from
              industrial collaborators in the printed circuit board assembly industry.  The
              fundamental principle of this approach asserts that decision tasks over a set
              of multiple, distributed, logically interrelated databases may be cast in the
              semantics of the underlying distributed database management system (DBMS).  In
              this form, the augmented relational decision framework takes advantage of the
              principles of normalization and decomposition that are inherent to the
              relational DBMS model, while the decision process is viewed as an instantiation
              of the relational schema, and the resulting representation of normal form
              hierarchies and data dependencies structures the process. 

The outcomes of
              this project offer advantages of local autonomy, reliability, improved
              performance, scalability, shareability, data confidentiality, and efficient
              software support for a new class of enterprise-level software systems.

