Title       : Chemical Dynamics at Solid Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0075744

Award Number: 0075744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458300             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Tully john.tully@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Tully of Yale University is supported by the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program  for research that focuses on the atomic-level understanding
              of dynamical processes at solid surfaces.  New theoretical and computational
              tools will be created and used to study specific chemical problems in three
              areas.  First, dynamics at metal surfaces will be explored to enable prediction
              of the contribution of electron-hole pair transitions to adsorbate energy
              transfer.  Methods for computing the relative intensities of vibrational modes
              and approximate propensity rules in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) will be
              developed.  Second, mixed quantum-classical dynamics will be developed with the
              goal of extending conventional molecular dynamics simulations to practical
              applications involving electronic transitions and/or quantum nuclear motion. 
              Finally, ab initio methods for computing energies and lifetimes of adsorbate
              excited states at semiconductor and metal surfaces will be developed and
              tested, then extended to calculating energies and widths of adsorbate-ion
              resonance states and excited states.  

Understanding molecule and electron
              behavior on solid surfaces is important for gaining insights needed to drive
              innovations in technologically important areas such as semiconductor
              processing.  Outcomes from this research are expected to impact a variety of
              important chemical applications, including the determination of molecular
              identity from observed topographical features in STM, and the understanding of
              multi-dimensional processes such as those involved in electrochemistry,
              condensed phase dynamics, and enzyme reactions.
