Title       : Control of Intrinsic Stresses in Ceramic Thin Films and Coatings Produced by
               Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0075207

Award Number: 0075207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Sheldon Brian_Sheldon@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara L. Walden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary motivation for this research project is the need to control residual
              stresses in ceramic thin films and coatings, which encompasses a wide range of
              materials used for both electronic and structural applications.  Residual
              stresses arise from the thermal expansion mismatch between film and substrate,
              and from various intrinsic mechanisms during film growth.  The viability of
              ceramic films and coatings are typically evaluated by calculating thermal
              stresses, however, this calculation is often inaccurate because it ignores
              intrinsic stresses. Previous work at Brown demonstrates that tensile stresses
              caused by island coalescence during film growth often overshadow thermal
              stresses. This work also shows that these intrinsic stresses can be controlled
              by altering processing during island coalescence. These efforts are focused on
              CVD diamond, which is an excellent system for these studies since diamond has
              large intrinsic stresses that are problematic for a number of applications and
              because the extensive literature on CVD diamond provides a strong basis for
              understanding growth stresses.  Building on the previous success with CVD
              diamond, the following activities will be carried out during the project: 1)
              Establish that intrinsic tensile stresses can be controlled by altering
              processing during grain coalescence in a wide range of ceramic thin films and
              coatings; 2) Develop better models for describing the evolution of intrinsic
              stresses; 3) Investigate relationships between residual stress and film
              properties (fracture, etc.), which will be based on the processing methods
              developed at Brown that provide a unique approach for varying stress without
              changing the substrate, grain size, or film composition; 4) Control intrinsic
              stresses to modify the total residual stress in novel ways; 5) Investigate
              discrepancies between Raman spectroscopy and other methods that are used to
              measure residual stress in CVD diamond; 6) Provide direct input to ongoing work
              on oxide coatings at Oak Ridge National Laboratory; and 8) Continue a variety
              of educational efforts, including the ExSEL program at Brown (co-PI Prof.
              Rankin), and an accredited Materials Science workshop for local middle and high
              school teachers that was developed by the PI.  Research activities will
              continue to involve undergraduates from both Brown and Trinity (an
              undergraduate teaching institution). 
%%%
Ceramic and diamond thin films are
              used in a variety of technologically important applications such as computers
              and telecommunications.  During processing these thin films are develop stress
              that limit their effectiveness in the application.  This research project,
              which will be carried out by two investigators at Brown University and one from
              Trinity College (an undergraduate institution), will investigated methods of
              controlling the stress that form. The results from this work will lead to
              better understanding and improved control of stresses in a variety of thin
              films and coatings, thus enhancing their usage in the application.
***
