Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Distributed and Collaborative Enterprise Decision
               Making in the Electronic Supply Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0075391

Award Number: 0075391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. David Wu david.wu@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Morris A. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick T. Harker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine distributed and collaborative decision paradigms for
              next generation enterprise systems.  The goal for the project is to explore a
              scalable framework for enterprise decision-making through the development of
              distributed and collaborative transaction paradigms in the context of supply
              chain management.  The main objectives of this research will be to:   (1)
              develop fundamental theory for distributed enterprise transactions, (2) explore
              enterprise coordination issues in the context of electronic commerce and supply
              chain logistics, and (3) conduct field studies based on real-world industry
              applications.  A main thesis of this research is that the synergy between
              e-commerce and supply-chain logistics forms an unprecedented area of innovation
              and discovery, which play a pivotal role in transforming the current economy.
              Building on solid theory and industry realities, the research in transaction
              paradigms and supply-chain coordination will be crucial links in this
              transformation.  

If successful, the result of this research will lead to
              simplify information management in the new electronic business environment.  A
              basic paradigm in conventional Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system is one
              that seeks "total visibility" of system details in a top-down, hierarchical
              manner.  This is accomplished by maintaining painfully detailed information of
              all perceivable aspects of the organization using sophisticated information and
              database management systems. This information must be kept up-to-date since it
              serves as a basis for decision making throughout the system.  For large-scale
              operations involving multiple facilities or firms in a supply chain, the
              current approach encounters major difficulties in scaling up.  The PI's will
              use a decentralized approach analogous to the operations of a free market:  
              each decision entity makes locally autonomous decisions based on privately
              owned information, self-interest, and locally motivated preference/constraints.
               Centralized information management is drastically simplified to that of
              maintaining market fairness and stability.  To be implemented in the context of
              electronic commerce, this new paradigm facilitates a universally agreed upon
              domain of electronic transactions and information exchange. The grant brings
              together a two-institution research team.  The research will be conducted with
              participation from industry partners at Lehigh's Manufacturing Logistics
              Institute and Wharton's Fishman-Davison Center for Service and Operations
              Management

