Title       : Experimental Evolution of the Bacteriophage Group Leviviridae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0075404

Award Number: 0075404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323721             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Huelsenbeck johnh@biomail.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,1174,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The genetics of adaptation will be examined in the Leviviridae, a group of
              single stranded RNA phage. The phage will be selected for growth at high
              temperature. High temperature inhibits the growth of the wild-type phage.
              However, after propagating the phage at high temperature for several
              generations, phage fitness recovers. In this study, eight different phage
              species will be propagated (via serial transfer) at high temperature. The
              genetic changes associated with adaptation to fast growth at high temperature
              will be assayed by completely sequencing the evolved phage and comparing these
              sequences to the ancestral sequence for each species. The specific questions
              that will be addressed include: (1) what are the genetic changes associated
              with adaptation to high temperature, (2) what are the fitness effects of the
              genetic changes, (3) what is the distribution of fitness effects of mutations
              that are fixed during the course of adaptive evolution, (4) is the evolution
              repeatable within a phage species, (5) to what extent does the phylogeny of the
              species predict specific change associated with adaptation to growth at high
              temperature, and, (6) to what extent do changes in the RNA molecule increase
              the stability of important stem-loop structures at high temperature? The
              Leviviridae are unique in that they have a very high mutation rate and the
              function of much of the secondary structure of the RNA molecule has been worked
              out; hence, the functional significance of many adaptive changes can be
              understood. Moreover, because a well-supported phylogeny of the group exists,
              the genetic changes can be placed into a phylogenetic context.
