Title       : GOALI/FRG: Nanoscale Morphological Control of Strained Semiconductor Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0075116

Award Number: 0075116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $848440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Hull rh5c@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Bean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolf M. Tromp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,1589,1682,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This FRG/GOALI project is a collaborative effort between researchers at the
              University of Virginia and IBM, Yorktown Heights, NY. Additional collaborations
              are established with U. IL, Urbana-Champaign; Longwood College, Farmville, VA;
              UCB; and Sandia National Laboratories. 
The approach is to investigate
              pathways for strain-relaxation of lattice mismatched heteroepitaxial films with
              the goal of gaining sufficient fundamental understanding of the roles that
              surface roughening and interfacial dislocations play as the epilayer relaxes to
              allow morphological 'programming' of heteroepitaxial films. The investigators
              seek to acquire the knowledge and ability to define the final morphology of an
              epilayer by introducing perturbations--surface steps, interfacial dislocations
              and/or lithographically defined patterns--onto the initial growth surface.
              Applications of such programmed surfaces for templating of subsequent nanoscale
              structures such as patterned quantum dot arrays and functional biological
              molecules will also be explored. This programmability places total reliance on
              neither spontaneous self-assembly nor lithography. Instead, it seeks out
              synergistic effects that may provide breakthroughs in practical nanostructure
              fabrication. Initially, experiments will concentrate upon the GeSi/Si system. A
              range of growth techniques (molecular beam epitaxy, gas source molecular beam
              epitaxy, and ultra-high vacuum chemical vapor deposition) will be studied, to
              enable general mechanisms to be inferred, rather than those particular to a
              particular growth chemistry or configuration. Studies on the evolution of
              uniform (i.e. non-perturbed) surfaces will focus upon both microscopic
              mechanisms of strain relief and macroscopic measurements of the overall strain
              state. The competition and inter-dependence of morphological evolution and
              misfit dislocation injection will be examined in detail. Experimental
              techniques will include ex-situ and in-situ transmission electron microscope
              (TEM), in-situ low energy electron microscope (LEEM), two dimensional
              reciprocal lattice mapping with X-Ray diffraction, in-situ wafer curvature and
              spectroscopic light scattering measurements, finite element analysis (FEA)
              calculations, and local strain mapping using TEM imaging and diffraction.
              Quantitative measurements of strain relaxation by epilayer roughening will be
              incorporated into an existing simulator, developed under a previous NSF grant,
              that models misfit dislocation injection into lattice-mismatched
              heterostructures. The combined simulator will provide a complete description of
              strain relaxation, morphological evolution and dislocation generation in a
              range of heteroepitaxial systems. Subsequent studies of perturbation mechanisms
              and programmable surfaces will apply many of the same tools, with emphasis on
              locally sensitive probes such as TEM-, LEEM- and FEA-based
              techniques.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science with high technological relevance. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              semiconductor materials performance in current and future device and circuit
              applications. An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. The multidisciplinary (materials science,
              electrical engineering, physics) and industrially-connected nature of this
              GOALI program offers unique educational opportunities for students to
              experience a teamwork-oriented research environment from both academic and
              industrial perspectives.
***

