Title       : Phylogeny and Androecial Diversification of Loasaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0075249

Award Number: 0075249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Hufford hufford@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075249
Hufford
	Systematics research includes the study of phylogenetic or
              genealogical relationships among species and genera, and the analysis of how
              morphological diversity arises within lineages. Dr. Larry Hufford at Washington
              State University is studying morphological diversity in floral forms,
              especially in the complex staminal configurations, in the plant family
              Loasaceae, emphasizing the large genus Mentzelia (blazing stars) and the
              subfamily Loasoideae. Although a relatively small family in terms of number of
              species (ca. 325 total), Loasaceae comprise taxa with a wide range of stamen
              numbers, configurations, and modifications. Taxonomists have used many of these
              features as characters to recognize distinct genera within the family, but
              discrepancies with other character evidence have suggested that some of these
              staminal characters have evolved multiple times, possibly in multiple ways,
              within Loasaceae, perhaps in association with shifts in pollination. An
              independent assessment of evolutionary relationships within the family will be
              made using DNA sequence data collected from nuclear and chloroplast genes, for
              ca. 114 species and for numerous outgroup taxa in the Hydrangeaceae and other
              related families. With a robust phylogenetic tree as framework, comparisons can
              be made between closely related species where the direction of morphological
              change can reasonably be inferred. Tissue- and organ-level changes in flower
              development will be studied with light and scanning electron microscopy, to
              determine whether similar or different patterns of organ formation underlie the
              various staminal configurations observed in Loasaceae. 
	The study of floral
              form in Loasaceae represents an early step in the fusion of phylogenetic
              analysis with morphological transformation. In particular, the study attempts
              to resolve within Loasaceae what are apparent floral trends in synorganization
              (unitary growth of formerly separate organs) and juvenilization (early and
              truncated development that preserves juvenile features as the final "adult"
              form in the flower). 


