Title       : Obsidian Sources and Prehistoric Trade in the Central Mediterranean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0075535

Award Number: 0075535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Tykot rtykot@chuma1.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              .With National Science Foundation support Dr. Robert Tykot will conduct two
              field seasons of geoarchaeological research and follow each with laboratory
              analysis of the materials collected. He will carry out  survey to document
              obsidian flows and outcrops on the Mediterranean islands of Palmarola,
              Pantelleria and Lipari and characterize them both physically and chemically.
              Physical properties including color, translucency and density will complement
              major/minor element data from electron microprobe analysis and trace element
              and isotope ratio data from ICP mass spectrometry. He will conduct similar
              analyses of a large number of obsidian artifacts recovered from archaeological
              sites. Obsidian, a form of volcanic glass can be easily modified to produce a
              sharp cutting edge and therefore was widely used and broadly traded in
              prehistory. It is an ideal material for reconstructing trade since it occurs
              geologically in a limited number of locations, is frequently found on
              archaeological sites even great distances from a source and may be chemically
              'fingerprinted' allowing definitive source attributions of artifacts. For these
              reasons it has been widely used to reconstruct prehistoric trade and exchange.
              While some sources in the Mediterranean region have been carefully studied and
              well characterized, others have not and Dr. Tykot's work will constitute a
              significant addition to this growing body of knowledge. The data will be used
              to address a number of specific anthropological questions. It will provide
              insight into the earliest settlement of the Mediterranean islands, the
              transition from hunting and gathering to an agricultural way of life, the
              development of long distance exchange networks, craft specialization and the
              emergence of social differentiation. The data will also be used to test
              explicit models of presumed prehistoric navigational and maritime transport
              capabilities, to reveal specific connections between island and mainland
              populations and to define the important sociopolitical and economic role of
              obsidian in many prehistoric Mediterranean societies.

This fundamental
              research will provide a data base which will be widely utilized by
              prehistorians to address a range of scientific questions. It will also yield
              new insight into the rise of complex societies.

