Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Life Cycle Product Information Systems for Scalable
               and Sustainable Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0075545

Award Number: 0075545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris T. Hendrickson cth@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Scott Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1604,9147,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0075545
Hendrickson

This grant provides funding to develop and to
              demonstrate a software model of life cycle product information based on a
              distributed, multi-enterprise and networked system of information modules.  In
              this model application, enterprises would provide information on their own
              goods and services as well as have the capability to aggregate information on
              the environmental performance of the enterprise itself.  Products would have
              their own information systems to document their manufacture and use.  With
              communication along the supply chain, the costs, associated information (e.g.
              repair manuals), and environmental impacts of any particular product could be
              rapidly assessed.  Virtual product records could be synthesized to help assess
              alternative supply chains or product designs.  Information would be scalable
              from individual products, through corporate performance indicators and
              geographic aggregations of multiple corporations.
Effective supply chain
              logistics and environmental management systems are among the essential elements
              for successful scalable and sustainable enterprises.  Logistics and
              manufacturing support may be of even greater importance in the age of commerce
              than in earlier marketing eras, as customers demand rapid and reliable order
              fulfillment.  Environmental management systems are equally necessary as
              consumers and society demand lower environmental impact from the production of
              goods and services in order to secure a sustainable future.  It this research,
              we will investigate distributed models of product information that would allow
              scalable enterprises, government regulators and consumers to understand the
              entire life cycle of economic and environmental impacts for particular
              products.

