Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Measurement Methodology of Scalable Enterprise
               Systems (MOSES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0075395

Award Number: 0075395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Giachetti giachetr@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chin-Sheng Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to develop a formal methodology for the measurement
              of scalability of enterprise systems.  The project seeks  to create a taxonomy
              of scalability attributes to classify and describe each aspect of the
              enterprise in an unambiguous, clear, and concise manner.  Measurement theory
              will be applied to generate a quantification of magnitude for scalability
              aspects, to generate scales, and to define relationships to map within the
              attribute's domain.  Finally procedures for acquiring the measurement from an
              enterprise system will be conducted.  This research project will adhere to the
              scientific process and after formulating the multi-dimensional definition of
              scalability and developing scales we will empirically validate the measurement
              methodology using select industry test cases.  

The primary goal of the
              MOSES project is to address the issues of defining and measuring scalability of
              the enterprise.  The specific objectives of the MOSES project are: (1) provide
              a formal multidimensional definition of scalability, (2) develop a measurement
              methodology, (3) develop supporting software tools, and (4) illustrate 
              coupling the proposed methodology and software tools with a target enterprise
              environment.  By measuring scalability managers, engineers, and system
              designers will be able to verify claims of software vendors, to identify areas
              in the enterprise for improvement with respect to scalability, to compare
              different system designs, to design scalability into an enterprise system, and
              to benchmark enterprise systems.  A more formal foundation to defining and
              measuring enterprise system scalability will enable systems designers to better
              understand and predict the enterprise's performance and contribute to better
              enterprise system designs.

