Title       : Morphology and Evolution of Fossil and Living Gars (Actinopterygii:
               Lepisosteiformes), Part 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0075460

Award Number: 0075460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239485             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Bemis wbemis@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lance Grande  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075460
Bemis and Grande
	Among the earliest lineages of vertebrate animals
              with living survivors today are several groups of primitive fishes including
              the sturgeons, bowfins, paddlefishes, and gars. Dr. William Bemis at University
              of Massachusetts-Amherst and his colleague at the Field Museum, Dr. Lance
              Grande, have been conducting detailed morphological and anatomical studies of
              all the living species of these fishes as well as of fossil material housed in
              the world's major museums. Their goal in this project is to integrate knowledge
              of the living species of gars with the wealth of fossil material known for the
              group, to describe morphological changes through time, assess migration routes
              and biogeographic ranges, and help determine the precise pattern of early
              vertebrate evolutionary diversification. Although all the living gars are
              limited to North and Central America, fossils have been described from Europe,
              Africa, Asia, and South America, from time horizons extending back through the
              Mesozoic. Many of these fossils are extremely well preserved, providing details
              of morphology and anatomy that make possible quite fine-scale comparison with
              living forms. In addition, the integration of fossil species with living taxa
              in an overall genealogical or phylogenetic framework and classification will
              help understand the environmental setting in which early fish evolution took
              place, for example whether marine lineages diversified less than freshwater
              lineages. Because fossil taxa typically will lack data for some features or
              characters observable from living species, the investigators will also explore
              theoretical issues concerning the effects of missing data on algorithms used to
              reconstruct phylogenetic trees

