Title       : POWRE: Determination of the Catalytic Activity and Functional Requirement for a
               Novel Kinase Homology Domain at the C-terminus of Newly Cloned Putative Calcium
               Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a0075024

Award Number: 0075024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica Nadler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ability of a cell to respond to its environment is one of the most basic of
              functions and requires a network of intracellular molecules that work in
              concert to integrate a response. Of the molecules involved in signal
              transduction, calcium is the most fundamental, serving as a universal second
              messenger in a plethora of pathways. Many of the effects of calcium are
              mediated by calcium/calmodulin (Ca2+/CaM) regulated protein kinases. Amongst
              such kinases, elongation factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K), which controls protein
              translation by phosphorylating elongation factor-2, stands alone. It has a
              catalytic structure which is distinct from any other protein
              serine/threonine/tyrosine kinase or histidine kinase family member. The
              functional significance of this different kinase structure is unknown, although
              it is clear that eEF-2K has a non-redundant cellular function, underscoring the
              importance of its catalytic domain. Another kinase from the amoebae
              Dictyostelium, which phosphorylates myosin heavy chain on specific threonine
              residues, shares this unique catalytic domain This kinase also appears to have
              a nonredundant cellular function since mutagenesis of its target threonine
              residues in myosin heavy chain results in gross overassembly of myosin and
              causes defects in myosin-related contractile processes (Egelhoff T. T. et al.,
              Cell., 75:363, 1995). In order to explore the functional diversity of this new
              kinase family, a novel gene was cloned from an EST that encodes an
              eEF-2K-related C-terminal kinase domain. This new sequence, named elongation
              factor-2 kinase related channel (EFKRC), not only shares homology to the unique
              catalytic structure of eEF-2K, but is part of a larger protein that also has
              strong homology to a novel putative calcium channel, melastatin (MLSN1).
              Importantly, EFKRC is the first protein found to contain an eEF-2K catalytic
              homology that serves as a domain within a much larger protein. In addition,
              since eEF-2K is a Ca2+/CaM regulated kinase, the potential exists for the EFKRC
              kinase domain to play a fundamental functional role within the context of this
              putative calcium channel. The goal of this project is to determine if the
              kinase domain (KD) of EFKRC is a catalytically active kinase and/or is required
              for EFKRC function. This will be accomplished by determining if the kinase
              domain of EFKRC is active when expressed individually and/or in the context of
              the EFKRC full-length molecule both in in vitro kinase assays and in in vivo
              cellular 32 P-orthophosphate labeling experiments. In addition, the catalytic
              function of EFKRC will be assessed by determining its ability to substitute for
              the catalytic core of eEF-2K with the generation and analysis of chimeric
              molecules and point mutants. The functional requirement of the KD of EFKRC will
              be determined by analyzing the ability of full-length (FL) and KD-null EFKRC to
              complement an EFKRC-dependent lethality found in DT40 chicken B cells. In
              addition, bulk calcium assays will be performed that will compare the effects
              of FL EFKRC vs. KD-null EFKRC. Overall, these studies should provide critical
              insights into the functionality of the EFKRC kinase domain. It is unknown why
              nature utilizes an unusual kinase domain structure for some essential threonine
              phoshorylation events. During evolution, this domain was incorporated into at
              least one larger protein, EFKRC. This project will yield new insights into
              whether larger proteins that incorporate this unique kinase family domain also
              utilize it in a non-redundant, essential fashion. This POWRE award will allow
              Dr. Nadler, who is entering a new research area, to gather sufficient
              preliminary data in order to submit a regular proposal.
