Title       : Light Driven Transport and Mechanistic Aspects of Relief Structure Formation in
               Azopolymer Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0075170

Award Number: 0075170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayant Kumar Jayant_Kumar@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sukant K. Tripathy  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The principal objective of the proposed research is to further the systematic
              investigation of the novel phenomenon of photodriven polymer mass transport in
              azo functionalized polymer films, at modest light intensities and substantially
              below their glass transition temperatures.  All-optical holographic fabrication
              of large modulation depth (>6000A) surface relief gratings (SRG) have been
              achieved on azobenzene-functionalized polymer films, without any pre- and/or
              post-processing.  A systematic investigation of this novel photodriven surface
              deformation and SRG formation process in a variety of azobenzene functionalized
              polymer systems has established a number of critical research findings and
              conclusions.  This includes the fundamental understanding, the mechanism and
              identifying possible device applications of this all-optical process.  The
              process is a result of polymer mass transport by optical field gradients and is
              initiated at the polymer film surface.  A number of models and mechanisms for
              the driving force have proposed.  The gradient force model developed by the PI
              describes the macroscopic behavior observed in this unique photofabrication
              process in amorphous azobenzene polymer film.  This model utilizing a single
              viscoelastic parameter has presented the opportunity to further connect the
              experimentally established deformation behavior to molecular level processes
              and molecular structural details.  The viscoelastic parameter of the
              photoplasticized deformation layer can be correlated with the molecular
              structural details by investigating the SRG process in tailored macromolecules
              under selected writing conditions.

The focus of this further explore the
              unusual light-driven transport phenomenon discovered under prior NSF funding. 
              In this all-optical process, desired micro and nonopatterning may be carried
              out in practically all polymers with some azo functionalization, at modest
              light intensities without any post processing.  Understanding the fundamental
              photophysical processes in this class of materials may lead to important
              devices and fabrication processes for photonic technologies.  Direct
              inscription of desired patterns is expected to serve as a simple and dramatic
              demonstration and learning tool for the classroom using this unusual optical
              and polymer-physical phenomenon.

