Title       : SGER: In-Situ Measurements of Small Angle Neutron Scattering and AC Magnetic
               Susceptibility of Vortex Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2001   
File        : a0075838

Award Number: 0075838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinsheng Sean Ling xsling@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0075838
Ling

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to a
              young faculty member at Brown University. He will study vortex phases in the
              regime where the random potential caused by defects in the material competes
              with vortex-vortex interactions and thermal fluctuations giving rise to the
              "peak effect" in type-II superconductors.  The vortex physics in this regime
              will be studied in a single crystal of Nb using a coil wound directly on the
              sample to measure the vortex dynamics and simultaneously using Small Angle
              Neutron Scattering (SANS) to measure the neutron diffraction pattern of the
              vortex array.  This experiment is highly exploratory since the neutron
              diffraction signal from a vortex array is very weak in the peak effect regime. 
              If successful, this project will generate experimental results that will reveal
              the direct correlation between the microscopic properties of the vortex lattice
              and the macroscopic properties of a type-II superconductor in a magnetic field.
               The question of vortex pinning-depinning is one of technological importance
              and thus this research could have a high payoff. A graduate student will
              participate in this research, thereby gaining the experience of working at a
              National Facility (the Center for High-Resolution Neutron Scattering at NIST)
              as well as working on a high-risk, high payoff project.  This should prepare
              the student for future work in academia, industry, or government.
%%%
The
              capability to carry an electric current without dissipation makes
              superconductors useful in many applications such as MRI magnets, power
              transmission, etc.  Most technologically useful superconducting materials allow
              a strong magnetic field to penetrate into the material to form quantized
              magnetic vortices.  In an ideal, defect-free type-II superconductor these
              vortex lines will move and cause dissipation under the driving force of a
              current.  Fortunately, imperfections, defects, and impurities, in the atomic
              lattice can pin the vortex lines, allowing a superconducting wire to carry a
              large lossless current.  Therefore a good understanding of the pining of the
              vortex lattice by random impurities is beneficial to many applications. This
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will fund a project that will use a
              neutron beam to study the microscopic structure of the vortex lattice that
              gives rise to what is known as the anomalous peak effect.  This effect allows a
              superconductor to carry more current at a higher magnetic field and
              temperature.  If successful this project will reveal the direct correlation
              between the microscopic structure of the vortex lattice and the macroscopic
              properties of a type-II superconductor in a magnetic field, and thus help
              scientists make better superconductors.  The graduate student participating in
              this project will have the opportunity to work at a National Facility (the
              Center for High-Resolution Neutron Scattering at NIST) with researches from
              around the country.  This should prepare the student for future work in
              academia, industry, or government.
***

