Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Real-Time Promising for Authority Domains Operating
               in a Build-to-Order Mode
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  2000  
File        : a0075714

Award Number: 0075714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129641             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Moses moses@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anindya Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Floyd H. Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Le Gruenwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Simin Pulat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant funds investigation of scalable techniques for real-time order
              promising by discrete build-to-order environments facing dynamic order
              arrivals.  The algorithms to be developed in this project for calculating due
              dates consider current time-phased availability of resources and material,
              existing commitments, and the current system state.  The presence of various
              alternate resources or materials increases the combinatorial complexity of the
              problem.  To increase performance, a combination of both
optimal algorithms
              with good scalability such as shortest path and computational heuristics will
              be considered.  One of the heuristics to be examined is based on a novel, even
              controversial, idea:  for the purposes of promising, the time when a resource
              will be able to process an operation can be estimated with sufficient accuracy
              by considering only a partially ordered resource task plan.  Current support
              for this principle is grounded in practical experience but little scientific
              evidence.  Joint research occurring at the intersection of Industrial
              Engineering and Computer Science is necessary in this project because
              algorithmic and computational aspects are intertwined when performing research
              in a large-scale systems context.
Algorithms will be implemented in an
              object-oriented, memory-resident, multi-threaded architecture for detailed
              study and empirical evaluation.  A key tenet of this project is that the
              results be highly scalable.

Order promising is perhaps the most important
              operational-level activity.  The ability to make tight, yet achievable,
              promises in response to requests from consumers or other businesses is a
              fundamental business requirement.  Surprisingly, very little research has been
              done in this area.  Results of this research will increase the accuracy and
              speed with which these promises can be made.  This research is directly
              applicable to manufacturers that increasingly are selling built-to-order
              products direct to customers via the Internet and to a future where
              collaborative commerce freely occurs among dynamically recombinant business
              partners.


