Title       : Including Language, Literacy and Community in Standard-Based Science Education
               Reform: Toward Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a0075907

Award Number: 0075907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98791              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth B. Moje moje@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Recent curriculum design projects have attempted to engage students in
              responsive or authentic science learning experiences in which students engage
              in textual and inquiry-based research projects about questions of interest to
              them (Goldman, 1997; Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1997).  The features
              of science project-based curricula generally include (a) driving questions
              anchored in real-world problems; (b) investigations and artifact creathion; (c)
              collaboration among students, teachers, and othersin the community; and (d) use
              of technological tools (Krajcik, Blumenfeld, Marx, Bass & Fredricks, (118). 
              Indeed, these are the features included in curriculum developed by the Centers
              for HighlyInteractive computing in Education (hi-ce) and Learning Technologies
              in Urban Schools (LeTUS) in collaboration with several Detroit public schools. 
              
  One of the five major facets of the LeTUS agenda is a focus on community
              engagement, along with curriculum and pedagogy, learning technology,
              professional development, and policy and management.  The experiences of LeTUS
              researchers during the firts two years of curriculum enactment  suggests that
              more detailed work needs to be done to address a number of curricular issues
              related to language and literacy, issues that have implications for and that
              can be addressed through community engagement.  Specifically, an initial
              assessment of the project-based curriculum indicates that the curriculum can be
              made more responsive in regard to language and culture concerns in the
              particular communities served by these schools.  In fact, successful curriculum
              entactment in the urban schools served by LeTUS over the next several months
              will depend on our addressing these language, literacy, and cultural demands of
              the curriculum.  Although we need to move forward with some urgency in our
              efforts toward community knows and needs in regard to childern's science
              learning-in order to engage the community with the science learned in
              curriculum.
  In addition, we need to examine several components of curriculum
              enactment to look for meeting points of the curriculum and accompanying
              materials; the teachers' enactments surrounding language and literacy; and the
              teachers' use of the students' everyday knowledge and ways of knowing, being,
              reading, writing and talking.  Given these discursive and textual demands, it
              is important to ask what linguistic - that is language,literacy, and technology
              skills - are engaged by such curricula and their accompanying texts, and how
              these skills shape students' opportunities to learn.  In short, what do young
              people need to be able to do to get the most from project-based science?  What
              strategies do we need to embed in projects in order to support students'
              learning?  In what ways can curricula designed to be culturally responsive also
              be made linguistically responsive to the needs of students?  We propose to
              engage in three related exploratory studies - a curriculum content analysis, a
              community ethnology, and a classroom interpretive study - that will allow us to
              advance the mission of the LeTUS by addressing these questions and laying the
              groundwork for future investigations of these issues.
