Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Control Versus Emergence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0075293

Award Number: 0075293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Y. Choi thomas.choi@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nong Ye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin J. Dooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project provides funding for the development of a scaleable and generic
              theory of enterprise which will provide new theoretical insight into the nature
              of the complex organizational networks.  From a single firm's perspective, the
              enterprise includes the organization itself, suppliers, distributors, and end
              consumers, and invariably transcends multiple industries and markets. 
              Complexity theory will be used as the basis for framing a theory of
              enterprises.  Case study observations from Honda of America and DaimlerChrysler
              will identify archetypal configurations within enterprises, and a series of
              theoretical propositions will be developed which can be tested in subsequent
              extensions of the project. A simulation model of these enterprises will also be
              developed to verify and validate our theory.

New theoretical models in this
              area are imperative to inform both practice and education.  At the core of such
              a theory lies the tension between control and emergence.  Controls represent
              the actions an organization takes to influence the behavior and outcomes of
              other firms in its enterprise system.  However, the structure and behavior of
              an enterprise are in large part emergent, outside of the control of the
              organization.  Whereas control may lead to short-term efficiency, emergence
              leads to long-term creativity and adaptive responses. By implication, then, too
              much enterprise control may actually thwart the long-term goals of the
              organization, leading us to raise questions if such extended control (e.g. ERP)
              is feasible or even desirable. This research will identify the critical middle
              ground between too much and too little control, between centralized versus
              emergent order. It will ultimately attempt to identify the theoretical limits
              of centralized control offered by modern information technology such as
              integrated ERP.  This research will give organizations specific prescriptions
              concerning how to move forward with their modernization plans concerning
              information technology and enterprise integration.

