Title       : A Phylogenetic Monograph of New World Vigna sensu lato (Fabaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0075202

Award Number: 0075202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew T. Lavin mlavin@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman F. Weeden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075202
Lavin and Weeden
	Botanists Matt Lavin and Norm Weeden, with Mexican
              collaborator Alfonso Delgado-Salinas, are studying the taxonomy and evolution
              of the legumes traditionally treated in the large genus Vigna, the Old World
              members of which include azuki bean and mungbean. Their preliminary molecular
              (DNA sequence data) and morphological studies show that New World species
              treated as Vigna in fact are more closely related to other New World legume
              genera like Dolichopsis, Mysanthus, Phaseolus, and Strophostyles than to the
              Old World Vigna. The study proposes to analyze the genetic and morphological
              variation of 140 or so species in Vigna and these other closely related genera,
              emphasizing in particular DNA sequence data from nuclear and chloroplast genes
              and adding morphological characters studied from herbarium specimens and field
              collections. One product of this study will be a taxonomy based on evolutionary
              relatedness, which plant breeders will be able to use as a guide for most
              efficiently selecting which species or races to use in experiments involving
              hybridization.  Currently, this is not available to plant breeders for this
              group of plants. Genetic analysis of the species of Vigna also has
              biogeographic importance.  Again, preliminary evidence reveals that all of the
              New World species form a genetically distinctive group that is most closely
              related to another genetically singular group centered in Africa and Asia.
              Over-water migration is one possible explanation for this disjunct pattern of
              split ranges, but it is also possible that a once-widespread, ancient range has
              been split by extinction events or by continental drift between Africa and the
              Americas. The investigators hope to identify "genetic footprints" in the DNA
              data they accumulate from the studied species, that may indicate which species
              are ancient (i.e., dating back to about 40 million years) on their respective
              continents, and which species are recent arrivals from another continent. 


