Title       : Collaborative Research - New Directions in Turbo Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0075221

Award Number: 0075221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar Y. Takeshita takeshita.3@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

This research involves the general area of error control coding for
              digital communication and storage systems.  In particular, it describes a
              number of fundamental research topics related to a powerful new method of error
              control coding called turbo coding.  The research has two major goals: (1) to
              propose new turbo coding schemes with performance and/or complexity advantages
              compared to the current state-of-the-art, and (2) to advance the fundamental
              state of knowledge regarding this exciting new approach to error control
              coding.  Although still very new, turbo coding is beginning to be applied in
              numerous areas that require error control techniques, including deep space
              communication, satellite communication, and digital cellular telephony, to name
              just a few.  Because of its ability to perform close to theoretical limits with
              reasonable implementation complexity, it is anticipated that turbo coding and
              related techniques will have an enormous impact on virtually all applications
              of error control coding over the next 10 years or so.

Turbo coding can
              achieve moderate bit error rates (in the range of 10-4 to 10-6) at
              signal-to-noise ratios very close to channel capacity.  However, there is still
              room for improvement in turbo coding performance, particularly in applications
              that require bit error rates below 10-6.  Further, there is considerable
              theoretical interest in achieving a more complete fundamental understanding of
              the key properties of turbo codes that result in such excellent performance. 
              The investigators study several new basic research problems in turbo coding.
              Among the topics to be investigated are (1) several new turbo code designs
              capable of achieving even better performance than existing schemes, (2) the
              introduction of a more general class of turbo codes that has the potential to
              yield better codes and/or reduced decoding complexity compared to standard
              turbo coding methods, and (3) the development of a new sub-optimum soft-in,
              soft-out decoding approach that can be used with more codes, thus offering the
              promise of near capacity performance at very low bit error rates, say below
              10-10.

