Title       : Investigation of Reactive Intermediates and Inner Phase Reactions Inside
               Molecular Container Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0075749

Award Number: 0075749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Warmuth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project has the long term objective to apply molecular container compounds
              in areas such as the characterization of reactive intermediates and in
              catalysis.  Two highly strained cyclic allenes and various intermediates in the
              naphthylcarbene rearrangement will be generated and spectroscopically
              characterized in the inner phase of hemicarcerands, and their thermochemistry
              will be investigated.  These species are important to structural theory in
              organic chemistry.  In addition, a new approach for the stabilization of
              reactive intermediates will be developed.  This approach involves the covalent
              bonding of a precursor molecule on the inside of a hemicarcerand, whereupon
              generation of a reactive intermediate from this precursor takes place to the
              exclusion of other reactive species.  Quenching of the intermediate is thus
              prevented.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program's Organic Dynamics Program supports the research of Professor Ralf
              Warmuth of Kansas State University.  Professor Warmuth is pursuing an area of
              physical organic chemistry wherein chemical species that are implicated as
              intermediates in reaction processes are created and observed.  These species
              are referred to as reactive intermediates, and are normally so short-lived that
              direct observation is difficult.  By forming these intermediates in a
              protective shell, Professor Warmuth will be able to extend the lifetimes of
              these elusive entities, making their observation more feasible.
