Title       : Optimization of Parabolic Systems: Iterative Methods, Suboptimal Controls, and
               Preconditioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0075731

Award Number: 0075731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Heinkenschloss heinken@caam.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel S. Collis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
   Optimization of linear or nonlinear parabolic differential equations
in
              the context of optimal control, optimal design, or parameter estimation 
plays
              an important role in science and engineering. Algorithms for the
solution of
              parabolic equations often involve marching in time, starting
from an initial
              condition. In optimization, however, the values of the
solution of the
              parabolic equation at later times feed into the
optimization at early times.
              This coupling in time makes the practical
solution of these very large-scale
              optimization problems challenging.
To cope with storage and computer time
              demands required by an exact
optimization of parabolic systems, so-called
              suboptimal control techniques, 
such as reduced bases techniques and
              instantaneous control have recently 
been proposed. The analysis of these
              techniques is still incomplete and 
the limits of their applicability are not
              clearly described. This
research integrates selected suboptimal control
              techniques into an
optimization framework, where they are interpreted as
              truncated 
iterative methods or are used as preconditioners in optimization
              methods.
This improves our theoretical understanding of these techniques and
              broadens 
their applicability. The resulting methods are applied to specific
              optimal 
control problems in or related to fluid mechanics.  

   Optimal
              control attempts to determine system parameters or inputs 
to increase the
              performance of the system. For example, micro electromechanical
systems may be
              used to alter the flow characteristics on an aircraft wing 
to reduce drag, or
              heaters may be adjusted to achieve a desired temperature
profile in a furnace
              while minimizing energy consumption. Many systems
can be modeled by
              mathematical equations. In this case mathematical 
techniques can be used, at
              least in principle, to determine the optimal
system inputs. For systems that
              can be adequately modeled by moderately
complex mathematical equations this is
              done routinely and successfully.
Detailed mathematical descriptions of other
              systems, including flow 
over an aircraft wing or the temperature distribution
              in a furnace, however,
are so complex that present mathematical techniques for
              the determination
of optimal control strategies require such large computer
              resources that
render them impractical. The goal of this research is to
              develop and analyze
computational mathematics tools for the determination of
              optimal control 
strategies for a class of complex systems and the
              demonstration of
the practicability of these tools using selected applications
              in fluid 
mechanics.

