Title       : Field Theoretical and Non-Perturbative Methods in Strongly Interacting and in
               Strongly Disordered Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a0075064

Award Number: 0075064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Ludwig ludwig@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0075064
Ludwig
This grant supports theoretical research in condensed matter
              physics.  Effects of quenched disorder and strong interactions, when present
              either separately or simultaneously, dominate many of the most interesting
              phenomena currently of interest in solid state physics.  The behavior of such
              systems is typically very rich, and is often not captured by standard
              approximations based on various "free particle" non-interacting models, such as
              Fermi-liquid theory and its perturbations.  On the other hand, there has been a
              tremendous development in non-perturbative techniques, which have been
              successfully used to solve strongly interacting systems observed in
              experiments.  In this grant non-perturbative techniques from conformal field
              theory and Bethe ansatz integrability, and in part supersymmetry, will be used
              to investigate electronic systems with strong interactions and strong disorder.
               Topics include quantum impurity problems such as quantum dots, and
              localization transitions of non-interacting particles.  In addition, effects
              resulting from the simultaneous presence of disorder and interactions on
              transport and thermodynamic  properties of electronic systems will be studied
              using novel methods.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical research in
              condensed matter physics.  Effects of quenched disorder and strong
              interactions, when present either separately or simultaneously, dominate many
              of the most interesting phenomena currently of interest in solid state physics.
               The behavior of such systems is typically very rich, and is often not captured
              by standard approximations.  This research will investigate a number of new
              methods to deal with these types of physical systems.  The work is of
              fundamental interest and, if successful, will have broad ramifications.
***

