Title       : Structure-Property-Chemistry Relationship in Ferroelectric Bronzes: Material
               Science Issues in Tilted Oxygen Octahedra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0075917

Award Number: 0075917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruyan Guo ryguo@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this research project is to develop underlying materials
              science in solid solutions of tungsten bronze (TB) structure and to enrich the
              present general understanding of the oxygen octahedral ferroelectric materials
              and relaxors, thereby enhancing the capability to design, select and modify
              electronic ceramics and single crystals for various device applications.
              Particular research topics include (a) the construction of structure-field-maps
              for TB compositions; (b) crystallographic structure studies by single crystal
              x-ray diffraction; (c) understanding the cation/vacancy distribution and order
              on relaxor characteristics and structural properties; and (d) the effect of
              thermodynamic fluctuation of large cations on low temperature dielectric
              dispersions. The project will consist of critical experiments and analysis that
              clarify the underlying structure-property-chemistry relationship in the
              ferroelectric TB oxide family.  A structure-field-map for known TB compositions
              that summarizes crystallographic phase stability over ionic radii and
              pressure/temperature conditions will be constructed. Morphotropic phase
              boundary (MPB) systems can therefore be charted and predicted.  Single crystal
              diffraction will be conducted to obtain cationic displacement details in over a
              broad temperature range.  A selected-electric-field-condition single crystal
              x-ray diffraction and structure refinement system will be designed and built. 
              It will be the first of its kind to allow the study of cation displacement
              under an electric field.  Quenching and annealing studies on single crystals of
              near MPB composition with filled or partially filled A-site will be carried out
              to clarify the effect of cation site-preference and the vacancy distribution. 
              Low temperature phase transition/relaxation phenomena will be studied by
              structural analysis (low temperature XRD and neutron diffraction), along with a
              dynamic pyroelectric measurement. The project will provide students from PSU
              and from Lincoln University (an HBCU) with an intellectual and challenging
              research project with access to both university and government lab facilities. 
              

Ferroelectric materials of the tungsten bronze structure encompass a large
              family of solid solution systems with great potential in various electronic,
              optical and electro-optic applications. The understanding that will result from
              this project will take materials scientists toward a more unified understanding
              on the structure-property-chemistry relations in deformed and tilted oxygen
              octahedral structures, and allow the possibility of intelligent selection of
              the materials for technologically important device applications.  
***
