Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Integration of Optimization, Inventory Control and
               Dynamic Models for the Management of Large-Scale Supply Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0075378

Award Number: 0075378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sridhar R. Tayur stayur@grobner.gsia.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. Erik Ydstie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ignacio E. Grossmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the problem of running enterprise systems in a flexible,
              responsive, and reliable manner to capture the economical potential that the
              market might offer, while minimizing the impact of fluctuations in the market.
              To achieve these goals, systematic control and optimization tools will be
              developed that can be used to assess the ability of supply chain systems to
              react to fluctuations, as well as to control the system to improve its
              responsiveness.  Large scale problems will be addressed, the plan is to
              investigate the integration of supply optimization, inventory control and
              dynamics to achieve cost optimal performance, while reducing inventory levels
              and coping effectively with disturbances in supplies, orders and delivery
              times.  The specific objective objectives are to develop a novel framework for
              multi-level planning that integrates optimization, inventory control and
              dynamics in the context of a supply chain with decentralized control. 
              Moreover,  to investigate a novel approach to model the dynamics and control of
              the entire supply chain.  For the implementation,  the plan is to develop a
              prototype of an internet-based system that will allow the effective
              collaboration among the various parties in the supply chain.  

A major
              expected benefit of the research is the creation of a science base that
              provides a framework and guidance for developing decision support tools for
              enterprise systems that leverage the new information technologies. Regarding
              the proposed integration of optimization, inventory control and dynamics, the
              major benefit will be the  coordinated decision making in the supply chain that
              operates as a decentralized system, which reflects more closely the real-world
              behavior of these systems. Finally, the research should provide a scalable
              enterprise solution, which is urgently needed as software companies are
              scrambling to meet the demand, and companies are investing in automated systems
              without a coherent plan or understanding. 

