Title       : LTREB: Pulsed Resources and the Dynamics of Rodents, Ticks, and Lyme-disease
               Risk in Oak Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0075277

Award Number: 0075277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Ostfeld rostfeld@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Canham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075277
Ostfeld
Seven years of observational and experimental studies in oak
              forests suggest that risk of human exposure to Lyme-disease bearing ticks may
              be predictable almost two years in advance based on acorn production. High
              abundance of acorns in the fall stimulates population growth of white-footed
              mice, resulting in high mouse density the following spring and summer. Newly
              hatched larval ticks acquire the Lyme disease bacterium more efficiently from
              mice than from other hosts. Therefore, the greater the abundance of mice in
              summer, when larval ticks are active, the greater the opportunities to feed on
              mice. Larval ticks feeding from abundant mice the summer following a mast year
              molt into nymphs one year later, resulting in high density of infected nymphs,
              and therefore high risk of exposure to Lyme disease, two summers following mast
              production. The project will support continued core monitoring of acorn
              production, population dynamics of rodents, and density and infection
              prevalence of tick vectors, for the next five years. Five additional years of
              data will allow investigators to test the hypothesis  that (1) significant
              relationships between acorn production, the summer density of mice, and the
              density of infected nymphal ticks occur across multiple masting cycles, (2)
              relationships between acorn production and tick density and infection
              prevalence, and between mouse density and tick density and infection
              prevalence, are best described by linear rather than curvilinear regressions,
              (3) significant relationships between acorn production and tick density and
              infection prevalence, and between mouse density and tick density and infection
              prevalence, are caused by the leverage from extremely high acorn production,
              and (4) interannual variation in mouse density, tick density and infection
              prevalence not explained by acorn production will be explained by interannual
              variation in climate. The core monitoring facilitates related research on
              impacts of pulsed resources on consumer community dynamics, (2) patterns and
              implications of dispersal by mice in heterogeneous landscapes and 93) the role
              of vertebrate diversity in Lyme disease dynamics. Continued long-term research
              will promote linkages between community ecology and epidemiology.

