Title       : Holocene Land Use Dynamics in the Western Mediterranean: a Regional Approach to
               Domestication Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a0075292

Award Number: 0075292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134330             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Michael Barton Michael.barton@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E M. MacMinn-Barton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Michael Barton and his team of
              international collaborators will excavate four prehistoric (Mesolithic and
              Neolithic) settlements in upland valleys of the Rio Serpis, a major drainage
              system in Alciante province of Spain. The goal of the work is to understand the
              transition from a hunting and gathering to an agricultural subsistence mode and
              the project builds on nearly a decade of prior research, primarily in the form
              of intensive, landscape oriented archaeological survey. Excavations will take
              place over the course of two summer field seasons, each focusing on one hunting
              and gathering (Mesolithic) and one agricultural (Neolithic) site. Each site
              will be grided and surface artifacts systematically collected. Surface artifact
              densities and features will be used to create a sampling design and an
              integrated field strategy using auger coring, backhoe trenching and hand
              excavation will be employed to acquire information about the density and
              distribution of cultural materials (including artifacts, floral and faunal
              remains) features, paleoenvironmental indicators and radiocarbon samples. GIS
              databases will be developed. In conjunction with regional data this information
              will be used to reconstruct changes in subsistence, social and spatial
              organization over time. The team will also examine the effect of these
              behavioral changes on the landscape.

The transition from hunting and
              gathering to agriculture is one of the most significant in the human past, and
              its repercussions are still felt today. With the advent of agricultural
              economies, humans began to experience widespread sedentism, urban life, and
              social complexity with multiple ramifications: social ranking and
              stratification, occupational specialization, centralized political power and
              organized warfare. Only after humans become dependent on agricultural economies
              did the human impact on the environment result in massive, long term or
              permanent changes in vegetation communities, denudation and anthropogenic soil
              changes. While this transition has long been a focus for archaeological
              research, the factors which underlie it are still poorly understood. This
              research should shed additional light.

