Title       : Bayesian Estimation of Host-Parasite Cospeciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0075406

Award Number: 0075406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Huelsenbeck johnh@biomail.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bret R. Larget  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 1269,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0075406
John P. Huelsenbeck

Dr. John P. Huelsenbeck of the University of
              Rochester, has been awarded a grant to use Bayesian statistacal methods to
              study coevolutionary interactions between parasites and their host species.  He
              is collaborating with Dr. Bret R. Larget of Duquesne University and Dr. Bruce
              H. Rannala of the University of Alberta (Canada) on this research.  Parasites
              are organisms that are dependent on another organism (the host) for their
              survival and reproduction and are typically harmful to the host. Often, the
              association of a host and parasite is highly specific and ancient.  In such
              cases, it is possible to infer the history of association between hosts and
              parasites by examining the phylogeny (genealogy) of related hosts and
              parasites. It is not uncommon for the phylogenies of hosts and parasites to be
              fully or partially concordant as the two groups have evolved in parallel. For
              example, if A, B, and C are the host species, and a, b, and c are the
              respective parasite species (species a parasitizes host A, and so on),  a
              concordant phylogeny of three hosts and parasites might be ((A,B),C) and
              ((a,b),c). The host phylogeny is consistent with species A and B being each
              others closest relatives. Similarly, the parasites associated with A and B
              (namely, a and b) are also each others closest relatives. This pattern is
              consistent with cospeciation of the hosts and parasites; a speciation event in
              a host causes the associated parasite to speciate via allopatric
              speciation.

Typically, the phylogenies of hosts and parasites are not
              completely concordant. Morevoer, the phylogenies of the hosts and parasites are
              never known without error. We have taken a Bayesian approach to infer the
              history of host-parasite association. The research funded by NSF proposes to
              estimate rates of host-switching, parasite speciation, and parasite extinction
              while accommodating uncertainty in the phylogenies of hosts and parasites. A
              numerical technique called Markov chain Monte Carlo will be used to perform the
              Bayesian inference.
.




