Title       : Estimating the Evolutionary Change in Growth Trajectories in the Perennial Plant
               Lythrum salicaria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0075258

Award Number: 0075258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125416             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Rogers jsrogers@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela O'Neil  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will use a unique approach to investigate genetic variation for
              life-history traits, such as size, in the long-lived invasive plant species,
              Lythrum salicaria (purple loosestrife).  Instead of analyzing individual
              size-related life history in each season as has been done by other researchers,
              this project will consider the change in each trait through time.  Six years of
              census data from an experimental garden established in 1993 has demonstrated
              that there is genetic variation for the pattern growth in this species. The
              proposed research will use additional census data from the established
              experimental garden and apply new statistical techniques from the field of
              quantitative genetics to investigate how selection acts on growth and genetic
              constraints on growth. Tradeoffs (negative correlations) between growth and
              reproduction will be investigated using both quantitative genetics and
              experiments manipulating reproductive effort. A new experimental garden of
              three cohorts of plants of different ages will be established to to determine
              whether year to year variation in life-history traits is due to the intensity
              of selection varying with age.

 Lythrum salicaria is an invasive species
              that is a serious pest in this country yet we still know little about its life
              history. Basic information on life span, lifetime reproductive success,
              contribution of each reproductive episode to total reproduction, etc. will be
              extremely valuable to researchers studying the invasiveness of this species.
              Investigating genetic variation for growth in this species is relevant to the
              fields of both evolutionary ecology and conservation biology.

