Title       : Rydberg Structure and Dynamics of Highly Excited Small Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0075833

Award Number: 0075833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Grant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Edward Grant of Purdue University is supported by a grant from the Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to continue his experimental research on
              state-to-state photoionization and dynamics of intramolecular relaxation by
              rovibronic coupling in highly excited (Rydberg) states of small molecules. 
              These experiments will be accomplished by multi-photon resonant ionization and
              high-resolution threshold photoelectron spectroscopy, in particular, Zero
              Electron Kinetic Energy-Photoelectron Spectroscopy.  The experiments will be
              paralleled by Multi-Channel Quantum Defect Theory calculations to identify
              highly excited rovibrational states and l coupling in these systems.  These
              calculations, initiated by the PI, will be extended by a collaboration with a
              theorist who is expert in this area.  Initially studies on the formyl radical
              and nitrogen dioxide will be continued, but these will be expanded to include
              other larger polyatomic molecules which are theoretically more
              challenging.

Small reactive radical molecules in excited states are critical
              species in many chemical and physical processes occurring in media such as
              internal combustion, plasma processing, polluted atmospheres and the
              interstellar medium.  In order to understand the molecular structure of, and
              energy transfer in, these species high resolution spectroscopy and high level
              theoretical calculations will be made.  This will enable observation of these
              media to be interpreted and the media to be modeled. 
