Title       : RUI: Evolutionary Significance of Mitochondrial DNA Clade Boundaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0075607

Award Number: 0075607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200017             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Archie jarchie@csulb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach
	      1250 Bellflower Blvd
	      Long Beach, CA  908400004    213/498-4121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075607
Archie
Phylogeography is the study of the evolutionary relationships
              (phylogenies) of populations of animals and plants in a geographical context,
              that is, the study of geographical patterns of genetic variation.  Many of
              these studies use mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) which is found outside the nucleus
              of a cell as the genetic marker of choice.  This is because this genetic marker
              has been found to have a high rate of change over time and because it is
              inherited through the maternal lineage. Genetic groups that are identified as a
              result of this type of study are called mtDNA clade groups.  In numerous
              phylogeographic studies, mtDNA clade groups, sampled from populations
              throughout a species range, form very distinct and geographically circumscribed
              groups.  In general, boundaries between the clade groups are very sharp and
              appear to act as barriers to gene flow of the mitochondrial genes. It has not
              been determined effectively what factors influence the rate and extent of
              mitochondrial gene flow across clade boundaries between the groups or if these
              boundaries also act as barriers to nuclear gene flow.  This research will
              investigate the  evolutionary significance of mitochondrial DNA clade
              boundaries by determining what factors affect nuclear and mitochondrial gene
              flow across the boundaries using the western fence lizard (Sceloporus
              occidentalis) as the model organism.  This species is one of the most common
              vertebrates in the western U.S., has a very complex pattern of geographical
              separation of the mtDNA clades, and has a high degree of variability in size,
              coloration, and other features thought to be important in otherwise
              differentiating between populations that are considered valid species.  Clade
              boundaries will be examined in detail using transect sampling between
              identified clade groups. The width of the intergrade or hybrid zone and the
              level of gene flow across the boundaries will be compared in relation to the
              following: environmental gradients, degree of genetic differentiation between
              the groups, and degree of morphological differentiation between the groups.  In
              addition, I will complete a phylogeographic analysis of the western fence
              lizard to identify additional clade boundaries and to test a series of
              hypotheses regarding the origin of this species.  This research will provide
              opportunities for the training of undergraduate students both through summer
              research programs and in classroom settings.  It will: 1) provide field
              experience to learn basic ecology, behavior, and data collection techniques; 2)
              provide training in molecular laboratory techniques (including DNA sequencing
              and genotyping); and 3) promote critical thinking and provide data analysis
              skills as well as a sound theoretical background.  The discrete nature of
              specific sub-projects, i.e., the analysis of particular clade boundaries, and
              the relative ease with which the genetic data can be collected in the
              laboratory will allow both undergraduate and graduate students to become fully
              involved in the research.


