Title       : POWRE: Vesicle Trafficking in Hippocampal Astrocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0075016

Award Number: 0075016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geeta Sharma geeta.sharma@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9125,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There are two main types of cells in the brain: neurons and glia. Traditionally
              glia have been thought to be passive cells whose main function is to provide
              support for neurons. Recent studies, however, indicate that glial cells form a
              vast network that is actively involved in transfer of information over
              relatively long distances. This project has two main aims:

1. How do one
              kind of glial cells, the astrocytes, communicate with each other? 
Preliminary
              data indicate that astrocytes can secrete neurotransmitters and growth factors
              when stimulated. This project will examine the nature of vesicles that store
              these chemicals in the cell. Vesicle trafficking in astrocytes will be examined
              using fluorescent dyes to specifically label vesicle membranes. Astrocytes will
              then be imaged using sensitive CCD cameras and vesicles followed over time.
              Changes that occur upon stimulation of the cell will be recorded.

2. Are
              there specialized areas between astrocytes and neurons that facilitate
              communication between the two cell types?
The hypothesis is that if there are
              such areas and stimulation of astrocytes should reveal microdomains of
              increased activity. In addition, these "hot-spots" should be in close proximity
              to processes of neurons. This will be studied in two ways (a.) Since calcium is
              essential for communication between cells, increases in calcium concentration
              (as indicated by calcium sensitive dyes) in well-defined areas of the cell upon
              stimulation will indicate the presence of hot-spots. (b.) Examination of cells
              under an electron microscope will expose the ultra-microscopic architecture of
              astrocytes revealing the presence of any intimate association with neuronal
              cells.

In summary, the aim of this project is to examine the basic cell
              biology of communication between cells in the brain, especially how astrocytes
              modulate brain function.   Funding of this POWRE project will also enable a
              beginning investigator to acquire preliminary data towards a larger proposal,
              and enhance her credentials and opportunities for an independent academic
              position.
