Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Designing Construction Information Workspaces:
               Making Information Work for Project Teams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0075672

Award Number: 0075672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Fischer fischer@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1604,9147,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0075672
Fischer

This grant provides funding for the exploratory development
              of a new kind of construction information technology: construction information
              workspace (CIW). A CIW is an interactive environment that visually communicates
              construction project information and their inter-relationships to support group
              tasks, such as project review, coordination and decision-making. CIW
              visualizations will be specified and prototyped based on observations of
              project meetings on planned and on-going capital facility projects and based on
              existing information visualizations in science and engineering. Mechanisms or
              filters will be formalized and implemented to generate these visualizations
              based on information obtained from state-of-the-art desktop tools currently in
              use in the construction industry (e.g., 3D CAD, project management software)
              and based on emerging integrated information systems. Through observations in
              practice and through tests with practitioners in the CIW, metrics will be
              developed to assess the usefulness of the developed visualizations to support
              group tasks. The CIW will be implemented in the _'Information Workspace'
              currently under development in Computer Graphics and Human Computer Interaction
              research groups in the Computer Science Department at Stanford
              University.

If successful the results of this research will provide a
              roadmap for the development of construction information workspaces.
              Observations have shown that current single-user human computer interaction
              tools are inappropriate for group use. Therefore, the roadmap will include
              guidelines for the design of visualizations to support group tasks, examples of
              the types of mechanisms needed to generate the visualizations from databases
              and legacy software, and metrics to evaluate whether a particular visualization
              will be useful for group tasks. CIWs will reduce the state of information
              overload often observed on projects today. They will make the currently static
              project information interactive. They will help a team share the focus of a
              discussion through visually representing the critical relationships between
              project information. Therefore, teams will be more likely to make better
              decisions and use available project information in a strategic and not just
              reactive way. The construction domain provides a challenging application domain
              for _'information workspaces' because of the large number of stakeholders
              involved in a project and because of the large and frequently changing sets of
              various types of information necessary to describe a project. Hence the results
              from this research will likely be useful in other domains.

