Title       : Collaborative Research: Alternative Carbon Source for Lake Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0075107

Award Number: 0075107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $477069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Carpenter srcarpen@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Kitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              00-75107
Carpenter

Collaborative Research:  Alternative carbon sources for
              lake food webs

Most ecosystems are viewed as driven by photosynthesis
              deriving from plants within the system's boundaries.  Lakes in particular are
              textbook examples of how algae and aquatic plants support food webs including
              fish.  Yet, plant production is often a poor predictor of fish and invertebrate
              production.  Ecologists have long known that lakes receive significant inputs
              of organic matter from their watersheds. Recent work demonstrates that this
              terrestrial organic matter is potentially available, suggesting terrestrial
              organic matter may be significant in supporting lake food webs including top
              carnivores.  This project will address this question by a series of whole lake
              additions of a stable isotope of carbon which will produce a strong contrast in
              isotopic composition between terrestrially-fixed carbon and carbon fixed by
              aquatic plants.  Through a combination of stable isotope addition experiments
              and  computer modeling, this research will provide an ecosystem-level test of
              the importance of the connections between terrestrial organic matter and
              aquatic food webs.
 

Abstract

00-75111
Hodgson

Collaborative
              Research:  Alternative carbon sources for lake food webs

Most ecosystems are
              viewed as driven by photosynthesis deriving from plants within the system's
              boundaries.  Lakes in particular are textbook examples of how algae and aquatic
              plants support food webs including fish.  Yet, plant production is often a poor
              predictor of fish and invertebrate production.  Ecologists have long known that
              lakes receive significant inputs of organic matter from their watersheds.
              Recent work demonstrates that this terrestrial organic matter is potentially
              available, suggesting terrestrial organic matter may be significant in
              supporting lake food webs including top carnivores.  This project will address
              this question by a series of whole lake additions of a stable isotope of carbon
              which will produce a strong contrast in isotopic composition between
              terrestrially-fixed carbon and carbon fixed by aquatic plants.  Through a
              combination of stable isotope addition experiments and  computer modeling, this
              research will provide an ecosystem-level test of the importance of the
              connections between terrestrial organic matter and aquatic food webs.

