Title       : RUI: Chloroplast Movements as a Mechanism for Protection Against Radiation
               Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0075847

Award Number: 0075847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly L. Gorton hlgorton@osprey.smcm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's Col of Maryland
	      18952 E. Fisher Road
	      St. Marys City, MD  206863001    240/895-2000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9141,9169,9178,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Photosynthesis, the process by which the sun's energy is converted to chemical
              form, supports most of the life on earth.  In leaves, the chloroplasts (where
              photosynthesis occurs) can move within the cell, maximizing light absorption
              when light is dim and minimizing absorption when light is bright. Although
              these movements are common, the advantage they confer to plants in the field,
              if any, is unknown.  One possibility is that these movements help protect
              chloroplasts from damage when visible or ultraviolet radiation is excessive.
              Radiation stress is common, and plants have evolved a variety of
              photoprotective mechanisms to cope, possibly including chloroplast movements. 
              
	The PIs will use laboratory measurements to examine the extent to which
              chloroplast movements might be photoprotective, and field measurements to
              ascertain whether this advantage is actually realized in plants growing under
              natural conditions. In the laboratory the PIs will measure photosynthesis and
              assess damage to chloroplasts both when chloroplasts are allowed to move freely
              and when they are fixed in one position. For field measurements, the PIs have
              developed an instrument to monitor chloroplast movements under natural
              conditions.  The PIs will examine the link between these movements and rates of
              photosynthesis. This work will determine whether chloroplast movements are part
              of the suite of adaptations plants use to adjust their photosynthetic apparatus
              to the unpredictable changes in light they experience each and every day. 
              Results of this study will be important for understanding how plants deal with
              stress and variability in their environment, both in natural and agricultural
              systems.  In addition, the work will significantly enhance the research
              infrastructure at St. Mary's College, a small, public, liberal-arts honors
              college with a strong emphasis on undergraduate research.  Several students
              will be involved in the research during each academic year and at least one
              will participate in the field research each summer. 

