Title       : Development of Fragility Curves for Problems in Geotechnical Earthquake
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0075998

Award Number: 0075998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Herve Prevost prevost@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Deodatis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Apostolos S. Papageorgiou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to develop fragility curves for a wide
              range of problems in geotechnical earthquake engineering; specifically, for
              foundations, slopes, and retaining walls.

Fragility curves provide the
              probability of exceeding a prescribed damage level (e.g. minor, moderate,
              major, complete) for a certain type of structure, as a function of the severity
              of the seismic event.  Fragility curves are extremely significant from the
              engineering applications point of view as practicing engineers can use them
              directly without having to perform any complex computations, and because they
              form the basis for all risk analysis/loss estimation/risk reduction of civil
              infrastructure systems.  Although fragility curves have been established for
              structures such as buildings and bridges, there hasn't been any systematic
              effort to develop such curves for geotechnical structures (e.g. foundations,
              slopes, retaining walls).  Such a task is particularly important, as damage to
              these structures is quite extensive during major earthquake
              events.

Empirical fragility curves will be computed using available damage
              data from recent seismic events such as: the Loma Prieta, the Northridge, the
              Kobe, Japan, the Izmit, Turkey and the Chi-Chi, Taiwan earthquakes.  In
              parallel with the task of establishing the empirical fragility curves,
              analytical fragility curves will be computed using Monte Carlo simulation
              techniques.  One of the important tasks is to compare the "empirical" and
              "analytical" fragility curves so as to improve their accuracy and reliability. 
              Several issues related to the establishment of fragility curves for such
              geotechnical structures will be addressed, including the definition of the
              different damage states for each type of structure and the measure of the
              intensity of the earthquake event.  Different mechanisms will be considered to
              cause damage to the geotechnical structures considered.  Particular emphasis
              will be given to soil liquefaction, to slope failure due to exceeding the shear
              strength, and to tilting of foundations and foundation systems.

The
              establishment of fragility curves for a range of geotechnical structures will
              form the basis for the risk analysis/loss estimation/risk reduction of such
              structures, when subjected to earthquakes.  These fragility curves will allow
              public and private organizations to make rational assessment of 1) the
              potential damage to civil infrastructure systems from earthquakes, 2)
              retrofitting strategies, 3) insurance premiums, and 4) guide emergency
              management teams to identify high-risk systems.

This project involves a
              collaboration between researchers at Princeton University and the State
              University of New York at Buffalo.

