Title       : POWRE: Transnational Identities: Southeast Asian-Americans, Gender, and
               Employment in Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0075028

Award Number: 0075028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43130              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel M. Silvey silvey@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the ways that Southeast Asian immigrants'
              migration and employment patterns shape, and are shaped by, their gender and
              ethnic identity formation in the larger metropolitan area of Denver, Colorado. 
              Specifically, the study will examine: i) the ways that particular employment
              opportunities are structured by "race"- and gender-based exclusions; ii) how
              these immigrants themselves formulate and enact strategies to challenge the
              labor market discriminations they face; and iii) the ways that stereotypes of
              "Asian-American" femininity and masculinity operate differently across
              generations and ethnic groups.  The research provides an in-depth analysis of
              labor market participation and identity formation among 100 cross-generational
              pairs of in-migrants (total n = 200) from four Southeast Asian countries (i.e.,
              Vietnam, the Philippines, Laos, and Cambodia) in the larger Denver metropolitan
              area.  The project will employ multiple methods, including in-depth and
              focus-group interviews, event-history surveys, and census data analysis.  Local
              student groups representing the specific immigrant communities will be
              centrally involved in the collection, analysis, and dissemination of the
              projects' findings.  The findings will be situated within historical analyses
              of the different national groups' immigration and labor market patterns and
              experiences.  The questions that this project will address are important for
              three main reasons.  First, since 1965, the number of Southeast Asian
              immigrants entering the U.S. has grown rapidly.  They are a population of
              increasing demographic significance.  Second, this project will clarify both
              the factors influencing this growing population's employment opportunities, and
              the ways in which their presence is influencing economic and cultural
              developments in the Denver area.   Third, scholars know very little about this
              population. This research thus can fill a critical gap in knowledge. 

This
              POWRE project will lay the groundwork for a wide range of comparative projects
              and cross-disciplinary conversations and will inaugurate a new realm of
              investigation that will link Silvey to a broader range of colleagues than she
              currently has.  In addition, at this point in her career, she has a rare window
              of opportunity to advance this research agenda.  Finally, this work will help
              establish Silvey's knowledge base in topics that remain closely linked to her
              longstanding research foci but also extend beyond her previous work to include
              the politics of international, Southeast Asian-American labor and immigration
              geographies.

