Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Supply Chain Optimization and Protocol Environment
               (Scope) - A Modeling Environment for Extended Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0075606

Award Number: 0075606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reha M. Uzsoy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ananth Iyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph F. Pekny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul V. Preckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer K. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the need for decision support tools in this area by
              developing a Supply Chain Optimization and Protocol Environment (SCOPE) which
              emulates the behavior of supply chains involving multiple, independent,
              goal-seeking entities over time.  Entities will be represented by optimization
              models that capture the key decision variables and technological constraints,
              while retaining enough special structure to allow efficient solution. 
              Interactions among entities will be described through protocols that specify
              what goods, money and information pass among entities, in what order entities
              make decisions, how information is
processed by each entity to make its
              decisions, and how entities respond to unforeseen events.   The approach
              combines computational tractability and scalability with the ability to explore
              the behavior of different supply chain configurations over time.  It will also
              allows the researchers to represent a range of different modes of interaction
              among entities in the supply chain.

Successful development of a tool like
              SCOPE would permit rapid prototyping of supply chain designs, while researchers
              would have a test bed for assessing how well theoretically-derived results
              generalize to different modes of operation that strain some of the original
              assumptions, and for experimenting with forms of supply chain collaboration too
              complex for treatment analytically.  

