Title       : Recruitment Limitation, Resource-Based Niches, and the Maintenance of Tropical
               Tree Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a0075472

Award Number: 0075472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330581             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Kobe kobe@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075472
Kobe
This proposal presents an integrated set of field experiments and
              model analyses to evaluate the relative influences of recruitment limitation
              and resource-based niches on the maintenance of tree species diversity in wet
              tropical forests. A particular focus of this proposal is soil resources (water
              and mineral nutrients), because strong indirect evidence warrants an
              examination of their role in the dynamics of tropical forest communities.
              
	The proposed addresses two sets of mechanisms that could enable the
              maintenance of high species diversity. First, to what extent are tropical tree
              species recruitment limited? Do species differ in recruitment limitation?
              Second, do tropical tree species partition gradients of resource availability?
              Specifically, what is the influence of soil resource and light availability on
              species-specific seedling survivorship and growth? Is there a trade-off among
              species in the ability to survive under low soil resources versus rapid growth
              under high soil resources. Is there a trade-off among species in colonization
              potential (fecundity and dispersal) versus competitive ability (resource based
              growth and survivorship), which underlies the maintenance of diversity?
	To
              address these questions, species-specific sub-models of seedling production and
              dispersal, and seedling growth and survival will be developed from field and
              experimental studies at La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. This study
              will contribute to understanding the mechanisms that lead to high tree species
              diversity in tropical forests. It will characterize offspring recruitment in
              terms of seedling production and dispersion, which in comparison to seed trap
              studies, is less biased against animal dispersed species and provides more
              robust sample sizes to rigorously test recruitment potential. The study also
              tests the influence of soil resources and light availability on
              species-specific seedling survivorship and growth. Finally, the research will
              integrate empirical results to assess the relative importance of recruitment
              limitation versus resource-based niches to the maintenance of tropical tree
              diversity.

