Title       : Towards a Monograph of the Ulvellaceae (Ulvophyceae, Chlorophyta)and related
               green algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0075601

Award Number: 0075601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. O'Kelly cokelly@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0075601
Dr. Charles J. O'Kelly

Drs. Charles O'Kelly and Robert Andersen
              of Maine's Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences have been given an award to
              study the biodiversity and evolution of an important group of microscopic green
              algae.  It is a challenge to identify small living things, and it is a
              challenge to obtain accurate information that will allow researchers to
              identify them when necessary.  Research by O'Kelly and Andersen will make
              identification less of a challenge for one family of small green algae, the
              Ulvellaceae.  Members of the Ulvellaceae are common in marine and freshwater
              environments, but because they are small, they typically go unnoticed - except
              for those species that cause disease in commercially-valuable seaweeds and in
              corals.  Many species have been described, but the characters separating them
              are few and hard to use.  Descriptions, records, and research reports are
              widely scattered, hard to acquire and assemble, and frequently are
              contradictory.  Also, species that look very much alike may not be closely
              related.  The historical relationships among species of Ulvellaceae, and
              species that look like they belong to Ulvellaceae but do not, are not well
              known and, when discovered, may surprise.  For example, the nearest relatives
              of Ulvellaceae are not small algae, but large ones (the sea lettuces, family
              Ulvaceae).  They will assemble the widely-scattered reports on algae in the
              Ulvellaceae, and will collect living and preserved specimens of them,
              particularly from the temperate eastern and western coasts of North America. 
              The research team will interpret these materials using modern culture,
              microscopical, and molecular methods, and produce more accurate species
              concepts and reconstructions of historical relationships.  They expect to find
              and describe a number of new species.  Results of this work will be posted
              online, at an authoritative, "one stop" shopping site for information on this
              group of algae.  The study will provide a workable template for other efforts
              to assemble and distribute information on the diversity of Earth's small
              creatures.


