Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: More is Different - A Grammatical Approach to
               Scalable Enterprise Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0075396

Award Number: 0075396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146086             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moon-Jung Chung chung@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Kwon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian T. Pentland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for exploratory research on the development of
              scalable enterprise systems, with particular emphasis on web-based electronic
              commerce applications.  While transaction volume is one aspect of the problem,
              scalability also includes the ability of a system to adapt to a changing
              environment, including new products, processes, technology, markets, and
              business partners.  To address the problem of scalability, a set of
              interrelated topics will be explored:  (1) grammatical models of enterprise
              workflow; (2) tools for supporting the design of scalable systems; and (3)
              strategies for actually measuring or predicting scalability.  This research
              will build on an existing prototype system, called MIDAS (Manufacturing
              Integration and Design Automation System), which provides a grammar-based
              framework for visualizing and managing work processes.  Grammatical models
              provide the conceptual foundation on which the design tools and measurement
              strategies will be based.

If successful, the results of this research will
              provide a theory that characterizes system structure and scalability and
              measures interdependencies among processes.  The research will also lead to a
              prototype of a framework within which such metrics could be validated (through
              empirical research) and applied (through design methodologies and tools).  The
              theory and the prototype tool will form a foundation for developing a web-based
              enterprise system that can handle various different yet interdependent,
              processes.  Such an enterprise system will be scalable in terms of not only
              volume but also variations, and will evolve into a powerful tool to model,
              configure, and reconfigure a wide variety of processes in relation to
              e-commerce activities in a virtual community.

