Title       : Systematics of the Lauxanioidea (Insecta: Diptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0075206

Award Number: 0075206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Gaimari   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075206
Gaimari

Lauxanioidea (Diptera) are a large diverse lineage of flies
              (4 families, 209 genera and subgenera, ~2000 species), worldwide in
              distribution, that took two major evolutionary pathways in their larval feeding
              modes.  On the one side, the pathway exemplified by the family Chamaemyiidae is
              one of larval predation on soft-bodied sternorrhyncan insects such as aphids,
              scales, and mealybugs.  On the other, that represented by Lauxaniidae and
              Celyphidae is larval saprophagy, feeding in decaying plant material from forest
              leaf litter to bird nests.  The remaining family Eurychoromyiidae is enigmatic,
              with only one described species whose larval feeding habits are unknown. 
              Discovering the larval habits of this latter family and placing them within the
              context of one of these pathways are among the goals of this study.  The
              current higher classification for the superfamily does not reflect phylogeny,
              so this project seeks to place the genera of Lauxanioidea into a phylogenetic
              context, constructing a natural, biologically predictive classification to
              reflect the interrelationships among lineages.  The hypothesized phylogenetic
              relationships will be used to examine biogeographical histories of these flies,
              and to explore the significance of the major feeding shift between larval
              saprophagy and predation in the early stages of lauxanioid evolution.  Within
              the predatory chamaemyiid lineage, feeding patterns and host shifts will be
              scrutinized with an eye towards understanding host specificity among species of
              different genera, providing an additional element of predictability to an
              important group of predators of Sternorrhyncha.  Habitat and food requirements
              can also be highly specific for saprophagous taxa, and assessing these
              requirements in the context of a phylogenetic classification can aid in
              developing conservation strategies within areas with high litter content, such
              as forest ecosystems.  Understanding lauxanioid relationships and associated
              patterns provides insight into the worldwide radiation of a highly diverse,
              functionally critical higher taxon.  The relationship between lauxanioid
              diversification and patterns of historical biogeography will provide insight
              into the reasons for their present-day success, particularly in areas of
              highest diversity such as Southeast Asia and South America.  The nuances of the
              feeding shift between saprophagy and predation are fundamental to many
              monophyletic groups of Diptera and other insects, and provide a step towards
              understanding the true ecological importance 

