Title       : POWRE: Isotopic and Geochemical Comparison of Metavolcanic Sequences in the
               South-Central Scandinavian Caledonides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0075034

Award Number: 0075034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. McClellan beth.mcclellan@wku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0075034
McClellan

The Scandinavian Caledonides are a classic area for study
              of thrust and nappe tectonics, and particularly with the advent of plate
              tectonic theory, for the study of ancient ocean crust that was thrust onto the
              continent during Paleozoic orogenic events.  In the central Norwegian
              Caledonides, a majority of these exotic and suspect terranes occur in a thrust
              complex termed the Trondheim Nappe Complex (TNC).  Ophiolitic sequences in the
              western TNC have received much attention and study, in part because they are
              commonly intact, of low metamorphic grade, and may be associated with
              fossiliferous sedimentary rocks that constrain their age.  In the eastern TNC,
              however, such sequences are generally more highly deformed and metamorphosed
              and fossil preservation is uncommon, therefore obscuring the tectonic
              setting(s) represented by the igneous successions and relationships between
              rock units.  This proposal addresses the age and tectonic setting of three
              metavolcanic complexes in the eastern TNC, and offers a test of two recently
              proposed hypotheses that concern revisions to the traditional nappe terminology
              and stratigraphy: (1) that the volcanic rocks in question actually do not
              represent oceanic crust, but extruded into a sedimentary basin on continental
              crust after a period of ophiolite obduction and erosion; or (2) that the
              volcanic complexes are related components of an oceanic arc or back-arc complex
              that was thrust onto continental crust, and underlie a major unconformity. 
              Results of such a study could be applied t more far-reaching problems
              concerning the nature of a vast ophiolitic belt throughout the Caledonides, and
              the presence of a "belt-length, terrane-linking unconformity" developed above
              it.  The metavolcanic sequences in question are all well represented in the
              study area, and the project would build upon previous mapping by the PI,
              completed for dissertation work.  A one-month field session is planned, for
              detailed mapping along critical contacts and to collect samples for geochemical
              and isotopic analyses.  The PI has recently relocated to the University of
              Kansas (KU), because of the prospect of professional opportunities for both her
              and her spouse.  At KU, the instrumentation (ICP-MS, ICP-AES, mass
              spectrometer) and support structure is available for the proposed work, and
              colleagues with expertise in this area are willing to assist in the "learning
              process."  The proposed activity is in accord with intent of the POWRE Program,
              as the study would furnish the PI with an opportunity to become proficient with
              modern instruments and current analytical methods, to collaborate with
              colleagues abroad and at KU, and to contribute to the KU Tectonics initiative. 
              Finally, this study would support a student as a field and lab assistant, and
              facilitate building a research program that would provide international
              prospects for future students.

