Title       : SGER: Isolation of Odorant Receptors from the Malaria Vector Mosquito Anopheles
               gambiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a0075338

Award Number: 0075338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49837              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence J. Zwiebel l.zwiebel@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In recent years it has become clear that all animals share common molecular
              mechanisms by which they are able to detect chemicals in their environment. 
              Insects, like many animals, use olfaction (smell) to sense changes in their
              surroundings which in turn influence several characteristic behaviors.  One
              important example of an insect behavior that is largely controlled by olfaction
              is the preference for human blood meals displayed by several species of
              mosquitoes some of which are responsible for the transmission of diseases such
              as encephalitis and malaria.   
Our work is concerned with the study of the
              genetic basis for this olfactory driven preference in mosquitoes.  To carry out
              this project we propose to identify and characterize a set of genes from the
              mosquito, Anopheles gambiae that encode proteins that act as odorant receptors.
               Such receptors act to recognize and specifically bind particular olfactory
              cues as a necessary first step in the mosquito's ability to sense and respond
              to these chemicals.  We will use molecular techniques to look for mosquito
              genes that are closely related to previously identified odorant receptors that
              have recently been identified in a highly studied model insect, the fruitfly
              Drosophila melanogaster.  Once candidate genes for these receptors have been
              isolated they will be tested to see if they are expressed in correct antennal
              cells of the mosquito that are known to be responsible for olfaction in this
              insect. 
By successfully identifying odorant receptors from mosquitoes we hope
              to be able to better understand the processes by which this insect is able to
              sense its surroundings initiate the behaviors that ultimately results in the
              choice of what type of animal to bite.  We also expect that these studies will
              eventually lead to a better understanding of what signals these insects respond
              to (which may lead to the development of new and powerful insect repellents) as
              well as a better appreciation of the events that have lead to the evolution of
              blood feeding preference among insects in general. 


