Title       : Dynamics of Point Defect/Impurity Interactions and Clustering Due to Ion
               Implantation and Thermal Annealing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0075723

Award Number: 0075723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448757             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Rozgonyi rozgonyi@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to achieve greater understanding of damage in
              crystalline silicon caused by energetic low and medium mass ion implantation,
              and to conduct a survey study of similar effects in GaN and SiC. Prior research
              established that most of the point defects remaining after implantation are
              trapped in defect cluster/disorder regions. The clusters subsequently re-emit
              point defects during an-nealing, producing a spectrum of stable defect
              complexes. It was also shown that the defect cluster dis-tribution after both
              80 K and room temperature implantation produces, in addition to the expected
              in-terstitial dislocation layer near the projective range, Rp, and a
              vacancy-rich defect band between the surface and Rp (called the Rp/2 layer),
              another defect layer of unknown origin at depths of 2 to 3 times Rp. An
              understanding of the physics responsible for this behavior impacts the
              performance achievable from ultra-shallow pn junctions, and the correct
              modeling of post-implantation annealing defect dy-namics which are operative in
              impurity gettering and transient enhanced diffusion phenomena. In addi-tion to
              providing new fundamental data on processes in crystals with point defect
              supersaturations, this project seeks options for control/suppression of these
              phenomena, particularly during the implantation itself. The general approach is
              to study defect accumulation and evolution within individual collision cascades
              using very low fluence MeV ions over a wide temperature range starting from ~
              80 K. The negligible cascade overlap for such implants isolates intrinsic
              intra-cascade point defect processes. The use of sensitive in-situ electrical
              measurements, together with a broad and complementary set of diag-nostic
              techniques allows characterization of a spectrum of defect types. Rutherford
              Backscattering Spectroscopy (RBS) and bevel-polish/etching will provide total
              damage data, while two-detector coin-cidence Positron Annihilation Spectroscopy
              (PAS) will provide vacancy/impurity identification. Deep level transient
              spectroscopy (DLTS) and electron beam induced current (EBIC) techniques will be
              used to identify centers with "native" electrical activity, as well as those
              with the electrical activity "in-duced" by trapping of hydrogen or diffusing
              metal impurities. Underlying these point defect/impurity phenomena are
              fundamental issues related to the release, diffusion, and capture stages of
              gettering and near-surface dopant diffusion. Specific objectives of the
              research are to: understand structural, chemi-cal, and electrical properties of
              the defect clusters formed in Si crystals due to implantation with low and
              medium mass ions; specifically examine the physical properties of cluster
              thermal stability, its ability to emit mobile point defects, which enable the
              formation of stable complexes during annealing; understand the nature of
              defects formed above(RP/2) and below(2RP) the projected range region and
              determine their impact on dopant/impurity redistribution and gettering; explore
              photon/electric field procedures which enable control of implant defect cluster
              properties and distribution in order to create defect engineering
              options.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              materials science with high technologi-cal relevance. Advanced implantation and
              characterization techniques allow greater understanding and control of
              elementary processes which will allow advances in fundamental materials science
              and tech-nology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research
              is expected to contribute to improving the ability to achieve doping with high
              residual crystal quality for electronic and photonic applications.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area.
***

