Title       : Sulawesi as the Crossroads of the Southeast Asian Rodent Radiations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0075555

Award Number: 0075555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan C. Morales jcm19@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Ruedas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075555
Morales and Ruedas

Observations and mapping endeavors in the Malay
              Archipelago dating back to the time of Alfred Russel Wallace formed the
              beginnings of the modern biological discipline of biogeography: the study of
              the distributions of animals and plants, and of the causes of those
              distributions.  However, perhaps in part because of the overwhelming influence
              of Wallace, no further comprehensive biological studies have since been
              undertaken in the Malay Archipelago, the birthplace of biogeography.  A few
              studies have examined, in isolation, distinct faunal elements (e.g., insects,
              birds, bats) of certain of the islands of the archipelago.
	We have, in
              contrast, begun to integrate these disparate studies and initiate studies of
              our own across the entire Malay Archipelago, from Mainland Asia to New Guinea
              and Australia.  These integrative studies have as a goal to test the general
              biogeographic hypotheses founded on ecological studies of the area.   Our work
              focuses on DNA-sequence derived studies of the evolutionary relationships
              within a single group of animals: the rodents.  In particular, we will
              concentrate on one family of rodents, the Muridae, which is the most speciose:
              over 65% of all rodent species (1326/2021) are murids.  We chose these rodents
              because these tend to be widespread and ubiquitous throughout the region, thus
              we are almost invariably assured of study organisms.  We will use the
              DNA-sequence data to determine what the major patterns of historical
              biogeography are in the area.
	The specific objectives of the project are to
              derive DNA-sequence based phylogenies of the area's murid rodents; these
              phylogenies will be used to test biogeographic hypotheses that have been
              proposed for the origin of the Australian, Papuan, and Sulawesian rodent
              radiations.  Finally, the data will be used to generate a more comprehensive
              and robust vision of the relationships among the region's rodents.  We will
              concentrate on Sulawesi as a key missing element in our current data set.  We
              have been studying the region's rodents for some years and have amassed
              specimens for analysis from islands on the continental margin as well as New
              Guinea and Australia; however, Sulawesi is of critical importance to regional
              biogeographic analyses (therefore to biogeography as a whole), as ecologically
              derived faunal studies are unable to localize the island within either of the
              two broad regions elucidated by Wallace.  Sulawesi's murid rodent fauna, one of
              the area's and the world's richest, is constituted by at least 41 species, of
              which 36 are endemic.  Of the endemics, ample representation is found of the
              major murid groups of the area, but most importantly, a group known as the "Old
              Endemics."  Rodents in this group tend to be rare and isolated and as such
              constitute key elements in evolutionary and biogeographic analyses. 
              Discovering these patterns will enable us to begin to understand how the faunal
              colonization of the area was undertaken, as well as what mechanisms are
              responsible for one of the richest regional mammalian biotas in the world.

