Title       : CISE Next Generation: Scalable Enterprise Systems: Research on Advanced
               Technologies to Support Internet-based Scalable E-business Enterprises (ISEE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0075284

Award Number: 0075284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Y. Su su@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herman Lam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherman X. Bai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2884,9161,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0075284
Stanley V. SU
University of Florida

CISE Next Generation
              Software: Research on Advanced Technologies to Support Internet-based Scalable
              E-business Enterprise (ISEE)

The Internet and Web technologies have brought
              about rapid and significant changes in the way business enterprises operate and
              have altered the nature of business competition.  To remain competitive in the
              Internet -connected world a business enterprise needs to adopt these and other
              available information technologies (IT), including the distributed object
              technology exemplified by CORBA, JAVA RMI, DCOM, and Enterprise Java Beans.  
              The integration of Internet, Web and distributed object technologies provides
              the basic information infrastructure, which allows distributed, heterogeneous
              application systems to be interconnected and to share all sorts of resources in
              a structured manner in the form of communicating distributed objects.  This
              basic infrastructure is not sufficient to support scalable enterprises because
              e-business requires not just accessing data and application systems over
              Internet but also the management of business events, constraints, rules and
              process/workflows.  
A more powerful integrated information infrastructure is
              needed for Internet-based scalable e-business enterprises (ISEEs).

The
              objectives of this one-year project are:

1) Investigate the architectures,
              processing techniques and algorithms associated with the proposed technologies
              and use the industrial endorsers to evaluate the practicality of the results. 
              The development code will be made available to all through the Internet.

2)
              Train students who will participate in this project and incorporate the
              concepts and results in relevant graduate courses in three different home
              departments of PIs and CO-PIs.

Identify additional research tasks and form a
              team of academic researchers and industrial participants who are qualified to
              tackle these tasks, and develop a joint proposal for submission to NSF for the
              follow-up work.

