Title       : Dynamics and Control in Semiconductor Manufacturing Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0075041

Award Number: 0075041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dieter H. Armbruster dieter@math.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter E. Crouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project can be viewed as part of the nationwide trend towards industrial
              mathematics.  It is proposed to apply dynamical systems concepts to model,
              analyze, simulate and control problems arising from flows  through
              manufacturing chains and networks.  In collaboration with researchers in
              Industrial Engineering and from the semiconductor industry, problems relating
              to scheduling and to supply chain management will be studied.  A small
              literature base and preliminary research indicate that re-entrant manufacturing
              lines show chaotic behavior under certain circumstances and that dynamical
              systems ideas and control theory might be used to optimize many different
              manufacturing flow problems.  The grant will allow the PI to gain a solid
              foundation in the methods, successes and open problems relating to scheduling
              re-entrant manufacturing lines and in the issues relating to the organization
              of supply chains in the semiconductor industry from factories to assembly/test
              to transportation links, warehouses and suppliers.  The PI will spend the
              academic year in the Department of Industrial Engineering at Arizona State
              University and the follwing two summer months at Intel.  The goal is to become
              immersed into and to deepen the understanding of the research problems in that
              field.  By establishing direct personal interaction with industrial researchers
              and the research community in Industrial Engineering the PI's graduate students
              will benefit in their research interests and career options.  This IGMS project
              is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA)
              and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
