Title       : Phylogenetics and Biogeography of Aeglidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0075600

Award Number: 0075600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Crandall keith_crandall@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075600
Crandall

Over 70 species and subspecies of freshwater crabs from the
              family Aeglidae (Decapoda: Anomura) are known to be endemic to southern South
              America.  These crabs are an interesting and unique group to study because of
              (1) the unusual distribution of species diversity: aeglids are the only
              anomurans restricted to freshwater;  (2) their morphological peculiarities:
              they have not developed pleopods (these are the 5 pairs of appendages on the
              ventral abdomen), the carapace is subdivided by lines, and the gill structure
              is trichobranchiate (divided into three branches);  (3) the ecological
              importance of crabs to freshwater ecosystems, and the fact that many of the
              known species may be considered endangered or vulnerable; and (4) the role they
              play in limiting crayfish dispersion.  Despite the attraction of this group for
              evolutionary study, there has been no work on its phylogenetic relationships. 
              This proposal represents the first detailed attempt to discover the
              evolutionary relationships of Aeglidae.

This study will sample all the
              speices of the family and some of  their anomuran relatives Galatheidae,
              Porcellanidae and Chirostylidae (Galatheoidea), which will serve as outgroups
              to test the monophyly of the Aeglidae.  Seven mitochondrial and nuclear genes
              will be screened to survey approximately 7800 bp of sequence data.  Thus
              phylogenetic analysis will comprise multiple DNA regions separated and combined
              using maximum parsimony, neighbor-joining and maximum likelihood, and
              combinations of these methods with the Templeton, Crandall, and Sing (TCS)
              method.  Recovering a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for Aeglidae will provide
              a framework on aeglid systematics upon which we can test several hypotheses. 
              For example, what is the taxonomic position of Aeglidae in the Galatheoidea? 
              Did Aeglidae speciation occur from north to south or from west to east or some
              combination?  What are the biogeograpical histories of the river drainages in
              which aeglids occur?  Of the previously identified regions of endemism of
              freshwater stream organisms, what are the conservation priorities for these
              regions?

Preliminary results and future phylogenetic relationships
              established from this study, primer sequences, PCR conditions and color photos
              of each species will be incorporated in a new freshwater crab web page that
              will be created in the KAC lab as part of the Tree of Life web project
              (http://ag.arizona.edu/tree/).  This will contribute to integration of research
              and education at all school levels.  This project will also provide
              collaborations with Brazilian and Chilean biologists, and training for at least
              one postdoctoral research associate and one undergraduate student at Brigham
              Young University.

