Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Discrete Event System Specification (DEVS) as a
               Formal Modeling Framework for Scaleable Enterprise Design - Case Study:
               Model-Driven Data Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a0075557

Award Number: 0075557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard P. Zeigler zeigler@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,9217,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate a theoretical foundation for a major
              responsibility of  enterprise systems to ensure that the right information
              about the enterprise is available to decision makers at the right time.  The
              Internet and e-commerce are rapidly creating an environment in which businesses
              can be usefully likened to organisms which must tap into the relevant features
              of their environments to make rapid life/death decisions-where even what is
              relevant is continually in flux.  The primary focus of this project is to
              formulate an approach  to incorporating flexibility in connecting
              decision-makers (brain)  to dynamically  relevant data sources (internal and
              external environment) to support time-critical decisions.  Within  this
              framework, the research will study the application of  model-driven data
              acquisition,  filtering and attention mechanisms to achieve flexible
              sensor-to-decision maker connectivity.

Enterprise resource planning (ERP)
              systems  are a response to the realization that manufacturing control systems
              cannot function in isolation from other major enterprise functions.  The 
              objectives of  ERP systems should also include standardization of principal
              functional modules to minimize customization and enhance reusability.  The
              ultimate result of this research would be a framework for scalable enterprise
              system development that does not constrain the continued development of the
              framework as would a pure software code-based approach.  Based on a
              mathematical formalism, the modules developed would not be bound to any one
              technology but would be amenable to  transition to scalable network
              infrastructures as they evolve. The development of a model-based framework for
              goal-driven data delivery could ultimately guide the  design of scalable data
              management as well as other standardized modules in flexible corporate
              enterprise systems.


