Title       : POWRE: Wavelets Applications to Seimic Response Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0075070

Award Number: 0075070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria I. Todorovska mtodorov@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1592,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0075070 
Todorovska
Since first introduced in mid 1980s wavelet analysis has
              been widely applied in many fields of science and engineering.  The wavelet
              transform is particularly suitable for analysis of transient signals and time
              varying systems, because it is localized both in time and frequency.  Its
              widespread use is also due to the existence of orthogonal and bi-orthogonal
              bases, the efficiency in representation of transient signals (data
              compression), and the availability of fast and accurate computational
              algorithms for signal/image transformation and reconstruction.  In spite of its
              obvious suitability to earthquake related problems (transient by nature), the
              wavelet analysis has been applied very little in Earthquake Engineering and
              Engineering Seismology.  The objective of this project is to explore various
              applications of wavelets to these two fields.  The focus of the study will be
              on identification of nonlinear soil-structure systems from strong and weak
              motion records in structures in presence of noise, and on representation and
              analysis of strong ground motion.

This research enhancement grant, made
              under the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education
              (POWRE) program, will provide an opportunity for the Principal Investigator to
              initiate independent research on the application of wavelets (and modern signal
              processing and estimation theory, in general) to her professional field, and
              will create opportunities for future funding from regular NSF and other
              sources. This is expected to increase her chances for getting a regular tenure
              track faculty appointment. The Principal Investigator is a mid career
              researcher, with interdisciplinary education (in Physics, Civil Engineering,
              Applied Mathematics and Electrical Engineering), career based in Earthquake
              Engineering and Engineering Seismology, and with a non-tenure track faculty
              appointment at the University of Southern California.  This grant will also
              provide an opportunity for her continuing presence and visibility at her home
              institution, where she has been the only female faculty in the Civil
              Engineering Department. This project will involve cooperation across two
              engineering disciplines (the Principal Investigator will cooperate on this
              project with faculty from the Electrical Engineering Department of her home
              institution), and participation of one graduate student (with Civil Engineering
              background).  Finally, this project will lead to the introduction of new
              methodologies for understanding and modeling earthquake strong ground motion
              and response of structures, and consequently will contribute to the national
              effort for Earthquake Risk Reduction.
***


