Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Designing and Managing Dynamic Supply Chains Using
               Model-on-Demand Predictive Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0075682

Award Number: 0075682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Smith-Daniels vicki.smith-daniels@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Rivera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Carlyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1401,1604,1669,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development and evaluation of model
              predictive control methods for integrating entities in supply chains where
              business and production conditions vary significantly over time.  Increasingly,
              companies find that they must reconfigure their supply chain structure,
              policies, and operating conditions to maintain or improve their performance in
              dynamic, real-time environments.  In this research, a Model-on-Demand
              Predictive Control approach will provide a closed-loop methodology for
              integrating supply chain decisions that generates desirable system behaviors
              for the enterprise using both feedback and feedforward control action on the
              dynamical system.  In addition, the model predictive control approach will
              provide the ability to evaluate the economic benefits of heterogeneous supply
              structures and varying degrees of centralization and information sharing, and
              the impact of time-varying inputs and outputs on system performance.  Using a
              series of simulation experiments, the Model-on-Demand Predictive Control
              approach will be compared with the performance of Materials Requirement
              Planning logic with a rolling horizon implementation.  Measures of performance
              evaluated in this study include inventory, customer service, responsiveness,
              and schedule stability. 

If successful, the model predictive control
              approaches developed through this research will provide benefits that include: 
              (1) improved understanding of the value of real-time, feedback controlled
              information across heterogeneous organizations in supply chains, (2)
              demonstration of the value of an integrated modeling approach that uses
              operations research, data warehousing, estimation procedures, and process
              control in a distributed decision making environment, (3) managerial insights
              on designing and operating dynamic supply chains for improved performance
              through increased coordination and information sharing, (4) advancement of the
              Internet as the enabling technology for closed-loop decision making across
              organizational boundaries, and (5) foundation for future research on supply
              chain integration using dynamic control approaches in real-time environments
              such as those found on the Internet including supply web enterprises and
              business-to-business marketplaces.   

