Title       : POWRE: Methanogenesis from Biosolids Under Extreme Conditions of Pressure,
               Temperature and Salinity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0075054

Award Number: 0075054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Birgitte K. Ahring bka@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1592,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075054  Ahring   The objective of this research project is to study the natural
              process of anaerobic degradation of treated sewage sludges (biosolids) under
              conditions of high pressure, high temperature and high salinity found in deep
              geological formations.  This research is motivated by the desire to establish
              the feasibility of injecting biosolids into deep underground high permeability
              saline or depleted oil and gas formations.  This could replace the current
              practice of disposing of biosolids on land or in landfills, thereby reducing
              the surface land impairment, truck traffic and associated emissions, impact on
              surface waters and groundwaters and release of greenhouse gases to the
              atmosphere.  If the rate of biogas formation is adequate, methane could be
              recovered at the surface for beneficial reuse as a clean fuel.  It is not known
              how conditions equivalent to the ones found in deep geological formations would
              affect the broad variety of microorganisms carried along with the biosolids. 
              It is unknown to what extent the microbial populations colonizing the injected
              biosolids will actually come from the native populations existing at the deep
              geological formation or from the microbial populations introduced by the
              biosolids.  Through the use of bench-scale deep-well simulators, the anaerobic
              degradation of biosolids under conditions similar to those found at deep
              geological formations will be tested for periods of six and twelve months.  The
              rate of biogas formation, biogas constituents, and changes in the microbial
              populations present in biosolids, as well as in core materials, will be
              studied.  Biosolids obtained from the Hyperion Treatment Plant in Los Angeles
              and core material and native fluids (brine) from the Aliso Canyon gas field
              will be used for these tests.  ***       
