Title       : SGER: A multi-user, combined thermal cycler and microfluorimeter for studies of
               marine organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a0075927

Award Number: 0075927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 15,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Palenik bpalenik@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farooq Azam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award will enable the purchase of an instrument that combines a rapid
              thermocycler with a microspectrofluorimeter.  This technology allows the
              quantification of a PCR reaction as it occurs in real time and thus can convert
              the qualitative results typical of PCR into quantitative ones using the
              sensitivity and precision of the fluorimeter.  Quantitative PCR is emerging as
              a potentially crucial, but still "risky" technique in the study of marine
              organisms.  The barrier of instrumentation cost has also limited its
              development as a tool in marine sciences.  The researchers will initially use
              the instrument in the detection of specific microorganisms (free-living
              photoautotrophs, heterotrophs, symbionts, and pathogens) in the marine
              environment, with the goal of developing a fundamental understanding of the
              mechanisms controlling microbial biodiversity.  The detection of the genes for
              various microbial activities such as toxic metal metabolism or nutrient stress
              responses is a second potential use.  Lastly, population genetic studies of
              eukaryotic marine organisms such as copepods and sea urchins will benefit from
              the utilization of the proposed instrument.  Three laboratories in the Marine
              Biology Research Division of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of
              California, San Diego, will begin as major users of the instrument (Palenik,
              Azam and Burton), but use of the instrument will likely extend to several other
              labs.  In all cases the instrument will be valuable in generating results that
              will open new research directions in marine sciences and provide preliminary
              results for future NSF proposals.  
