Title       : Origins of Nuclear Genomes in Hybrid Unisexual Salamanders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0075856

Award Number: 0075856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina M. Spolsky spolsky@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Uzzell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0075856
Christina M. Spolsky
Thomas M. Uzzell

Drs. Christina M. Spolsky
              and Thomas M. Uzzell of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, have
              been awarded a grant to study the interaction of genomic imprinting and unusual
              reproductive lifestyles in salamanders.  Mole salamanders (genus Ambystoma)
              include a variety of clonally-reproducing lineages that are almost exclusively
              female. Such clonal females are hybrids between sexually reproducing species,
              and might be expected to be sterile. Nevertheless, the clonal females are
              capable of reproducing and have broad geographic ranges in which they are
              common. The mitochondrial DNA of the clonal forms, although distinct, most
              resembles that in a species in one species group of Ambystoma, whereas the
              nuclear genetic material (DNA contained in chromosomes) resembles that of two
              species in another species group. This award will be used to obtain genetic
              material from tissues of selected sexual species and clonal individuals. All
              the genes that encode proteins will be archived in so-called cDNA libraries.
              Two of the nuclear genes (serum albumin and serpin) will be isolated from these
              libraries and sequenced. These sequences will be used to design and test
              primers that permit identification of the genomic composition of clonal
              individuals.

The mitochondrial genomes of clonally-reproducing mole
              salamanders are distinctive, and suggest that these lineages have existed for
              3-5 million years. This is far longer than expected according to evolutionary
              theory, because gradual accumulation of deleterious mutations should eventually
              doom any strictly clonal lineage to extinction. The paradox posed by the long
              independent survival of the mitochondrial DNA given the brief survival expected
              from theory suggests that occasionally nuclear chromosome sets of the clonal
              salamanders are replaced, in sexual rather than clonal reproduction, by nuclear
              chromosome sets from males of sexual species. Genome-specific primers will
              permit an assessment of the frequency with which such chromosomal replacements
              occur. The data are important for theories about the persistence of sexual
              reproduction despite the short-term advantages of clonal reproduction.
              Comparison of variability in mitochondrial and nuclear DNA will provide a basis
              for evaluating the relative effects of natural selection on these two kinds of
              DNA in the clonal lineages.

