Title       : Collaborative Research: Ecological Consequences of Inbreeding in Plants for
               Plant-Herbivore Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0075225

Award Number: 0075225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215934             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Carr dec5z@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075225
Carr
More than half of all plant species self-pollinate at least 20%
              of the time and almost all species studied suffer reduced fitness as a result
              of inbreeding.  Despite decades of intensive, detailed studies of the
              propensity and fitness consequences of inbreeding in plants, virtually nothing
              is known about how inbreeding influences the biology of organisms that
              regularly interact with inbred plants. It is likely that the loss of genetic
              variation within inbreeding individuals and the associated phenotypic changes
              in inbred plants will greatly affect other interacting populations of plants
              and animals. We are expanding the study of inbreeding in plants to include the
              interaction of plant mating-system and insect herbivory. We will conduct a
              series of greenhouse and field experiments to test the hypotheses that
              inbreeding in plants exacerbates the negative effects of herbivory and alters
              the quality of the host for insect herbivores. We will also partition genetic
              variation for herbivore resistance and host plant quality into its additive and
              non-additive components to assess the ability of inbreeding populations to
              respond to selection imposed by herbivores.  Our collaborative study will be
              the first to unite the important disciplines of plant mating-system evolution
              and plant-herbivore interactions. The results of this study will have important
              implications for plant mating-system evolution, for the evolution of resistance
              in host populations, and for the long-term persistence of population fragments
              experiencing rising levels of inbreeding. Our results will also be relevant to
              the development of agricultural crops via selective breeding programs. From the
              herbivore's perspective, this study will provide insight into the ability of
              insects to respond to the environmental heterogeneity created by a mixed-mating
              host and their ability to exploit hosts that have restricted gene flow. As
              natural landscapes become increasingly fragmented, understanding the genetic
              and ecological processes that transpire within small populations is critical to
              conservation management.

