Title       : Hippocampal Representation of Space in Birds: An Electrophysiological Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0075891

Award Number: 0075891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Verner P. Bingman vbingma@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Vertebrate animals, including man, are able to experience past events in their
              lives as memory because the nerve cells of the brain are able to create a
              physical record of those past events. A large body of experimental research has
              identified one brain structure, the hippocampus, as being critically important
              for the formation of new memories. However, how the physiological activity of
              nerve cells in the hippocampus are able to contribute to the physical record of
              past events we call memory remains uncertain. The problem to be studied in the
              proposed research exploits the remarkable spatial memory ability of homing
              pigeons and the important role of the hippocampus in that spatial memory.
              Electrodes, which permit the recording of activity from single nerve cells,
              will be surgically implanted in the hippocampus of homing pigeons. The
              electrodes will be used to observe how nerve cell activity changes as a
              consequence of exploration and the formation of new memory in pigeons allowed
              to freely move in an open environment. Changes in nerve cell activity as a
              consequence of behavior and memory would provide important information on how
              the hippocampus creates a physical record of past events.
	How the brain
              creates a physical record of past experiences is one critical dimension that
              contributes to the uniqueness of each individual. This is apparent and
              tragically evident in people who suffer memory loss as a consequence of brain
              disease, brain trauma or just aging, and gradually or quickly experience a loss
              of identity. Basic research using animal models is a fundamental part of
              unraveling the mystery of how the brain creates memories and what goes wrong
              when an unhealthy brain loses its ability to create new memories. By studying
              how activity in the nerve cells of the bird hippocampus participates in memory
              formation, valuable insight may be gained regarding the relationship between
              the hippocampus, including the human hippocampus, and memory, and help in
              understanding how dysfunction in the hippocampus can lead to memory loss. 
              
	

