Title       : Incorporating Developmental Genetic Pathways into Speciation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0075451

Award Number: 0075451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman A. Johnson njohnson@ent.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam H. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075451 
Johnson & Porter

Developmental geneticists have made tremendous
              progress characterizing molecular mechanisms by which genetic blueprints encode
              the traits of organisms. Genes often interact in pathways to regulate the final
              traits, and these interactions usually involve binding between different
              molecules. Drs. Johnson and Porter, the authors of this proposal, have
              incorporated these developmental pathways into models of evolutionary change.
              They started pairs of computer-simulated populations with identical genes and
              allowed them to evolve under identical conditions of natural selection. As
              these populations evolved, their hybrids quickly accumulated genetic
              incompatibilities and thus became drastically less fit. The authors have also
              developed analytical theory to make quantitative predictions.  The simulation
              results fit the theoretical expectations. Johnson and Porter propose to examine
              the robustness of their models to different assumptions about binding functions
              and the relationship between traits and fitness. They will also investigate the
              extent to which hybrid incompatibilities can evolve despite some exchange of
              genes between the populations. 

This study has important implications for
              the solution to a fundamental evolutionary problem: species formation. 
              Biologists remain interested in how one species become two because, among other
              things, knowledge of this process is critical for understanding how
              biodiversity is generated.  Hybrid fitness reduction, an important contributor
              to the speciation process, usually is due to genetic incompatibilities: genes
              from one species do not interact well with genes of the other. How these
              incompatibilities evolve is still poorly understood, in large part because
              mechanistic models of how traits evolve are lacking.  The proposed study
              provides such a plausible mechanism. Moreover, the proposed exploration of the
              basic evolutionary principles of developmental genetic pathways establishes a
              theoretical foundation for the ultimate union of population genetics and
              developmental biology.



