Title       : Non-thermal Surface Chemistry of Halogenated Molecules: Giant Electron-induced
               Enhancements of Negative Ion Desorption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0075995

Award Number: 0075995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore E. Madey madey@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1318,9161,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Investigation of the mechanism of fluorine and chlorine anion emission from
              adsorbed layers of halogenated hydrocarbons irradiated by electrons forms the
              focus of this research project supported by the Analytical and Surface
              Chemistry Program.  Professor Theodore Madey and his coworkers at Rutgers
              University are examining the enhanced emission of Cl- and F- from physisorbed
              layers of CFC's in contact with water, ammonia, or non-polar co-adsorbates.  A
              series of measurements is being carried out to elucidate the mechanism of this
              enhanced emission, and the connection this may have to the heterogeneous
              chemistry of ozone in the stratosphere.  Electron stimulated ion angular and
              energy distributions are measured under a variety of conditions of surface
              temperature, co-adsorbate polarity, and incident electron energy in order to
              provide mechanistic understanding of the fundamental surface processes of ion
              emission.

When adsorbed layers of chlorofluorocarbon compounds are
              irradiated with low energy electrons, significant amounts of chlorine and
              fluorine anions are desorbed.  In the presence of certain polar co-adsorbates
              such as water and ammonia, this emission is dramatically enhanced.  This
              research project examines this effect with a series of ion angular and energy
              distribution measurements.  Connections of this effect with problems of ozone
              depletion in heterogeneous stratospheric chemistry are made in this research. 
              The results of these studies, in addition to providing considerable fundamental
              insight into ion processes at surfaces, may help to understand stratospheric
              ozone depletion processes

