Title       : POWRE: An Extended-Depth-of-Focus, Differential Interference Contrast (DIC)
               Microscope for Improved Observations of Living Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0075004

Award Number: 0075004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Cogswell cogswell@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A new kind of differential interference contrast (DIC) microscope that will
              allow biologists to observe live-cell preparations with all the high-resolution
              advantages of conventional DIC, but with the added advantage that many more
              features throughout the specimen volume will appear in focus in a single image,
              will be developed.  At present, high resolution DIC techniques are hampered by
              an inherent narrow depth-of-focus.  Sometimes called "optical sectioning" (not
              to be confused with confocal microscopy), DIC tends to image the highest
              spatial frequencies (i.e. the finest detail) only from features that are
              nearest the plane of focus.  Features above or below this plane rapidly lose
              contrast and appear as low spatial frequency blur.  Any biologist who has used
              DIC for imaging thick preparations appreciates that by focusing up and down
              rapidly, one can get a sense of the 3D morphology of a specimen. Unfortunately,
              there is no current mechanism for acquiring this depth information all at one
              time in a single image.  For many biological applications requiring tracking of
              moving cell components over time, the limited focal depth exhibited by DIC
              means that features may rapidly move out of focus, which severely limits the
              ability to obtain useful, interpretable images.

The new microscope will be
              called an extended-depth-of-focus, differential interference contrast (EDF-DIC)
              system.  It will be based on novel "wavefront coding" optical techniques that
              recently have been used to convert a standard fluorescence microscope into one
              that acquires sharp images from extended depths at much faster rates than are
              possible with  confocal or widefield microscopes.  Specifically, the creation
              of an EDF-DIC system requires simply inserting a custom-designed phase plate
              into the imaging path of a standard DIC microscope and then applying a very
              fast, single-iteration digital filter to the recorded image.  This also has the
              advantage that it can be easily adapted to virtually any existing microscope
              design.

It is anticipated that the new EDF-DIC microscope will supply
              biologists with a promising new tool for a wide range of investigations of the
              dynamical processes of living cells over time.  To name a few examples, the new
              EDF-DIC system should provide biologists with the capability to perform the
              following: observe the 3D spatial distribution and dynamic instability of
              microtubules (e.g. in budding yeast) or view all the chromosomes in focus at
              once throughout the mitotic cycle in a broad range of applications throughout
              the animal and plant kingdoms.


