Title       : Algorithms and Software for Phylogenetic Supertrees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0075319

Award Number: 0075319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Sanderson mjsanderson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Gusfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver Eulenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1266,1271,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075319
Sanderson and Gusfield
	Supertrees are phylogenies (rooted
              evolutionary trees) assembled from smaller phylogenies that share some but not
              all taxa (twigs or end branches) in common. Thus, supertrees can make novel
              statements about relationships of taxa that do not co-occur on any single
              source tree while still retaining all the hierarchical information from all
              source trees. As a method of combining existing phylogenetic information,
              supertrees potentially solve many of the problems incurred by other methods,
              such as lack of homologous characters, incompatible data types, or combining
              trees with different taxa. However, despite the potential for constructing
              large trees and synthesizing phylogenetic relationships from trees based on
              disparate sources of evidence, supertree construction has mainly been an
              informal "by hand" operation, done without the use of specially developed
              software. Furthermore, there is little ground for assessing the reliability of
              such supertrees.
	In a collaboration among biologists and computer scientists,
              Drs. Sanderson, Gusfield, and colleagues are examining a new class of methods
              that is somewhat analogous to phylogenetic distance methods but uses a novel
              distance measure based on "flips" of cells in the matrix representation of the
              source trees. In addition to generating supertrees, flip-supertree methods will
              help systematists focus on poorly known or contentious taxa, thereby directing
              future systematic effort where it is most needed. Accuracy and speed of
              supertree methods will be tested through simulation studies, and through use of
              the web-based database of phylogenetic trees in TreeBASE, to determine methods
              most useful to systematists. The graphically oriented software to be developed
              will implement various supertree algorithms and offer improved methods to
              visualize and compare trees that share some, but not all, taxa in common. 

