Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems: Scalable Information Framework for the Extended
               Business Enterprise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  2000  
File        : a0075608

Award Number: 0075608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198573             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Peck   (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Meredith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Kolluru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine W. Jarvis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson Univ Res Fdn
	      P. O. Box 946
	      Clemson, SC  296330946    864/656-0880

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the modeling, developing and prototyping of
              communication standards and interfaces that will support scalable, enterprise
              resource planning (ERP) systems.  Based upon an examination of a set of
              existing supply chains, a general model will be developed to represent a supply
              chain and the data needed to support transactions within the chain.  Standards
              based upon XML will be developed for communication interfaces in a supply chain
              consisting of links that receive products from many suppliers in the chain and
              create products for many customers in the chain.  Models will be constructed
              for representing not only linear relationships of suppliers, manufacturers and
              customers (supply chains) but also complex relationships that can only be
              represented as two-dimensional directed graphs (supply networks).  The
              prototype software will be designed, developed and tested to determine how well
              the model supports operation of a small, sewn products (e.g. parachutes),
              supply network with scalability to a complex of military sewn products such as
              apparel, footwear, and chemical protective suits.   Final scalability would
              support the entire set of supply networks of organizations providing consumable
              military products.

Projections suggest the results of this research will
              lead to new features in ERP systems that currently support only internal
              operations of firms with common ownership or administration.   Results of this
              project will influence the design of future ERP systems to incorporate
              business-to-business support for groups of cooperating, independently managed
              organizations (a virtual enterprise) that builds competitive advantage through
              collaboration.  These new extended systems will reduce overall inventories in
              the supply network while, at the same time reducing stock outages in all supply
              network segments.    The standards developed will facilitate the exchange of
              important information in the supply network and thus increase the velocity of
              both information and product flow between cooperating business entities.  

