Title       : Computational Mathematics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a0075009

Award Number: 0075009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Altenkirch altenkirch@research.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jianping Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will spend 12 months in the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
              Biology at Mississippi State University from August 2000 to August 2001. During
              this visit, he plans to obtain a broad exposure to the general area of
              biochemistry and molecular biology, and some in-depth understanding of
              important research issues in computational biology. This will be accomplished
              by participating in joint research projects with researchers in that
              department, attending department seminars and  professional conferences, and
              exchanging ideas with colleagues through regular discussions. The PI's long
              term interest is in modeling and simulating various signal transduction and
              metabolic pathways in living organisms using nonlinear reaction-diffusion
              partial differential equations and high performance parallel computers.  During
              the proposed visit, he expects to identify long term interdisciplinary research
              projects in which computational simulations can play a significant role in
              solving biological problems, and to develop joint proposals with bioscientists
              for funding to sustain long term research in computational biology.

In
              addition to the research activities, the PI will also emphasize the education
              aspect by combining computational simulations and mathematical modeling with
              biosciences. He plans to involve graduate students 
in the joint research
              projects both during and after the visit, examine the current curriculum in
              biosciences at Mississippi State University to identify the needs for
              computational simulations, and establish connections 
with faculty members in
              biosciences who can help students work on cross-disciplinary projects in
              
computational biology, either as co-advisors or as program committee members.
               This kind of 
cross-disciplinary research experience will significantly
              broaden students' career options and 
enhance their competitiveness in the job
              market.  This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS).
