Title       : Manufacturing and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0075128

Award Number: 0075128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99202              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. McCord chris.mccord@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Perzigian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sundararaman Anand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is funded by the Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical
              Sciences program, with both research and educational components. The principal
              investigator proposes to substantially broaden his background in industrial
              engineering, specifically in manufacturing system design,  to build an
              interdisciplinary research program on computational geometry and optimization
              problems in manufacturing. He plans to study and apply mathematical methods to
              a variety of problems in the design of manufacturing 
systems, primarily those
              involving the setting and evaluation of tolerances, and the routing of
              automated machinery.

The PI will spend the 2000-2001 academic year in the
              Industrial Engineering Program at the University of 
Cincinnati.  In addition
              to collaborating with the members of the Computer-Aided Manufacturing
              Laboratory, he plans to develop a better understanding of Industrial
              Engineering by teaching undergraduate courses in the IE program, participating
              in its senior-level Design Clinic, and participating in graduate courses. 
              

The goals of this project are twofold.  On the research side, the PI
              expects to develop an ongoing working relationship with the CAM laboratory,
              with results disseminated in both the mathematical and industrial engineering
              literatures, as well as directly to industries.  On the educational side, the
              PI will bring the experiences gained back into the Mathematics Department, and
              assist in the development of its Industrial Mathematics program.  The
              possibility may also arise for the creation of interdisciplinary courses
              
between the two departments at the graduate level.  This IGMS project is
              jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and
              the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
