Title       : Synaptic Modulation Mediated by Hyperpolarization-Activated Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0075842

Award Number: 0075842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Zucker zucker@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0075842
Zucker

Neurons communicate by releasing chemical transmitters at
              synaptic contacts.  This project will explore mechanisms by which a hormone,
              serotonin, regulates synaptic transmission at a neuromuscular junction in
              crayfish, a preparation that is particularly accessible to modern cell
              biological probes.  Serotonin increases transmitter release by elevating the
              cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate (cAMP) concentration in nerve terminals,
              which activates a particular presynaptic ion channel referred to as Ih.  We
              will explore the mechanism by which Ih influences transmitter release.  We will
              look for roles for Ca2+ influx through Ih channels and connections to
              cytoskeletal proteins, because such proteins and Ca2+ are known to influence
              transmitter release.  Ih channels also may mediate the induction of a long-term
              facilitation (LTF) of synaptic enhancement following presynaptic activity.  We
              will establish whether there are for Ih and cytoskeletal proteins in LTF
              induction.  Serotonergic modulation of transmission involves increasing the
              size of the presynaptic store of releasable transmitter; we will determine
              whether LTF works the same way.  Finally, we plan to measure the
              spatio-temporal profile of changes in cAMP concentration accompanying serotonin
              action and LTF.
Serotonergic regulation of synaptic transmission is a critical
              locus for control of complex behaviors such as learning and memory. 
              Pharmacological modification of synapses and serotonergic pathways are
              increasingly used to treat a large variety of neurological and psychiatric
              disorders.  This project provides the basic knowledge essential for the
              understanding of complex behaviors and the development of therapeutic
              strategies.


