Title       : Surface Chemistry Studies During Thin-Film Growth Using Electrochemical Atomic
               Layer Epitaxy (EC-ALE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0075868

Award Number: 0075868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376627             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Stickney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is greater understanding and control of electrochemical
              epitaxial processing of compound semiconductors. The focus of the project is
              atomic layer epitaxy (ALE), where deposits are formed an atomic layer at a
              time. In ALE, surface limited reactions are used to form each atomic layer.
              Surface limited electrochemical reactions generally occur at underpotentials,
              potentials below those needed to deposit the element on itself. The approach
              makes use of an automated electrochemical flow-cell, which facilitates growth
              of films thick enough for analysis by X-ray diffraction (XRD), electron
              microprobe analysis (EPMA), infrared (IR), and optical spectroscopies. Previous
              EC-ALE studies have focused either on the first few atomic layers or the
              structure, composition, and morphology of completed films. This project will
              address surface chemistry of the EC-ALE cycle as the deposit is being formed.
              It is thought that optimal conditions (potentials) change as the deposit grows,
              and some form of feedback is needed to better control the process. However,
              currents measured during various cycle steps do not provide an accurate picture
              of the deposition process. It is proposed to study the surface chemistry after
              various numbers of cycles, and at different points in the cycle, while deposits
              are forming, that is, to follow the surface chemistry during the 2nd , 5th ,
              10th , 25th , -..200th , cycles. Surface sensitive probes will be used to
              follow the EC-ALE cycle chemistry during film growth. A unique electrochemical
              STM flow-cell will be used to monitor surface structure and morphology during
              deposition. This apparatus allows atomic scale imaging in a controlled
              environment where solutions are easily exchanged and EC-ALE deposits can be
              formed. The mass of the deposits will be monitored at each step in the EC-ALE
              cycle using an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EC-QCM) system. A
              microbalance crystal will be used as a substrate in a flow-cell. The mass of
              the deposit at each step will be compared with observed currents to elucidate
              interfacial processes and current efficiencies. An electrochemical flow-cell
              deposition system will be constructed for use in the antechamber of a UHV
              surface system, so that the composition of the surface can be monitored after
              any number of cycles and after any cycle step. Deposits will be transferred
              periodically from the flow cell directly to the analysis chamber for
              examination with AES, XPS, LEED, STM, and LEIS. Improved understanding of the
              surface chemistry, leading to better control over deposit structure,
              composition and morphology is expected. InAs and InSb are being grown using
              EC-ALE and work on the formation of III-V compounds in general will continue.
              CdSe/CdTe and InAs/InSb superlattices have been formed, and will continue to be
              studied.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              materials science with high technological relevance. New, innovative
              experimental techniques such as electrochemical atomic layer epitaxy can now be
              characterized more fully leading to greater understanding and control of
              elementary chemical and diffusion processes which will allow advances in
              fundamental materials science and technology. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              the ability to efficiently deposit high crystal quality semiconductor films for
              electronic and photonic applications.  An important feature of the program is
              the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***

