Title       : Nonlinear Optical Spectroscopic Studies of Polymers and Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0075402

Award Number: 0075402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuen R. Shen shenyr@physics.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on three topics: studies of chiral liquid crystalline
              materials, studies of polymer surfaces and interfaces relevant to liquid
              crystal alignment, and studies of surface effects on liquid crystal bulk
              alignment for liquid crystal displays.  According to Lord Kelvin, chirality
              refers to the structural asymmetry of an object whose image in a plane mirror
              does not coincide with itself.  Chiral liquid crystals have become increasingly
              important to liquid crystal science and technology.  More generally, molecular
              chirality also plays an exceptionally important role in science and technology
              in science because, for reasons unknown, practically all natural products such
              as DNA and proteins are chiral.  Research will include developing the nonlinear
              optical spectroscopic technique for unique studies of this special class of
              liquid crystalline materials.  High sensitivity of the technique allows
              measurements not only on the bulk fluid but also on monolayers, surfaces, and
              films of chiral liquid crystals.  From the spectra near vibrational resonances,
              chirality and chiral strength in selected atomic groups of chiral molecules
              will be deduced.  They will be correlated to the chiral molecular structure and
              the macroscopic helical structure of the liquid crystal bulk.  The results will
              yield a better understanding of chirality from the molecular level and chiral
              liquid crystal properties for potential applications.
%%%
Liquid crystals
              have found wide applications in the modern world, with the surface properties
              often being the determining factors for an application.  This research will
              enhance our knowledge of liquid crystals as extraordinary materials for modern
              optoelectronic application such as displays and memory and sensor devices. 
              Substrates in liquid crystal displays and other polymer surfaces potentially
              useful for liquid crystal alignment.  The spectroscopic technique also can be
              used to study liquid crystal monolayers adsorbed at an interface.  Information
              on the orientation and alignment of liquid crystal monolayers is important as
              they control the bulk alignment of liquid crystal films.  A better
              understanding of the polymer surface structures and their interaction with
              adsorbed liquid crystal monolayers would be of help to the design of future
              liquid crystal devices.

