Title       : Formation of High Temperature Superconducting Balls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0075780

Award Number: 0075780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rongjia Tao rtao@astro.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is for a project to investigate a newly
              discovered phenomenon, superconducting granular balls. When a strong electric
              field is applied to a suspension of liquid nitrogen and high temperature
              superconducting particles, the granular particles quickly move between the
              electrodes and bind themselves together to form macroscopic balls in
              milliseconds. The phenomenon shows a new property of superconductor: electric
              field induced surface energy. The current preliminary explanation relates this
              surface energy to a loss of Joshphson coupling energy between the ab-planes due
              to the induced surface charge on the particles. The physical model requires
              extensive development. The new phenomenon is also related to a long-standing
              unresolved issue: the behavior of superconductors in a static electric field.
              The basic science of the phenomenon is important to the understanding and
              development of superconductivity. The research may also lead to a new method to
              produce superconducting films.  The project offers excellent opportunity for
              the training of undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
              fellows in techniques that will prepare them for future careers. 
%%%
This
              individual investigator award is for a project directed towards the study of a
              new phenomenon of superconductivity discovered recently, the formation of
              superconducting granular balls in a strong electric field.  The current
              theoretical explanation concludes that the nature of the phenomenon is a new
              property of superconductivity. The discovery is also related to a long-standing
              unresolved important issue: the behavior of superconductors in a static
              electric field. The basic science of the phenomenon is important to the
              understanding and development of superconductivity. The research may also lead
              to a new method to produce superconducting films. The project involves
              undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellow, whose
              training in a forefront of physics prepares them for the future career in
              science.  
***




