Title       : Acquisition of Rheometer for Information Storage (Materials Research and
               Education)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0075787

Award Number: 0075787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82559              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Wiest jwiest@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Lane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Nikles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pieter B. Visscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This is an award to the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa for the acquisition
              of a Rheometrics ARES Rheometer. This instrument will be used by an
              interdisciplinary group of four investigators and their students in the
              Materials for Information Technology Center at the University of Alabama for a
              variety of research projects in the general area of advanced materials
              development and processing as related to information storage technology. The
              projects include (1) investigation of the microstructure and microstructure
              evolution of magnetic dispersions, so as to enable the revolutionary advances
              necessary for step increases in information storage capacity (2) exploration
              and characterization of the constitutive behavior of magnetic dispersions, so
              as to provide the enabling science for development of next generation coating
              processes, and (3) development of solventless, electron- beam-cured
              formulations that will eliminate the large release of volatile organic
              compounds typically associated with magnetic media manufacture. Knowledge of
              the rheological properties of the materials involved is critical to each of
              these projects. In addition, the rheometer will be used in an undergraduate
              chemical engineering course in conjunction with a laboratory demonstration
              module and a numerical analysis project to educate undergraduate engineers on
              the importance of non-Newtonian behavior in fluid processing
              operations.

This is an award to the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa for the
              acquisition of a Rheometrics ARES rheometer. This instrument will be used by an
              interdisciplinary group of four investigators and their students in the
              Materials for Information Technology Center at the University of Alabama for a
              variety of research projects in the general area of advanced materials
              development and processing as related to information storage technology. In
              addition, the rheometer will be used in an undergraduate chemical engineering
              course in conjunction with a laboratory demonstration module and a numerical
              analysis project to educate undergraduate engineers on the importance of
              non-Newtonian behavior in fluid processing operations.   

