Title       : Mechanical Interaction of Sea Waves and Sea Bed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0075713

Award Number: 0075713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chiang C. Mei ccmei@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0075713
C. Mei, MIT

The requested open-channel flume will be
              used, in the immediate future, for experimental studies of turbulent flow
              fields around bridge piers and the dynamics of turbulence in irregular breaking
              waves.  This research will be fundamentally useful in its revelation of basic
              flow properties around bridge piers in rivers, and in surf zone waves. Improved
              descriptions of turbulent flows at piers and in breaking waves are critical to
              the development of accurate and efficient computational methods for pier scour
              and coastal processes. The proposed research will also provide the high quality
              data needed to test and improve detailed models of bridge-pier flows and surf
              zone hydrodynamics.  This data set would go far beyond any comparable data set
              that is presently available, and it would be useful for testing a wide range of
              modeling techniques, including both present day models and models that are
              under long-range development in the future.

The requested precision-tilting
              flume will be an important contribution to the modernization of the Fluid
              Mechanics Laboratory at South Dakota State University.  This laboratory is used
              cooperatively by all departments in the College of Engineering. In addition,
              cooperative programs at our collaborating institution at South Dakota School of
              Mines and Technology will also utilize the requested flume for research and
              education. Such use will be enhanced because a remote operation system will
              enable researchers to run the flume and acquire instrumental data by computer
              through the Internet. Acquisition of the requested flume will therefore permit
              South Dakota faculty to carry out competitive instrumentation and more
              effectively compete for research funding.  The corresponding increase in the
              amount of research support will enable South Dakota to attract and support
              capable graduate students and to provide research-training opportunities to
              undergraduate students.  The integration of research and teaching will provide
              elevated education quality for South Dakota students.  Furthermore,
              Internet-based remote access to equipment will enhance diversity and will
              enable institutions (e.g. tribal universities, two-year colleges and high
              schools) that do not have a Fluid Mechanics Laboratory to participate in
              projects and activities supported by the requested equipment.


