Title       : POWRE: Myosin Heads and Muscle Assembly in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0075012

Award Number: 0075012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66676              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. De Stasio elizabeth.a.destasio@lawrence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence University
	      Box 599
	      Appleton, WI  549120599    414/739-3681

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In order to understand how muscle functions, it is necessary to know the
              ultramicroscopic (nanoscale) structure of muscle tissue and how that structure
              is organized and assembled.  The functional unit of muscle tissue, the
              sarcomere, is a repeating structure consisting of partially overlapping
              parallel interdigitating filaments of two major protein components, actin and
              myosin, plus additional protein components.   When one set of the parallel
              overlapping filaments (the thick filaments) move along the other set, the
              entire sarcomere shortens.  Coordinated shortening of sarcomeres throughout the
              muscle results in overall muscle shortening, or contraction.

A long-term
              goal of the Principal Investigator, Dr. De Stasio, is to understand the role of
              myosin in the assembly of sarcomeres of striated muscle.  Myosin is found in
              the thick filaments which move relative to the stationary actin-containing thin
              filaments to cause shortening of the sarcomere and, thereby, contraction of
              muscle. Myosin is the motor protein, which has an enzymatically active head
              domain that uses chemical energy in the form of ATP hydrolysis to move itself
              along the actin filaments and thereby run the contraction cycle. Little is
              known, however, about the role that the head domain and its ATPase activity
              might have in the assembly and maintenance of thick filaments and
              sarcomeres.

The genetically tractable model organism, the nematode C.
              elegans, has been used extensively to study muscle function and development. 
              Genetic approaches have identified two classes of mutations in the myosin B
              head domain of C. elegans that disrupt thick filament and sarcomere structure. 
               One class of myosin mutants have single amino acid changes in highly
              evolutionarily conserved functional domains of the myosin head.  The second
              class of mutants contain translational stop codons within the head domain;
              expression of these mutant genes would produce partial head domains which lack
              rod segments, but which do contain a highly conserved amino acid sequence for
              which no function is yet assigned.  Both classes of mutants are dominant. 
              These animals are flaccidly paralyzed as heterozygotes and, in most cases,
              homozygotes die as early embryos.  These phenotypes are more severe than that
              of animals lacking myosin B, indicating that the mutant myosin B is toxic.  The
              early embryonic lethality further indicates that the mutants interfere with
              some step of thick filament and sarcomere assembly.

Dr. De Stasio's lab has
              used the dominant nonsense myosin mutants as a tool to understand the role of
              myosin heads in muscle assembly.  By producing mutant myosin genes lacking
              rod-coding sequences, she hopes to identify regions of the protein responsible
              for the disruptive phenotype.  The long-term goal is to then use these
              truncated genes to probe myosin function by studying protein-protein
              interactions and ATPase activity of the isolated myosin fragments.

This
              project includes a set of experiments designed to directly test the hypothesis
              that expression of truncated myosin heads, particularly those including the
              evolutionarily conserved domain, are disruptive to muscle assembly.  Mutant
              myosin gene constructs including a very short epitope tag have been produced
              and these are being microinjected into C. elegans gonads where the DNA is taken
              up by developing oocytes.  The host C. elegans have a conditional expression
              system whereby even lethal transgenes can be maintained at the permissive
              temperature and transgene expression can be controlled.

Dr. De Stasio will
              use this POWRE award to support a sabbatical leave in the laboratory of Dr. H.
              Robert Horvitz at MIT to learn techniques necessary to finish the project.  She
              needs to learn the art of in situ epitope detection and Rnase protection as a
              more quantitative method of assessing mRNA expression, and she wishes to plan a
              larger set of experiments designed to test the function of myosin heads.  She
              plans to take advantage of the epitope-tagged constructs as a tool for
              isolating the major body wall isoform of myosin from C. elegans.  Lastly, Dr.
              De Stasio plans to develop at least two new laboratory experiments using new
              techniques for inclusion in her undergraduate course in molecular biology at
              her home institution, Lawrence University, and to investigate the applications
              of molecular modeling for this course and others as well.  


