Title       : Charge-Carrier Dynamics in Novel Photorefractive Inorganic: Organic
               Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0075867

Award Number: 0075867
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paras N. Prasad pnprasad@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the study of basic processes associated with the
              photorefractive effect in a novel class of inorganic nanocrystal: polymer
              nanocomposites.  The proposed new class of materials holds promise in that the
              spectral response for photorefractivity can be selectively chosen for operation
              at visible as well as near infra-red communication wavelengths, a feature
              primarily derived from the quantum confinement effect in inorganic systems will
              allow the photorefractive effect to be observed at low operational voltage. 
              This novel approach to the photosensitization of polymeric materials not only
              offers a method by which the characteristics and processes involved in the
              photorefractive effect may be significantly enhanced, but also provides the
              opportunity to study the fundamental physical processes of photocharge
              generation, migration, and trapping and recombination.  Photoconductivity
              experiments will be utilized in the characterization of the photosensitivity of
              the nanocomposite and mobility data will be obtained from time-of-flight
              experiments.  The results will then be analyzed using established model, e.g.
              the Onsager recombination model.  Photorefractive characterizations will be
              made using degenerate-four-wave-mixing- as well as asymmetric-two beam coupling
              techniques.  These experiments will provide insight into several aspects of
              grating formation such as phase shift and the kinetics of grating growth and
              decay.  The temerature dependence of the mobility as well as grating kinetic
              experiments will provide additional insight into the mechanism of trapping and
              detrapping of carriers.
%%%
The development of novel optical materials should
              be reviewed as having potentially a very important impact on technology, and
              the best properties of both inorganic and organic materials need to be
              exploited.  Graduate and post -doctoral students trained in these areas will
              have excellent job prospects.

