Title       : GOALI: Combining Discontinuous Molecular Dynamics and Chemical Process
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0075883

Award Number: 0075883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109879             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Richard Elliott dickelliott@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan Massey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0075883
J. R Elliott

In this two-year exploratory grant
              prospects will be evaluated for integrating molecular modeling tools with a
              chemical process simulation package to provide a complete, rigorous, and
              accurate framework for physical property prediction and correlation.  Chemical
              process simulators are becoming the primary interface for industry chemical
              knowledge.  It has been recently discovered that perturbation theory is much
              more accurate than previously appreciated, especially for polyatomic molecules.
               Discontinuous molecular dynamics (DMD) simulation combines with perturbation
              theory and virial expansion to provide a basis for highly leveraged
              computational effort in all aspects of molecular modeling.  An existing DMD
              program will run the minimal number of simulations necessary with reasonable
              speed on low-cost microprocessors.  The resulting segmental potential models
              will act as molecular scale group contributions, analogous to conventional
              engineering group contribution models.  Although these segmental potentials act
              essentially as first group contributions, higher order effects derived from
              molecular geometry will be explicitly addressed through the connectivity of the
              first order groups in the user-designated molecular structure.

The initial
              goal will be to test the transferability of discontinuous potential models for
              the equilibrium properties of pure fluids and mixtures.  A database of
              fluctuation populations for spheres, dimers, trimers, 6mers, 8mers, and benzene
              will be developed and be used to develop optimal step potentials for
              representing experimental values for vapor pressures, density, and internal
              energy for methane, ethane, n-hexane, n-octane, benzene, water, methanol and
              ethanol.  The transferability of the resulting potentials will be evaluated in
              terms of the accuracy of predictions for n-butane, n-pentane, n-heptane,
              n-nonane, and n-decane.  For mixtures, the transferability will be evaluated in
              terms of the accuracy of predictions for ternary mixtures and mixtures like
              n-propanol+methanol, for which the hydroxyl group in n-propanol was
              specifically regressed.

The second goal will be to implement methods of
              calculating transport properties like viscosity, thermal conductivity, and
              diffusivity in addition to the equilibrium and coexistence properties that have
              been computed in the past.  Resulting simulations will probe the extent to
              which potential models developed solely on the basis of equilibrium properties
              can be applied to estimating transport properties.  It is sought to "dissect"
              model intermolecular potential functions in the sense of identifying which
              pieces of the potential correlate most strongly with specific physical
              properties.  Also sought will be broadly applicable mappings of attractive
              effects on transport properties given DMD simulated properties for reference
              fluids, by analogy to the perturbation perspective for equilibrium properties. 
              For example, the extent to which the diffusivity of n-decane can be predicted
              from correlated results for the diffusivity of n-octane and DMD simulations for
              purely repulsive n-decane will be examined.  The work will be performed with
              collaboration between The University of Akron and ChemStations, Inc.  

If
              this exploratory work shows promise, the ultimate goal will be an internet site
              which clients can access for zero cost up front and relatively low hourly fees
              varying according to the intensity of the server side computation requested. 
              Services provided will include molecular modeling of transport and equilibrium
              properties like vapor pressure, activity, water solubility, octanol partition
              coefficients, viscosity, and the ability to infer knowledge about one property
              from measurements of other properties through a common molecular model.  Within
              the range of options will be a comprehensive collection of semi-empirical
              methods with estimates of the accuracy of each property.  The scope of this
              project includes a thorough evaluation of the accuracy all the semi-empirical
              models and the molecular based models against a database of approximately 1300
              compounds.  Those evaluations will comprise a significant portion of the work
              beyond the exploratory phase.  Also included in the web-accessible version will
              be flowsheeting and process simulation based on shortcut unit operation models.
               The sensitivity of the process capital and production costs to the estimated
              physical properties will be a menu option.  The shortcut model will serve as a
              precursor for rigorous process simulations directly within a web-based
              environment.        



