Title       : POWRE: The Costs of Indonesia's Economic Crisis for Women and Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0075058

Award Number: 0075058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Frankenberg efranken@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904072138    310/393-0411

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1331,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In the space of three years Indonesia has seen immense changes in its economic
              and political landscape, including a decline in per capita GDP of 12% in 1998. 
              This research explores the consequences of this severe economic downturn for
              children less than five and for women of reproductive age.  The project focuses
              particularly on how patterns of women's and children's use of community health
              services have changed.  These groups are selected because they have specific
              needs for preventive care, they are vulnerable to poor health if these needs
              are not met, and they are the targets of a number of intervention programs. The
              study uses panel data from household and community-facility surveys from two
              waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey.  These surveys were collected in
              Indonesia in 1997 and 1998 by the researcher and colleagues.  The data will be
              used to address the following questions.  First how have patterns of use of
              services for children under five and women of reproductive age changed since
              the onset of Indonesia's economic crisis.  Second, what characteristics of
              individuals and households are associated with declines in use of health care
              services among women and children.  Three factors will receive special
              attention:  the economic status of the household, women's labor force
              participation, and women's educational levels.  The exogenous and unexpected
              change in economic status that occurred between 1997 and 1998 provides an
              important lever for understanding the causal relationship between economic
              resources and health.  Multivariate regression techniques are employed to
              estimate the relationships between individual, household, and community
              characteristics and various aspects of use of health care.

From a scientific
              perspective, the research will provide important insights into how families'
              investments in human capital respond to economic change and how government and
              community resources affect such investments. The research will contribute to
              the scientific literature on the relationships between socio-economic status
              and health care use patterns.  It will also contribute to the scientific
              literature on individual and family responses to economic shocks.  The latter
              topic is important given the increasing frequency with which developing
              countries are experiencing exchange-rate driven crises of the type Indonesia
              experienced in 1998.  

The activity fits within the guidelines of the POWRE
              program because the funding will be used to support the researcher in spending
              a concentrated period of time analyzing and writing papers with the data sets
              in which she has invested much of the last four years designing and collecting.
               
	


