Title       : Syntheses, Structures, Properties, and Applications of Some Novel Elastomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0075198

Award Number: 0075198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Mark james.mark@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The basic goal of this program is to obtain structure-property relationships
              that can be used to optimize the properties of elastomeric materials.  For
              example, stress-strain results on a variety of elastomeric materials in
              elongation, biaxial extension, shear, and torsion will be interpreted using
              both analytical theories based on entanglement-constrained network junctions,
              and computer simulations.  Elastomers will include both commercially important
              polymers cross linked by some of the relatively uncontrolled techniques used in
              the industry, but also some elastomers prepared using more selective reactions
              designed to give networks of better known  structure.  Such tailor-made
              networks will be prepared by end linking functionally-terminated polymer
              chains, an approach that can also be used to synthesize unusual networks with
              multimodal network chain-length distributions.  These results should give a
              much better molecular understanding of rubberlike elasticity, and provide
              guidance in the design of materials of unusually attractive mechanical
              properties.  Experiments on these materials that are of particular interest
              will be stress-strain measurements for identifying maximum extensibilities and
              toughness.  Novel reinforcing fillers such as silica will be generated in-situ
              by hydrolyses of precursors such as organosilicates, and simple metal salts
              such as ferric chloride.  Of particular importance will be identifying the
              particle size that maximized reinforcement, and characterizing the effects of
              particle size that maximizes reinforcement, and characterizing the effects of
              particle shape and the orientations of non-spherical particles.  Novel
              materials will be prepared by coating particles of one type with a ceramic of
              another type.  It will also be possible to the thread elastomeric chains
              through reinforcing zeolites, and to prepare fillers that can be manipulated by
              a magnetic field.  The resulting filler-reinforced elastomers will be
              characterized primarily by mechanical property measurements, electron
              microscopy, and by X-ray and neutron scattering.  Two newer approaches which
              already show considerable promise are pulse-propagation measurements and
              Brillouin spectroscopy.

This project is focused on learning how the
              structures of elastomeric materials can be controlled in order to maximize
              their mechanical properties.  The most important structural features are the
              chemical natures of the elastomers and how they are linked into networks, and
              the most important properties are their strengths, extensibilities, and
              toughness.  The approaches taken are primarily experimental, but will be guided
              by parallel computer simulations and analytical theory.

