Title       : Investigation of the Relationships Between Iron Oxide - (Cu-Au) and Epithermal
               Precious Metal Mineralizing Systems in the Ar Rayn Terrane, Saudi Arabia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0207217

Award Number: 0207217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176462             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray W. Hitzman mhitzman@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hitzman
EAR-0207217

Iron oxide-(Cu-Au) deposits are currently a prime
              exploration target worldwide. Understanding of this class of deposits has been
              hindered by the scarcity of examples and by the large scale of the systems
              themselves. There are fundamental disagreements on several key features of this
              deposit class, particularly in regard to the source of the fluids responsible
              for alteration and mineralization and the role of specific magmas. Tied to
              these debates is how the iron oxide-Cu-Au class of deposits relates in time and
              space to other deposit types. Such linkages between deposit types are critical
              not only for mineral exploration but also for better understanding the
              geochemical and hydrodynamic aspects of large-scale mineralizing
              systems.

The Late Proterozoic Ar Rayn terrane in central Saudi Arabia
              provides an ideal site to test the linkages between iron oxide systems and
              low-sulfidation epithermal gold deposits.  The terrane contains a number of
              well exposed mineral deposits and prospects, including iron oxide-(Cu-Au) and
              epithermal precious metal deposits which appear to be genetically and
              temporally related based on geological relationships and limited geochronology.
              The deposits, though described in reports by the Saudi Arabian Deputy Ministry
              for Mineral Resources, are virtually unknown in the literature outside of Saudi
              Arabia.

This project will document the geology and geochemistry of the
              deposits. Descriptive information from detailed outcrop mapping will be
              supplemented by mineralogic, fluid inclusion, and stable isotope geochemical
              studies designed to quantify physical and chemical conditions of the
              hydrothermal fluids across all parts of the zone of transition from apparently
              deep-seated, magnetite-rich, Fe-oxide-(Cu-Au) deposits to much shallower,
              low-sulfidation epithermal deposits. In addition, geochronological studies will
              allow determination of the temporal relationships of these mineralizing
              systems. These data will allow critical analysis of the possible linkage
              between iron oxide systems and low-sulfidation epithermal systems.  The project
              will also aid in forging relationships between the Saudi Geological Survey and
              research groups in the United States.

