Title       : Magma Genesis Beneath Continents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0207939

Award Number: 0207939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia G. Bryce   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary R. Reid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bryce
EAR-0207939

Continental basalts provide the broadest insights into the
              nature and origin of the continental lithosphere but, because they may
              represent a mixture of contributions acquired during melt formation, transport
              from the source region, evolution in a magma chamber, and eruption, the
              chemical identities and the relative roles of these processes are topics of
              debate.  Isotopic and chemical studies of melt inclusions in phenocrysts of
              mafic lavas provide a means to examine and quantify contributions from these
              processes before exotic melts have been mixed away during melt aggregation and
              magma storage. The focus of the proposed work is to investigate these
              contributions in the 0-8 Ma alkali basalts of the Cima volcanic field of
              eastern California.  Mantle xenoliths contained within the lavas demonstrate
              that the mantle at shallow levels beneath Cima is compositionally heterogeneous
              and that the lavas had a limited residence time in crustal chambers. 
              Accordingly, the large variations in Pb isotopic compositions observed in
              magmas of the Cima suite most likely reflect signatures acquired during their
              formation and transport through the mantle, rather than from assimilation of
              continental crust.  The proposed study will combine in situ techniques (e.g.,
              electron and ion microprobe) to characterize the major, trace, and Pb isotopic
              compositions of melt and mineral inclusions in olivine and other phases from
              mafic (MgO > 6 wt. %) Cima lavas.  Our results will address whether the
              compositional and Pb isotopic variety of melt inclusions trapped in continental
              lavas is even greater than that observed in the suite of lavas that contain
              them, from which we can better delimit the nature and origin of compositional
              domains in the mantle at levels deeper than those sampled by xenoliths. The
              results from this project can be combined with ongoing studies of the isotopic
              and compositional variability of melt inclusions trapped in oceanic basaltic
              phenocrysts to improve our understanding of the processes significant in the
              generation of basaltic magmas.


