Title       : Collaborative Research: Opportunistic Scheduling for Multimedia Wireless Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0207892

Award Number: 0207892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin K. Chong echong@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project focuses on network-level solutions for exploiting the
              time-varying nature of the wireless environment to increase the overall
              performance of the system taking into account quality of service (QoS) and
              fairness for Multimedia Wireless Systems. The proposed algorithms are
              classified "opportunistic" since they consider channel conditions (and related
              definitions of per-user utility). The following research activities will be
              particularly pursued: opportunistic scheduling with and without explicit delay
              requirements as well as opportunistic scheduling in the frequency domain. The
              objective related to opportunistic scheduling without explicit delay
              requirements is to develop scheduling algorithms that exploit the time-varying
              nature of the wireless channel to optimize network performance under different
              fairness requirements. In particular, the channel estimation problem will be
              explored for which fast methodologies to effectively track the system
              parameters through stochastic approximation types of techniques will be
              developed. For opportunistic scheduling with explicit delay requirements, the
              goal will be to develop scheduling mechanisms for real-time applications such
              as voice and video where the objective is not only to schedule users based on
              their channel conditions and fairness constraints, but also based on their
              deadlines. In particular, the problems of opportunistic scheduling without
              individual QoS constraints and problems of opportunistic scheduling with
              individual QoS requirements will be studied. For that purpose, the off-line
              optimal scheduling solutions that provide benchmarks in evaluating other
              schemes will be developed. On the other hand, the on-line algorithms that take
              into account network traffic statistics will be developed and proven on
              practicability. Finally, the activities related to opportunistic scheduling in
              the frequency domain will consider taking advantage of both time-domain and
              frequency-domain diversity in wireless systems. In particular, the problems
              will be explored where the objective will be to maximize the system performance
              where power could be an explicit constraint or a penalty function. Other types
              of problems that will be explored here will deal with minimizing the
              transmitted power subject to performance constraints. 



