Title       : Comparison of Microscale Fault Fabrics Formed in Creeping and Stick-Slip Faults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0207672

Award Number: 0207672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40621              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Cashman smc1@axe.humboldt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Humboldt State University
	      
	      Arcata, CA  95521    707/826-3011

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research applies an innovative technique, microstructural analysis of
              faulted
sediments, to evaluate more accurately the hazard associated with
              creeping faults.  This project extends ongoing microstructural studies of
              faulted sediment texture from stick-slip faults (Cashman and Cashman, 2000;
              Baldwin et al., 2001, in review) to a selected study site on the creeping
              portion of the San Andreas Fault.  The research goal is to develop
              microstructural criteria that will allow paleoselsmologists to differentiate
              shear zones produced by aseismic creep from those formed by coselsmic fault
              rupture.

Digital image acquisition and analysis enable researchers to
              quantify characteristics of
rock fabrics such as grain dimensions and grain
              orientations in order to test hypotheses about processes governing the
              development of rock texture.  For example, computer-based image analysis has
              been used to measure crystal size distribution (e.g. Cashman and Marsh, 1988)
              and vesicle size distribution (e.g. Cashman et al. 1994) in volcanic rocks with
              the goal of constraining dynamic rates of crystallization and vesiculation. 
              This approach has also proved useful for measuring particle size distribution,
              grain shape, and grain orientation in shear zones in unconsolidated sand
              adjacent to the active McKinleyville fault, California, (Cashman and Cashman,
              2000) and New Madrid North fault, Missouri, (Baldwin et al., 2001, in review)
              with the goal of assessing the relative importance of compaction, grain
              breakage, and grain rotation in shear zone development.  Fault zone sediments
              from these two stick-slip faults have several textural features in common,
              including compaction, pronounced grain size reduction, preferred grain
              orientation, and development of anastomosing micro-scale shear zones.  Of
              particular interest is the high degree of grain breakage in the unconsolidated
              sand.

This study is a microstructural analysis of fault zone sediments from
              a site on the creeping portion of the San Andreas Fault.  Preliminary data
              indicate significant quantifiable differences in the degree of grain breakage
              between unconsolidated sand subjected to stick-slip faulting and that defon-ned
              by ascismic creep.  Image analysis of fault zone sediment from a
              well-documented creeping fault site will provide data on grain breakage and
              other textural changes produced by creep.  These data will be used to evaluate
              the relative importance of grain breakage, grain rotation, and compaction in
              sediment defon-ned by stable fault creep, and to determine if specific textural
              criteria are unique to stick-slip or to creeping faults.
