Title       : Form of Gold and its Relation to the Hydrothermal History of Carlin-type
               Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0207273

Award Number: 0207273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Kesler skesler@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney C. Ewing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kesler et al 
0207273


This proposal requests funding for a comprehensive
              study of the form of gold and its relation to the hydrothermal history of
              Carlin-type deposits. Most studies of these deposits have focused on
              macro-scale (geologic) observations with limited attention to micro-scale
              features. They have left a fragmented picture of the form of gold in
              Carlin-type deposits and how it relates to the origin and age of the deposits.
              The study will combine state-of-the-art high-resolution, transmission electron
              microscopy (HRTEM) and xray absorption, near edge structure (XANES) with more
              traditional surface ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) analyses to provide
              comprehensive mineralogical information. Work will focus on the Twin Creeks,
              Betze-Post-Screamer, and Meikle Carlin-type deposits, all of which have been
              well studied geologically. By combining observations from the atomic scale to
              the deposit scale, we will provide better control on mechanisms of gold
              transport and deposition in these deposits and on their hydrothermal history
              and age. Our main objectives will be to determine whether structurally bound
              gold in arsenian pyrite, the main host for gold in these deposits, is present
              as interlayers of arsenopyrite/marcasite in pyrite, and how they relate to
              nano-scale gold particles observed in reconnaissance studies of these deposits.
              This information is important because structurally bound gold might have been
              deposited from solutions that were not saturated with respect to native gold,
              thus allowing them to collect gold more efficiently during their formation. We
              will also evaluate whether arsenian pyrite-hosted gold and small particles of
              native gold are coeval or were deposited at different times. This information
              is needed to relate gold to the appropriate stage of mineralization and
              evaluate the possibility that Carlin-type deposits in Nevada were formed by
              several, spatially overlapping, gold-depositing events. Deposition from
              unsaturated solutions and formation by multiple events could also help explain
              why these deposits are so large. Finally, our work will relate the deposits to
              their geologic and tectonic setting, which is essential to exploration for ore
              to serve the next generation. 

