Title       : Paleobotanical Estimates of the Eocene Elevation of the Sierra Nevada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0207571

Award Number: 0207571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198523             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack A. Wolfe jwolfe@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clement G. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Much of what is now the North American Cordillera was near sea level in the
              Early Cretaceous. Knowing when uplift to its present elevation occurred is
              essential to understanding the large-scale tectonic processes that led to its
              formation. For the Sierra Nevada of California, it has been thought since the
              1890s that geomorphic and other evidence required middle Miocene and later
              uplift of the range, despite cessation of major magmatic activity in the Late
              Cretaceous. New geophysical, geochemical, and paleoaltimetric data have cast
              doubt on this concept of late uplift.
     We propose new paleobotanical
              studies to determine the Eocene elevation of the Sierra Nevada, which will
              allow us to decide between early and late uplift models. Analyses of the
              physical morphology of modern leaf assemblages are able to produce reasonably
              accurate estimates of present-day climate and altitude (750 m). The
              relationship is especially well calibrated in North America. Leaf morphology
              studies have indicated that western Nevada was higher at 16 Ma (middle Miocene)
              than at the present, and this conclusion is supported by other lines of
              evidence. The history of elevation of the Sierra Nevada - western Nevada region
              prior to 16 Ma, however, is very uncertain. We propose to collect and analyze
              numerous Eocene leaf assemblages that occur in this region with ages from 45 -
              50 Ma. This is the probable age of the lower part of the "auriferous gravels"
              of the Sierra Nevada, the focus of so much of the California gold rush.
    
              Paleobotanical work will focus first on fossil leaves known as the Chalk Bluffs
              flora found in the lower part of the auriferous gravels. These gravels are
              probably of early and/or middle Eocene age and were deposited by the ancestral
              Yuba River. Differences in inferred paleotemperature could result from global
              climatic change or from local climatic change due to altitudinal change. There
              are low-altitude leaf assemblages of the same age to the west that we will use
              as standards to control for regional climate change and estimate paleoaltitudes
              for the inland assemblages. The low altitude assemblages will also be compared
              to other low-altitude early to middle Eocene leaf assemblages in a range of 20
              latitude along the Pacific Coast.
     Some of the localities we wish to
              sample are threatened by development; there is some urgency in making these
              collections and analyses before the opportunity to constrain the early Tertiary
              elevation of the north and central Sierra Nevada slips away.


