Title       : Non-Conforming HP Finite Element Methods for Computational Modeling of Problems
               in Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0207327

Award Number: 0207327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Padmanabhan Seshaiyer padhu@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0207327
PI: 			Seshaiyer,
              Padmanabhan
Institution: 		Texas Tech University 
Program: 		Computational
              Mathematics
Program Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Non-conforming hp
              finite element methods for computational modeling of problems in science and
              engineering

Most problems in science and engineering routinely require
              finite element analysis in the assembly of many incompatible
              sub-discretizations. Often, these sub-discretizations are independently
              modeled, or available from previously constructed meshes. Therefore, to support
              a flexible meshing procedure, it is crucial that an efficient method be
              employed to join these independently modeled sub-meshes. Recently, the
              principal investigator introduced, a non-conforming hp finite element technique
              to accomplish such coupling. The proposed research will systematically develop,
              improve and combine sophisticated non-conforming hp finite element methods with
              high performance computing, through the accomplishment of the following four
              objectives. First, the stability and convergence of these non-conforming
              techniques will be theoretically established and computationally validated in
              higher dimensions. Secondly, the robustness of such methods to concatenate
              domains of different dimensions will be investigated. Third, the performance of
              these methods will be analyzed for problems in fluid mechanics. Finally, 
the
              stability and convergence of a more general three-field technique will be
              investigated. Numerical results will be presented to validate the exponential
              convergence of these techniques both theoretically and computationally. 

An
              ultimate goal of this research is to develop a flexible problem solving
              methodology tuned to high performance computing that allows a rigorous coupling
              of different physical processes, mathematical models, or discretization methods
              in different parts of a simulation domain. The successful integration of the
              proposed objectives will contribute to a common infrastructure that provides
              efficient computational support and parallel data-management for solving a wide
              variety of problems in science and engineering. The solution methodology to be
              developed will provide efficient and accurate solutions that will not only
              benefit various engineering fields such as aerospace, materials science, and
              bioengineering, but also aid in the process of designing better 
processes and
              products from aircraft to prosthetic implants.


Date: June 6, 2002

