Title       : Using and Evaluating Strainmeter Data - A Pre-EarthScope Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0207863

Award Number: 0207863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161936             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duncan Carr Agnew dagnew@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0207863
Agnew

EarthScope is a major earth science research initiative that
              will integrate scientific information derived from seismology (US Array),
              geodesy (Plate boundary Observatory), subsurface sampling and measurement
              (SAFOD), remote sensing (InSAR), and complementary geology and geophysics to
              understand continental scale plate deformation and evolution. Funding for the
              EarthScope initiative is currently being discussed in Congress as part of NSF's
              FY 2003 budget.  The Division of Earth Sciences has made FY 2002 funds
              available for projects that qualify as pre-EarthScope activity, i.e. activities
              that will facilitate or enable the construction, fabrication, installation or
              operation of EarthScope once it is funded under the MREFC (Major Research
              Equipment Facilities and Construction) account.  Such activities include
              meetings and workshops, prototype development, site selection or
              characterization.

This award provides funds to support activities which will
              make the data from the large number of strainmeters to be installed as part of
              the Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) component of EarthScope more useful, and
              more widely used.  At present, strainmeter data are used only by a small number
              of investigators, primarily those who install and operate the instruments; to
              the larger geophysical community these data seem somewhat mysterious, rather as
              GPS data originally did. The Principal Investigator will undertake several
              activities which should "demystify" strainmeter data for interested
              researchers, and thus make these data much more generally accessible.  These
              activities  include both didactic and research efforts, all drawing on the PIs
              recognized expertise in the area of strain measurement and interpretation.  The
              specific work to be undertaken includes four activities:  1) the development of
              a strainmeter guide;  2) the development of processing software;  3) 
              facilitating data availability; and 4)  data characterization for array design.
              
*** 



