Title       : Nonlinear Waves in Uniform and Periodic Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0207262

Award Number: 0207262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanos Venakides ven@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main aims of this project are in three directions.  (a) To advance existing
              approaches and to develop new methods for the rigorous asymptotic solution of
              integrable nonlinear wave equations, primarily the nonlinear Schroedinger
              equation, in the small dispersion limit; also to understand how the structure
              of the solution, critically affected by the modulational instability, depends
              on the degree of smoothness of the initial data.  (b) To develop methods within
              the theory of integrable and near-integrable wave equations to deal with wave
              reflection from boundaries and time dependent forcing.  (c) To develop
              numerical and analytical tools for the study of electromagnetic resonant fields
              and surface wave phenomena in periodic and random photonic crystal slabs with
              as well as without the presence of nonlinearity. 

INTEGRABLE WAVE
              PROPAGATION is often a very good approximation to physical wave propagation in
              real materials (e.g. the nonlinear Schroedinger equation and its perturbations
              model transmission of light in fiber optics), and related mathematical aspects
              like the modulational instability play a crucial role in the optimal design of
              communications systems.  PHOTONIC CRYSTALS, first developed in the eighties,
              allow light to be trapped in or guided through regions of dimensions comparable
              to its wavelength. They are already in use in microwave antennas, low threshold
              lasers and other devices. In most of their current applications they function
              as linear devices. We investigate nonlinear behavior and therefore pay
              particular attention to resonant behavior, which generates large fields for
              which the nonlinearity of the medium plays a central role.

