Title       : RUI: Volcanic, Petrologic, and Geochemical Evolution of Darwin Volcano,
               Galapagos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0207962

Award Number: 0207962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry R. Naumann aftrn@uaa.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Anchorage
	      3211 Providence Drive
	      Anchorage, AK  995084614    907/786-1410

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5926,9150,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Naumann
EAR-0207962

The western Galapagos archipelago is one of the most
              active volcanic areas on Earth. This volcanologic, petrologic, and geochemical
              study of Darwin volcano is designed to test competing hypotheses for the growth
              of Galapagos-type shield volcanoes and their geochemical variations. The origin
              of their distinct "overturned soup plate" morphology is not merely a provincial
              issue: Galapagos-type shields may be characteristic of many seamounts and
              extraterrestrial volcanoes. Little is known of Darwin volcano, but several
              reconnaissance specimens from the lowermost flanks indicate that it is mostly
              made up of basalts with isotopic compositions are between those of lavas
              erupted from mid-oceanic ridges and those erupted from hotspots. Despite their
              isotopic character, the same lavas are rich in incompatible elements, more
              typical of ocean-island basalts. Darwin volcano was chosen for this study
              because although it remains virtually unstudied, it is situated between the two
              well-studied volcanoes of Alcedo and Wolf on Isabela Island. Alcedo and Wolf
              volcanoes represent two end members in the western Galapagos with respect to
              geochemical variation, elevation, shape, and caldera depth, and the study of
              Darwin volcano will allow for testing and refinement of models that predict the
              origin of these diverse geochemical systems and volcano morphologies.

The
              goals of this project seek insights into the fundamental processes of
              ocean-island magmatism. These include: 1) documentation of the eruptive
              processes and the chronology, distribution and volume of eruptions that have
              constructed Darwin volcano; 2) determination of the petrologic and geochemical
              variation of Darwin's lavas in order to document the processes involved with
              the generation, storage, and eruption of magmas; and 3) a comparison of Darwin
              volcano with other well-studied western Galapagos volcanoes in order test the
              hypothesis that the magma supply rate to each volcano is the dominant control
              not only of the geochemical variation of lavas but also each volcanoes unique
              size, shape and caldera morphology.

