Title       : Physical Insight and Mathematical Methods in Seismic Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0207126

Award Number: 0207126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guoqing Tang gtang@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Caesar R. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports an interdisciplinary research project in applied and
              computational seismology between the Physics and Mathematics Departments at
              North Carolina A&T State University. Specifically, the PI will spend one year
              working in the Seismic Physical Modeling and Data Processing Laboratories in
              the Physics Department to gain physical insight into and knowledge of seismic
              data acquisition, processing, advanced imaging and visualization, and to study
              mathematical methods and open problems in seismic data analysis. The proposed
              project activities include: (1) acquiring seismic data through seismic physical
              modeling as well as field surveying; (2) processing acquired seismic data using
              OMEGA Seismic Processing System and Seismic Unix software packages; (3)
              simulating seismic data through mathematical modeling and numerical solutions
              of appropriately formulated two- and three-dimensional point source acoustic
              wave equations for seismic waves, and writing interactive Fortran, C++,
              Labview, Matlab, OMEGA, and Seismic Unix programming scripts; and  (4) studying
              mathematical methods, current research trend and open problems in seismic data
              analysis.  

It is anticipated that upon completion of his one-year residence
              in the Physics Department, the PI will not only enhance his own expertise and
              experience in applied and  computational seismology, but also lay a foundation
              for a continuing collaboration between the PI and his two hosts in the Physics
              Department in developing a well-defined interdisciplinary geosciences research 
              program which will engage other mathematics faculty members and students. The
              proposed project activities will also further collaborations and cooperation
              with the Allied Geophysical Laboratories of the University of Houston, Western
              Geophysical/Baker Hughes Corporation, and Pyramid Environmental, Inc. as well
              as enhance and expand the geophysical and environmental science education and
              research training component of the Talent-21 project funded  by the NSF
              HBCU-UP. This project will have immediate impact on three proposed program
              initiatives at the proposers' institution: a computational science program, a
              geosciences program, and an interdisciplinary Ph.D. program, all of which aim
              at strengthening and upgrading the University's interdisciplinary research
              efforts.   This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS).

