Title       : Experimental Petrology of Planetary Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0207546

Award Number: 0207546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $481605             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Walker
EAR-0207546

The general aim of this project is to understand
              planetary differentiation by igneous processes. Laboratory experiments are used
              to simulate those processes. The major expression of planetary differentiation
              is the separation of core and mantle. The highly siderophile elements of the Pt
              group are a key suite of elements for understanding the formation and evolution
              of Earth's core. Their geochemical partitioning between silicate and metal has
              been poorly understood because of technical problems in the interpretation of
              the dispersed metal nuggets found in experimental silicates equilibrated with
              metal at the low pO2 relevant to the core formation process.  New experiments
              show that for Pt the nuggets are not artificial contaminants but are Pt
              recovered from solution during the incomplete quenching process.  This
              preliminary result makes many of the enigmas of the high abundance of Pt in the
              Earth's mantle less perplexing. Pt is orders of magnitude more soluble in
              silicate than conventionally thought. We will continue to explore this result
              with time and temperature series studies.  If verified, we will extend the
              study of nugget formation to Re and Ir, two elements of the group also known to
              also have their geochemical behavior clouded by nugget formation in
              experimental work.
	Additional projects to be undertaken include the
              completion of studies of the volumes of garnets across the solid solution
              series grossular-pyrope at simultaneous high-P and T by synchrotron XRD. This
              study has shown some interesting anomalies compared to conventional practices
              used to make these measurements. The results are relevant to the mixing and
              melting properties of garnets in mantle peridotite.  Garnet is one of the
              important repositories of fusible components that liberate basalt upon deep
              peridotite partial melting. A related study will use the NaCl-KCl system to
              model the behavior of a solvus in a binary solution at high-P,T. We will also
              measure the melting points of B1 and B2 RbCl to ~30 kbar to investigate the
              bond weakening which seems to take place on conversion of phases to higher
              density, higher coordination number polymorphs. This study is relevant to
              expected convective style changes across phase change boundaries in the Earth.
              Finally, we hope to complete the data reduction of epithermal neutron resonance
              pyrometry measurements of the effect of P on thermocouple emf. This subproject
              is relevant to the calibration of widely used thermocouple pyrometry in use at
              high pressure.


