Title       : Development, Analysis, and Implementation of Robust Algebraic Preconditioners
               for Sparse Linear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0207599

Award Number: 0207599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Benzi benzi@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Benzi
0207599
     The solution of large, sparse systems of linear equations
              
continues to be one of the fundamental problems of computational mathematics.
              Recent years have seen significative advances in the performance and robustness
              of iterative methods, prompted by the need to solve increasingly large systems
              of equations. The linear systems (and eigenvalue problems) arising from the
              discretization of partial differential equations in three space dimensions are
              too large for direct solution methods, and the only viable option is to use
              preconditioned Krylov subspace methods or, if applicable, multigrid-type
              methods. While robust and effective iterative solvers are available in the case
              of systems  involving symmetric positive definite matrices or M-matrices, much
              work remains to be done in the case of indefinite systems. A major part of the
              project consists in the development of algebraic preconditioners for symmetric
              indefinite matrices. The investigator develops both incomplete factorization
              methods and sparse approximate inverses. He makes use of techniques developed
              by the direct solvers community, like pivoting strategies of the Bunch-Kaufman
              and Bunch-Parlett type. Preliminary experiments on saddle-point and shifted
              linear systems are encouraging. He also explores multilevel variants of these
              preconditoners. Special methods targeted to so-called KKT-type systems are
              investigated. Other parts of the project deal with the construction of robust
              preconditioners for least-squares problems, and for singular linear systems
              arising from Markov chain calculations. The latter problem is currently of
              particular interest due to recent  applications in data mining. Specifically,
              the largest matrix problems currently being solved are the so-called "Google
              Problems", which amount to computing the stationary distribution vector of
              Markov chains with 2.7 billion states. Improvements in solution techniques have
              the potential of greatly affecting this important area.
     Advances in many
              important fields of science and technlogy depend on progress in mathematical
              algorithms used in computer simulations. A recent example is provided by the
              emerging field of data mining. The well-known search engine "Google" (see
              http://www.google.com) relies on the solution of an extremely large, sparse
              matrix model; in technical terms, a stochastic matrix, or Markov chain. This
              amounts to finding the solution to a very large set of simultaneous linear
              algebraic equations. Part of this project deals with finding improved solution
              methods for problems of this type. More generally, the project aims to solve 
              challenging, large-scale problems in numerical linear algebra. The main goal is
              to develop efficient and robust algorithms, and related software, for solving
              difficult problems arising in various fields of  engineering and physical
              sciences. Some other areas that would benefit from this work include
              computational fluid dynamics, structural analysis, acoustics, electromagnetics,
              and optimal control. In all of these areas, computer simulations are of
              paramount importance and there is a strong need for reliable and efficient
              solution algorithms and software.  

