Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Excavating Community and Identity in
               the Borderlands of Late Classic (A.D. 650-900) NW Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0207405

Award Number: 0207405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Sharer rsharer@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Archaeological research around the globe has long been focused on the grand
              monuments, fine artistic achievements and sweeping political dramas of ancient
              peoples.  This emphasis has often been adopted at the expense of a smaller
              scale, more intimate understanding of the lives and experiences of the
              individual peoples comprising those cultures.  A consideration of how ancient
              peoples perceived and identified themselves with respect to those within and
              without their communities will provide an important step in improving our
              anthropological understanding of personal and group identity in both the past
              and present.  This research project addresses issues of co mmunity identity and
              its material expression on range of scales among the Late Classic (650-900
              A.D.) peoples of Las Canoas, NW Honduras.  Research includes the intensive
              excavation of both elite and non-elite houses and administrative/ritual
              buildings at the archaeological site of Las Canoas, as well as analysis of
              artifacts recovered from those structures.  This information will be studied
              with the aim of finding patterns in the use of built spaces and the production,
              trade, and use of material goods, such as pottery.  The design of human
              settlements and the changes wrought on them over time lends insight into the
              ways people feel their environment should be organized and communities
              experienced.  The types of possessions made, gathered, saved, displayed,
              hidden, and/or discarded by individuals and families reveals much about what
              they value, what they are able to acquire and to what lengths they will go to
              access such items.  Studies of both ancient architecture and artifact
              assemblages including pottery, stone tools, domestic refuse, burials, special
              caches and/or ritual deposits provide a view into how a group of people shaped,
              lived in, and gave meaning to their world - in essence created their
              identities.  The proposed research will consider the layout, orientation and
              relationships of buildings to one another, as well as the types and styles of
              artifacts (especially pottery), as indicators or expressions of individual and
              community identity.  Information recovered from Las Canoas will be analyzed
              with these ideas in mind and then compared to that known from contemporaneous,
              similarly sized sites in the surrounding area.  Understanding how the peoples
              living at Las Canoas related to the social, political, and economic hierarchy
              in Late Classic Mesoamerica are basic goals of this project.  The broader aim
              of the research, however, is to test the hypothesis that much-debated
              anthropological concepts such as culture and ethnicity do not always play
              themselves out in the daily reality of human lives.  Rather, it is proposed
              that peoples craft their identities to suit a variety of material and symbolic
              needs, shifting their alliances and affiliations in response to changing
              pressures and situations.  This research is designed to question our
              often-untested assumptions about the nature of interaction between different
              peoples and communities in achieve a better understanding of human
              behavior.



