Title       : Blind Channel Estimation and Signal Detection for Direct Sequence(DS) Code
               Division Multiple Access (CDMA) Systems Employing Long Spreading Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0207931

Award Number: 0207931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhengyuan Xu dxu@ee.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0207931
Xu, Zhengyuan 
U of California - Riverside

The rapid
              evolution of the global information society has been fostered by the increasing
              demand for seamless wideband integrated services. The development of advanced
              communication technologies is becoming imperative to meet such a demand. Future
              desired services will range from the traditional voice and paging services to
              interactive multimedia, including high speed data communications.  To support
              multiple bit-rate transmissions, direct sequence (DS) code division multiple
              access (CDMA) technology appears as an appealing solution due to the inherent
              merits of CDMA modulation. In DS spreading, the spreading sequence which will
              be adopted for next generation wireless systems will be aperiodic with period
              much longer than the bit duration. Employment of long codes bestows several
              benefits on the communication system. First, it increases the immunity of the
              system to multiuser interference (MUI) on the average because of less
              correlation of signature waveforms of different bits from different users. This
              leads to improved system performance. Secondly, spreading by long codes can
              uniformly distribute the signal bandwidth over the available spectrum, thus
              improving the bandwidth efficiency. In addition, long
spreading codes provide
              end-users more secure communication and prevents interception by eavesdroppers.
