Title       : Bacterial and Sediment Tracing in Mantled Karst Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0207793

Award Number: 0207793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph K. Davis ralphd@mail.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg Thoma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,9150,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Davis
0207793

Animal waste associated with the production of livestock
              (poultry, cattle and swine) contributes significantly to non-point source
              contamination of surface water and groundwater.by nutrients and bacteria. 
              Water-quality data collected over storm hydrographs from several springs
              throughout  the mantled karst aquifer in northwest Arkansas indicate that
              concentrations of fecal coliform bacteria, dominated by Escherichia coli (E.
              coli), rise significantly in the early portion of the storm hydrograph.  Pork
              bacterial concentrations occur coincident with the peak in spring discharge. 
              Bacteria and other pathogens may survive for extended periods within the open
              flow domain of mantled karst aquifers.  However, the transport mechanism and
              specific storage reservoir for the bacteria within these mantled karst
              environments are poorly understood but critical  to the development of
              effective management strategies to protect human health.

This project is a
              multiple tracer experiment with a main goal of elucidating the fate (transport
              and storage) of bacteria within well-characterized, well-defined mantled karst
              basins.  Specific questions addressed by this project include (1) the use of 
              Eu-labeled bacteria and La-labeled clay, a visible technique to monitor
              injected tracer's breakthrough over time periods that include significant
              recharge events, and (2) what information we can infer about the bacterial fate
              in the subsurface from the breakthrough curves.

Multiple tracers will be
              injected into a losing stream segment previously used during the pilot project
              at the Savoy Experimental Watershed (SEW) to provide more detailed breakthrough
              data needed to assess the project hypotheses,  and to quantify tracer loads and
              capture.  The SEW is a University of Arkansas property of approximately 1,250
              hectares.  Inputs and outputs in the mantled karst aquifer formed in the
              Mississippian Boone and St. Joe Formations are routinely monitored at SEW, and
              karst basin boundaries have been previously delineated.  A second
              well-characterized injection site in northwest Arkansas will be used to assess
              the exportability of the methods.

This project provides (1) minimum
              detection levels for the analytes injected, (2) estimated dilution factors for
              the tracers, (3) development of breakthrough curves to assess differences in
              tracer response, (4) verification of the presence of Eu-tag on variable
              injected bacteria at the sampling point, and (5) correlation of tracer loads to
              the hydrograph.  If the environment in the springs is stable and conducive to
              the survival of fecal coliform bacteria, then it may also be conducive to
              supporting other potentially harmful pathogens.  Results of this project will
              be beneficial for development of effective management strategies to minimize
              bacterial pathogen input into karst aquifers.

