Title       : Design of Superplastic Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0207197

Award Number: 0207197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha L. Mecartney martham@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The optimal microstructural design of superplastic ceramics using finely
              dispersed second phases will be studied.   Intergranular silicate phases and
              nanodispersed crystalline oxides will be used to create ceramic materials with
              improved properties for shape forming via superplastic deformation.  The volume
              and distribution of second phases and their interfacial energy and solubility
              will be variables analyzed with respect to grain growth, grain boundary
              sliding, and fracture in polycrystalline oxides.  Experimental analysis
              techniques will include analytical electron microscopy and impedance
              spectroscopy as well as mechanical deformation tests both at room temperature
              and at high temperatures.  The goal of this research is to understand how
              chemically dissimilar dispersants can be used at the nanoscale to tailor the
              mechanical properties of oxide ceramics,  so that highly deformable ceramics
              can be net shape formed at high temperatures while retaining a superior
              mechanical and electrical performance at lower temperatures.

Superplastic
              forming has the potential to allow the production of shapes not easily attained
              by conventional ceramic processing techniques.  Superplastic deformation of
              ceramics currently, however, is currently possible only in a few limited
              ceramic systems that retain a fine grain microstructure.  In addition, the
              extremely high temperatures required for this process and slow strain rates
              attained limit the industrial applications of this technique.  This research
              will focus on optimizing the microstructural design parameters that will result
              in lower temperatures for superplastic forming and increased deformation rates
              while expanding the range of ceramic materials that can be shaped by
              superplastic forming, thus making this technique a more economically viable
              method for net shape forming of ceramics. 

