Title       : Transport, Transformation, and Retention of Arsenic in a Headwater Stream:
               Hydrologic, Biological, and Geochemical Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0207784

Award Number: 0207784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Madeline Schreiber mschreib@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Maurice Valett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0207784
Schreiber

It is well-known that arsenic, a toxic and carcinogenic
              element, is readily transported in natural waters and that its forms,
              speciation, and concentrations are affected by biogeochemical reactions.  In
              this proposal, we address the transport, transformation and retention of
              arsenic in a stream-aquifer system impacted by past mining activities.  Given
              our current understanding of the structure of stream-aquifer system in close
              contact with the mine, we developed a number of questions regarding the role of
              hydrologic, geochemical and biological processes controlling the speciation and
              concentration of arsenic.  The proposed research will center on addressing two
              central questions: (1) what factors control spatial and temporal variations in
              arsenic fluxes to the stream? (2) How do hyporheic processes influence
              retention of arsenic in the stream?

To address these questions, we will
              utilize a combination of field, laboratory, and modeling techniques to evaluate
              the controls on arsenic mobility within the stream, with specific emphasis on
              characterizing the role of the hyporheic zone in acting as a source or a sink
              for arsenic.  The proposed research elements include employing hydrologic and
              geochemical monitoring to characterize groundwater and surface water
              end-members as well as to describe biogeochemical conditions within the
              hyporheic zone.  In addition, transient storage models will be used to evaluate
              the hydrologic characteristics of the hyporheic zone and, through incorporation
              of reactive uptake terms, to address the role of the hyporheic zone in
              retarding or promoting arsenic transport to the stream.

Results of this
              proposed research will have implications for our general understanding of the
              biogeochemical cycling of redox-sensitive trace elements such as arsenic.  The
              recent tightening of the arsenic drinking water standard from 50 to 10 ug/L
              will drive federal and state agencies to closely examine sources of both
              natural and human-introduced arsenic contamination.  Improving the knowledge of
              the processes that control arsenic mobility will greatly aid these agencies in
              developing plans for protecting and treating drinking water supplies.

