Title       : Computational Methods for Problems in Material Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0207402

Award Number: 0207402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Smereka psmereka@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7208,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns the development of efficient numerical
methods for
              problems related to material science.  The
investigator studies computational
              issues concerning the
numerical solution of continuum models for thin film
              growth.  Many
of these models include effects for surface diffusion, which is
              a
nonlinear 4th order term.  Consequently, these models are very
stiff from a
              computational point of view.  Because the surface
diffusion term is nonlinear,
              it is difficult to use implicit
methods.  The investigator introduces a new
              semi-implicit level
set method for solving motion by surface diffusion.  He
              uses this
new method to incorporate the effects of surface diffusion
              into
models of polycrystalline thin films.  He also develops a new
approach
              for computing island dynamics, where the adatoms on the
terraces are
              considered as a continuum field and the atoms on the
edge of the island are
              treated discretely.  This approach retains
the potential advantage of
              continuum methods but at the same time
preserves the discrete and stochastic
              effects present in island
dynamics.  The investigator includes effects of edge
              diffusion,
surface tension, nucleation, and elasticity.  An
              important
computational aspect of this problem is the numerical solution
              of
the diffusion equation in a complex domain.  The investigator
examines new
              methods for the efficient solution of this problem.
     Thin films occur in a
              large number of applications, from
coatings on bearings to semi-conductor
              devices.  In many cases
these films are not single crystals but instead
              are
polycrystalline and the quality of the film can depend on its
texture. 
              Films with good biaxial texture are close to being a
single crystal and have
              applications in the manufacture of
super-conducting tapes, for example.  One
              important physical
effect in determining the evolution of the texture is
              surface
diffusion, but this is difficult to implement numerically and
              the
investigator plans to develop a semi-implicit level set method to
study
              the growth of polycrystalline thin films.  The work here
could help improve
              the fundamental understanding of these films.
Another important process by
              which thin films are made is
molecular beam epitaxy.  The standard method for
              accurate
simulation of this process is kinetic Monte Carlo.  In
              many
situations this method can be slow, and continuum models have
              the
potential to greatly increase the speed of such computations.
However,
              continuum models ignore discrete and stochastic effects.
The investigator
              develops hybrid models that have good physical
fidelity but offer considerable
              computational speed.
