Title       : Career Development in Mathematical Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0207145

Award Number: 0207145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99216              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. French french@math.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Perzigian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Behbehani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is a substantial demand for mathematical talent in the biomedical
              sciences. This IGMS grant will help meet this demand by providing training in
              physiology, which is one of the more mathematical areas of the biosciences, for
              Donald French.  He will spend one year jointly hosted by two Professors in the
              College of Medicine at his home institution.

In particular, they will
              investigate a system of self-organizing neurons that form a signaling network
              which undergoes synchronized intracellular calcium oscillations. French will
              also take courses in neuroscience and cell biology; attend conferences in
              Neuroscience; teach a course entitled ``Computational Neuroscience''; and
              mentor a mathematics graduate student.

The planned research is interesting
              since it will involve the collaboration between a theoretician and
              experimentalists.  The investigation will be on a network of neurons that can
              be viewed as a complex system and a focus of the work will be on emergent
              properties such as synchronized calcium oscillations.  This in-depth experience
              will provide the appropriate training so French can develop his own research
              program.  This research program will not necessarily be limited to
              neuroscience.  For example, the type of neuronal modeling being done during the
              immersion year is similar to mathematical modeling used to describe cardiac
              function.

This grant will extend knowledge in Physiology through research on
              neuronal networks and advance human resource development by training the PI in
              Physiology.  It will also provide a highly interdisciplinary research
              experience in Mathematical Physiology for the PI's graduate student.  After the
              term of the grant French will continue to provide leadership in Mathematical
              Physiology at his home Mathematics 
Department through his teaching and
              research.  These activities will enrich the educational experience for students
              and broaden their career options.  This IGMS project is jointly supported by
              the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
