Title       : Can We Constrain the Evolution of Crustal-Scale Normal Fault Arrays Using
               Geomorphic and Structural Criteria?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0207569

Award Number: 0207569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancye H. Dawers ndawers@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander L. Densmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project is aimed at understanding the relationship between the
              evolution of large continental non-nal fault arrays and the development of
              drainage catchment-alluvial fan systems.  Previous studies of non-nal fault
              growth, footwall denudation and catchment development have either ignored
              spatial and temporal changes in fault array geometry and slip rate, or have
              focused on portions of the fault array that are far from actively-propagating
              tips and relay zones between adjacent fault strands.  In the proposed work, the
              PI's and a Tulane University graduate student will carry out a quantitative
              structural and geomorphological study of active faulting at extensional relay
              zones, i.e. areas of segment overlap and fault linkage, and at fault tips.  The
              study area is located in the circum-Snake River Plain area of cast-central
              Idaho, southwestern Montana and western Wyoming.  This area is well suited to
              the aims of the project because the Basin and Range non-nal faults show a wide
              range in scale; i.e., the faults show varying amounts of total displacement and
              rock uplift, and hence the footwalls exhibit varying degrees of drainage
              incision and denudation.  Two tasks are proposed.  The first task is an
              analysis of digital topographic data.  This will measure a number of geomorphic
              parameters (catchment spacing, relief and area; and alluvial fan area) along
              fault strike and across a range of fault length scales.  Results of this work
              will constitute the first quantitative assessment of relations between fault
              structure, slip rate and footwall morphology, as well as the first evaluation
              of the fan area/catchment area ratio as proxy for fault slip rate, and thus as
              a potential neotectonic tool.  The second task is a focused field investigation
              of 3 relay zones along 2 of the largest and most active faults.  This work will
              map the distribution of active faulting through these segment linkage sites,
              and document the relationships between the spatial fault pattern and
              catchment-fan parameters (derived in Task 1) in relays.  The 3 field sites
              chosen for the detailed structural and geomorphological work show varying
              amounts of fault segment separation and linkage development, which is
              hypothesized to control some of the patterns of catchment evolution.  The
              proposed work is expected to establish predictable relationships between the
              growth, interaction and linkage of continental-scale normal faults and patterns
              of denudation and catchment-fan evolution.  This research will also lead to an
              improved understanding of earthquake hazards, because the approach will address
              issues of fault segment connectivity over a time scale longer than that
              addressed by paleoseismology alone.
