Title       : Seismic Trenching for the Pulse of the Earthquake Engine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0207372

Award Number: 0207372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Bruhn rlbruhn@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard T. Schuster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0207372: SEISMIC TRENCHING FOR THE PULSE OF THE EARTHQUAKE
ENGINE
Ronald
              L. Bruhn and Gerard Schuster
Department of Geology and Geophysics
University
              of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-01 11



PROJECT ABSTRACT

The purpose
              of this research project is to study how earthquakes occur on normal faults. 
              The patterns of earthquake recurrence in space and time provide the 'pulse' of
              the earthquake engine.  Investigating these patterns is revealing the complex
              processes that interact to generate earthquakes within the earth.  Successfully
              understanding the nature of past heartbeats is the key to predicting the future
              behavior of large faults that generate earthquakes.



Until now, trenching
              across fault scarps has been the primary tool for revealing the past history of
              earthquakes.  By carefully logging the sedimentary deposits in trenches,
              geologists have been successful in deducing the sizes and recurrence intervals
              of past earthquakes.  However, there are three shortcomings with the trenching
              method: it is expensive and environmentally intrusive, it is limited to depths
              no deeper than about 30 feet, and yields only a vei7tical cross-section of the
              fault.  These limitations mean that the earthquake heartbeat is poorly sampled
              in both space and time, which can lead to erroneous conclusions about the
              nature of earthquakes.  To overcome these problems, and to answer fundamental
              questions about the heartbeat of normal faulting, University of Utah earth
              scientists are conducting more than two dozen shallow seismic experiments over
              fault scarps in the Oquirrh, Stansbury and Wasatch faults.  These are three
              large normal fault zones located in the Wasatch Front of Utah.  The first
              arrival times of the recorded seismic waves yield velocity tomograms, or
              images, that delineate both the shallow and deep patterns of sedimentary
              'colluvial' wedges that formed in response to the offset of the earth's surface
              during past earthquakes.  When identified, the colluvial wedges to a depth of
              50 m or so are cored by a powerful Odex drill, and samples of the deposits
              surrounding and within the wedges are dated by a variety of dating methods.  By
              this procedure the science team is extending our knowledge of earthquake
              behavior beyond 100,000 years, and significantly extending the history of
              earthquakes along the Wasatch Fault and other faults in the eastern Basin and
              Range Province.  This combined use of seismic tomography, drilling and dating
              methods is referred to as seismic trenching.



The extended earthquake
              history being determined during this study provides new information for
              predicting the future history of earthquakes in the region, and for creating a
              new generation of mechanical models of processes of faulting.  The research has
              significant impact on the applied field of earthquake hazards and the basic
              science of earthquake mechanics.



