Title       : The Red Bed Paleomagnetic Inclination Correction and the Accuracy of the Late
               Paleozoic North American Apparent Polar Wander Path
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0207275

Award Number: 0207275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Kodama kpk0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work will investigate how the PI's recent magnetic anisotropy
              studies, showing that hematite-bearing red sedimentary rocks can suffer up to
              30 degrees of inclination shallowing, impact the accuracy of the Late Paleozoic
              North American apparent polar wander path. Red bed paleopoles dominate and
              control the position of the Late Paleozoic to mid-Mesozoic portion of North
              America's apparent polar wander path, thus inaccuracies in red bed remanence
              would greatly affect any paleogeographies based on this part of the pole path.
              the PI's previous NSF-funded study has shown that a combination of isothermal
              remanence anisotropy and anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility can be used to
              identify and correct inclination shallowing in red, hematite-bearing
              sedimentary rocks. By using thermal demagnetization and chemical
              demagnetization, the magnetic fabric of the characteristic remanence-carrying
              grains can be isolated. This is critical for an accurate inclination
              correction. Though initial tests of the accuracy of these corrections support
              their validity, given the importance of red beds to the Late Paleozoic North
              American apparent polar wander path, the PI proposes to further test the
              accuracy of the corrected inclination he has determined for the Carboniferous
              Mauch Chunk Formation. Igneous paleopoles would be the best way to test the
              corrected inclination, but igneous results for Carboniferous North America are
              few and scattered. Therefore, his strategy is to collect and correct the
              inclinations of other red bed units, and magnetite-bearing sedimentary rocks,
              of the same age as the Mauch Chunk. If magnetic anisotropy does truly control
              the accuracy of remanence, the corrected paleopoles should agree with each
              other. The corrected magnetite-bearing inclinations from the Brush Creek
              Limestone and Buffalo Siltstone in Pennsylvania will be particularly important
              since the PI has established the accuracy of the magnetite correction from a
              comparison of corrected results from the Paleocene Nacimiento Formation to
              coeval igneous results. He will correct the inclinations of the Maringouin,
              Shepody, and Enrage Formation red beds from New Brunswick, Canada and the Deer
              Lake Group rocks from western Newfoundland for the red bed part of the
              comparison. These rocks have given excellent Carboniferous age paleomagnetic
              results for North America. Finally, although Carboniferous North American
              igneous results are scattered, the PI plans to restudy the remanence of the New
              Brunswick Volcanics, given their proximity to the other New Brunswick units he
              proposes to study. He wishes to check the accuracy and age of the New Brunswick
              Volcanics remanence to make sure they provide a reliable record of the
              Carboniferous field. The proposed work will be conducted over three years,
              including three field seasons, and will support a graduate student's PhD
              dissertation work at Lehigh University.
