Title       : Theoretical Morphology and Spatial Analysis of Trace Fossils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0207194

Award Number: 0207194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy E. Plotnick plotnick@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical Morphology and Spatial Analysis of Trace Fossils

Roy E.
              Plotnick
University of Illinois at Chicago
EAR-0207194

ABSTRACT

Trace
              fossils represent the preserved interactions of trace making organisms with
              their environment.  The exact forms of traces result from complex interactions
              among the organism's morphology, the behavior being carried out, the organism's
              perception of the environment, and the heterogeneity of the environment. The
              study of trace fossils thus allows us to study the evolution of animal movement
              in 'deep time'. Existing mathematical models for the biological formation of
              traces have tended to focus on a limited repertoire of behaviors, such as
              grazing.  They do not include realistic patterns of environmental
              heterogeneity, differences in perception, or multiple behavioral responses.  In
              addition, there have been almost no attempts to model three-dimensional traces,
              or traces that branch or anastomose.  New models for grazing and crawling
              traces will be built based on current research by ecologists into animal
              perception and movement patterns and their relationship to environmental
              heterogeneity.  These models will explore the interactions of alternative
              spatial patterns of environmental heterogeneity with different perceptions and
              behavioral responses to it.  They will also incorporate recent concepts in the
              study of artificial life.  The new models could suggest how behavioral patterns
              for a given trace-making organism might change as a function of environmental
              differences, such as resource distribution.  This could be a useful tool for
              determining such patterns of spatial heterogeneity in ancient environments.

