Title       : The Rise and Fall of the Himalayan-Tibetan Plateau: An Integrated 3-D Finite
               Element Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0207200

Award Number: 0207200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mian Liu lium@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  Much of the current understanding of the geodynamics of the
              Indo-Asian collision has been based on two end-member models: the plane-stress
              viscous thin-sheet model based on continuum mechanics, and the plane-strain
              plasticine indentation model based on analog experiments. Both models have
              provided important frameworks for understanding the Tibetan tectonics, but the
              two-dimensionality and other simplifications of these models have left many
              important issues in uncertainty. For example, the plasticine indentation model
              predicts lateral extrusion of Tibet and SE Asia to be the dominant mechanism
              accommodating the >2000 km post-collisional crustal shortening, whereas the
              viscous thin-sheet model emphasizes the role of crustal thickening. These
              different predictions are biased by the model limitations: the plasticine
              indentation model does not allow vertical strain and hence crustal thickening,
              whereas the viscous thin-sheet model dose not includes the faults and the
              frictional (plastic) rheology necessary to simulate the escaping tectonics.
              Since these end-member models were introduced ~20 years ago, numerous
              improvements have been made, but the continued debate on the strain
              partitioning between crustal thickening and lateral extrusion and many other
              questions manifests the need for a new approach. The proposed work is to
              develop a fully three-dimensional (3-D) finite element model to investigate the
              rise and fall of the Himalayan-Tibetan plateau. The large volume of
              multidisciplinary observational data accumulated from decades of intensive
              studies is ready to be integrated and interpreted in more sophisticated
              geodynamic models. The 3-D finite element models are now feasible thanks to the
              advancement of computer technology and maturation of the finite element method.
              The PI has already built the prototype 3-D model and successful applied it to
              studies of active tectonics in the Tibetan plateau and the Andes. Major model
              developments in this project include implementing strike-slip faults in
              finite-strain calculations and incorporating more realistic rheology. The
              finite-strain model will include brittle
deformation within the upper crust,
              often omitted in viscous thin-sheet models, by using a mixed viscous-elastic
              rheology. Transient stress and strain rates will be simulated in
              infinitesimal-strain models with viscoealstic and plasto-viscoelastic rheology.
              The finite-strain and infinitesimal-strain models will be combined to provide a
              more complete simulations of the collision history. Systematic numerical
              experiments will be conducted to explore the mechanics of the Indo-Asian
              collision. The results will lead to a better understanding of these
              questions:
 What are the major driving forces for crustal deformation in the
              Himalayan-Tibetan plateau?  When and how did the Tibetan plateau uplift?  What
              controlled the strain partitioning between crustal thickening and lateral
              extrusion?  What caused the Tibetan extension? How is the upper crustal
              deformation related to that in the lower crust and the mantle lithosphere? The
              numerical modeling will be closely integrated with ongoing geological and
              geophysical studies in the Tibetan plateau through collaboration with US and
              Chinese scientists, including Yin (UCLA), Nabelek (Oregon State), and Flower
              (UIC). The proposed 3-D finite element models will be a major step forward in
              numerical modeling of large-scale continental deformation and can be used for
              other plate boundaries. The PI will document the computer codes and make them
              available to public. The multidisciplinary data sets compiled for this study
              will be organized into a GIS database and made available to the research
              community. This project will involve undergraduate and graduate students; the
              integration of cutting-edge computation with multidisciplinary studies provides
              a great opportunity for training a new generation of geoscience students. 
