Title       : The Chemical Synthesis, Self-Assembly, and Facial Crosslinking of Dendrimers for
               the Study of Ultra-Tough Mimics of Spider Dragline Silk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0207086

Award Number: 0207086
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C,Clark
	      Campus Box 1134, One Brookings D
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1695,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An MPS Distinguished International Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-DRF)
              will be used to perform research at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer
              Science (MPIP) in Mainz, Germany with the guidance of Prof. Dr. Klaus Mullen
              and additional collaborators for specialized techniques that are not available
              the MPIP, including Prof. Dr. Martin Moller at the University of Ulm.  The
              iterative design, synthesis, and characterization of a morphological, composite
              mimic of spider dragline silk, an ultra-tough tensile fiber, is the subject of
              this work.  The branching units of prototypical dendrimers will be modified
              with multiple, chemically-immiscible oligomeric side chains.  One side chain
              phase of the dendrimer will be crosslinked, and length of the chain ends at the
              periphery of the dendrimer will be optimized in order to suppress bulk
              crosslinking in a columnar mesophase.  Upon dissolution,
              conformationally-restricted, dendrimeric dimers should be afforded.  The
              accessibility that the non-centrosymmetric, dendrimer conformation needs to
              reach before dimerization will be probed using atomic force microscopy with
              chemically-modified surfaces, in solution through the interaction with
              phospholipid vesicles using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, and in the
              bulk using differential scanning calorimetry.  A second dendrimer scaffold will
              be synthesized bearing similar, chemically-immiscible side chains and chain
              ends, but with an additional, latent functionality in the branching unit side
              chain which will not initially undergo crosslinking.  After dimerization, the
              latent functionality will be unmasked and used to incorporate linear chains for
              bulk crosslinking or physical entanglement in a final composite.  The
              mechanical properties of the resulting composite are expected to mimic those of
              spider dragline silk.

While this work is not expected to produce materials
              amenable to commercial application, it is expected to assess the theoretical
              mechanism of spider dragline silk responsible for its remarkable mechanical
              toughness.  It is the hope that such conclusions will be drawn about the future
              of advanced composite materials and that they will be invaluable to the
              development of more practical materials.

