Title       : Next-Generation Optical WDM Mesh Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0207864

Award Number: 0207864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Biswanath Mukherjee mukherje@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims at creating new knowledge on the design, analysis, and
              optimization of novel system architectures, network protocols, and software
              algorithms for building next generation optical Wavelength Division
              Multiplexing (WDM) backbone networks. Particular research focus will include
              hierarchical optical switching, optical multicasting, and optimal topology
              reconfiguration. For hierarchical optical switching, the generalized optical
              switch architecture with multiple levels will be developed where the advantages
              of both optics and electronics will be exploited. For example, a hybrid switch
              architecture will include wavebands (bands of wavelengths) being switched
              all-optically, while wavelength and sub-wavelength connections may be switched
              with optical-electrical-optical (OEO) switches. Results from this investigation
              will provide guidelines on where to strategically place resources such as
              hierarchical optical switches.  This project will also design optical
              multicasting switch architectures and develop mathematical models and efficient
              algorithms for supporting light-trees in a network with hierarchical optical
              switching. The research team will develop new efficient models for network
              operators as well as will design new algorithms for protecting light-trees
              using various schemes such as link protection and shared protection. In
              particular, the signaling protocols for set up, maintenance, and termination of
              light-tree based connections will be designed and studied by simulation.
              Finally, in the part of the research related to the virtual topology design,
              the reconfigurations of WDM networks will be studied so that the bandwidth
              upgrades are taken into account, e.g. instead of fully taking down a
              lightly-loaded lightpath or adding a maximum-capacity lightpath, an existing
              lightpath can be upgraded when a fraction of its free capacity is needed. In
              particular, traffic fluctuations, such as within the global optical network
              over the time zones, can create another dynamism, i.e., traffic intensity peak
              rates. In this context, the research team will study different virtual
              topology-design methods to obtain a better understanding of this and similar
              problems related to dynamic traffic fluctuations.
