Title       : Elementary Reactions of Hyperthermal Gas-Phase Oxygen Atoms with Atomic
               Adsorbates on Si(100)-(2x1): Mechanisms and Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0207291

Award Number: 0207291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Weaver weaver@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to determine the elementary mechanisms and
              kinetics governing the non-thermal reactions of hyperthermal, gas-phase oxygen
              atoms with atoms adsorbed on single crystal silicon.  A novel beam source of
              hyperthermal atomic oxygen will be used to stimulate reactions at the
              adsorbate-modified silicon surface.  The desorbing reaction products will be
              monitored during the atom-adsorbate reactions using mass spectrometry.  The
              reaction products that remain adsorbed on the surface and the chemical changes
              of the surface will be studied using thermal desorption, x-ray photoelectron
              and Auger electron spectroscopy.  The reactions of hyperthermal, gas-phase
              oxygen atoms with adsorbed oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, and deuterium atoms will
              be investigated with these techniques to determine the influence of adlayer
              structure and bonding energetics on the elementary mechanisms, kinetics, and
              selectivity of the reactions.  Results of this project will advance the current
              understanding of elementary atom-adsorbate reactions.  The educational
              component is the mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students.  Graduate
              students will be trained in an area that will be of significant interest to
              industries interested in heterogeneous chemistry, especially in the
              semiconductor industry. The results of this work could have a significant
              impact on our understanding of processes in the semiconductor industry,
              including plasma processing.
