Title       : Collaborative Research: Testing for Marginal Independence Between Two or More
               Multiple-Response Categorical Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0207212

Award Number: 0207212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Bilder bilder@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Questions that ask respondents to "choose all that apply" from a set of items
              occur frequently in surveys.  Categorical variables that summarize this type of
              survey data are called multiple response (or pick any/c) categorical variables.
               It is often of interest to test for independence between two categorical
              variables.  When categorical variables can have multiple responses, traditional
              Pearson chi-square tests for independence should not be used because of the
              within-subject dependence among responses.  This research will provide methods
              to test for independence between two or more multiple-response categorical
              variables.  A modified version of the Pearson statistic will perform the test,
              and bootstrap procedures will provide approximate sampling distributions. 
              First and second-order corrections will allow for chi-square distribution
              approximations to the sampling distribution.  Generalized log linear models and
              multivariate binomial logit-normal models will provide a model-based approach
              for the test of independence. 

Many survey questions are asked in a
              multiple-response manner.  Examples include: "What types of cars do you own?"
              and "For what criminal offenses have you been arrested?"  Other questions
              naturally fall into a multiple-response format, but some researchers avoid
              asking them in this format due to statistical analysis problems.  For example,
              most survey questions dealing with ethnicity allow respondents to make only one
              choice, which is entirely inappropriate in today's highly multicultural
              population.  Other researchers may analyze multiple-response questions as if
              they came from single-response categorical variables, which can lead to very
              conservative tests of independence.  This research will allow researchers to
              incorporate these types of questions into surveys and use statistically correct
              methods of analysis.   The research is supported by the Methodology,
              Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
              agencies under the Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding
              Opportunity.
