Title       : Hydraulic Jump Mechanics and Channel Interactions in Mountain Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0207713

Award Number: 0207713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory B. Pasternack gpast@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0207713
Pasternack

Hydraulic jumps in mountain rivers are turbulent mixtures
              of air and water that produce significant kinetic energy dissipation, air
              entertainment, surface waves, and spray.  Despite their prevalence, the role of
              natural hydraulic jumps on river flow mechanics, sediment transport, channel
              change, and basin evolution is unknown primarily because of adverse site
              conditions that previously limited field data collection.  The overall goal of
              this project   is to overcome past constraints on investigating hydraulic jump
              fluid mechanics in the natural setting and its relevance to fluvial
              geomorphology with the aid of new technologies that enable precise in situ
              measurement for the first time.  New technologies developed and tested at UC
              Davis include a River Truss, an air content sensor, and large-scale particle
              image velocimetry.  The new technologies will be used to address three
              hypotheses that predict how systematic changes in the external controls of
              channel geometry and discharge directly affect the response variables of water
              surface topography, velocity, pressure, air content, air entertainment, and
              energy dissipation.  The role of response variables in sediment transport,
              channel change, and basin evolution will follow from a thorough investigation
              of the response variables themselves, especially when addressing conditions
              near the bed.  Observing 13 natural hydraulic jumps in the American River basin
              over a 3-year period will test hypotheses.  Results will be compared between
              jumps and against results from engineering flume-based studies using
              theoretical and empirical equations.  A better understanding of the role of
              natural jumps in channel change is very  important to science because it would
              improve the physics of landscape evolution models,
provide needed guidance for
              including in-stream features in river restoration and rehabilitation,  and make
              interdisciplinary contributions to ecology and aquatic geochemistry.  In future
              research, other scientists will be able to apply the newly proven field
              technologies and resulting models to better understand the complex flow
              mechanics and channels interactions occurring in  mountain rivers.



