Title       : Development of a Novel CO2 Partial Pressure - Based Paleo-Altimeter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0207440

Award Number: 0207440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105031             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer C. McElwain mcelwain@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The topography of the Earth exerts an extremely important influence on
              atmospheric circulation patterns and both floral and faunal biogeography. 
              However, the uplift history of many large tectonic structures, such as the
              Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau, and the changes in paleo-topography of the Earth
              through time, remain among the least well-quantified, yet critical boundary
              conditions in the study of both climatic and biotic evolution.  The proposed
              research aims to develop, validate and precisely quantify the associated errors
              of a novel paleo-altimeter, which will be based on the predictable changes in
              CO2 partial pressure (Pa) with altitude, as reflected in stomatal frequency
              (density and index) of fossil plant taxa.  The reduction in CO2 Pa with
              altitude exerts a physiological limitation on plant photosynthesis, which is
              compensated for, in many species, by an increase in stomatal frequency and
              altered stomatal distribution.  As the partial pressure of atmospheric CO2
              decreases with altitude in a predictable manner, and stomatal frequency on
              plant leaves increases significantly with decreasing partial pressure,
              theoretically therefore, paleo-elevation can be estimated by calculating the
              difference in CO2 Pa (estimated from fossil leaf stomatal frequency) between
              coeval high elevation and sea-level fossil floras.  It is projected based on
              preliminary modeling that this CO2 Pa based method will yield paleo-elevations
              within an estimated error of  500 m and yield results, based on temperature
              sensitivity analysis, which are independent of climate, therefore providing
              significant improvements on existing methodologies.  


