Title       : Functional Polymer Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0207560

Award Number: 0207560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Wynne kjwynne@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The theme of this research is the development of a molecular and macromolecular
              basis for generating desired surface structure and function that avoids
              post-manufacturing processes such as plasma treatment. To this end, the
              synthesis and utilization of Dual Function Macromonomers (DFMs) will be carried
              out. DFMs are difunctional low molar mass copolymers having conventional end
              groups (e.g., alcohol) and containing  (a) semifluorinated sidechains and (b)
              functional sidechains. It is proposed that semifluorinated "nanoballoons" will
              bring desired functionality to the surface in operations such as solvent
              casting or melt processing. Thus, the DFM concept leverages the well-known
              tendency of fluoropolymer groups to surface-concentrate. However, in so doing,
              copolymer structure causes functionality that would ordinarily be in the bulk
              to be brought to the surface. The DFM concept will be applied first to
              polyurethanes. The plan is to prepare (a) surface active DFMs, (b) PUs
              incorporating DFM soft blocks, and (c) blends using a conventional polyurethane
              as major component and DFM PU as minor component. The resulting material
              properties are controlled at the nanostructure and microstructural levels. The
              DFM PU is employed for controlling surface function while a conventional bulk
              PU provides independently controlled mechanical properties. 

The proposed
              work focuses on a new and potentially economical method for introducing
              chemical functionality specifically at the surface of polymeric materials. The
              proposed control of surface chemistry is anticipated to improve adhesion and
              durability of manufactured items, to facilitate long-term function of
              biomedical materials, and to bring into existence new materials for destroying
              dangerous pathogens on contact.

