Title       : Black-Hole Dynamics and Gravitational Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0207097

Award Number: 0207097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Evans evans@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A theoretical and numerical study will be made of several problems in numerical
              relativity and gravitational wave physics.  A numerical method will be
              developed to allow the calculation of wave fields that propagate in the
              vicinity of black holes.  This method will focus on directly computing the
              spacetime metric, which is the object that describes a gravitational field. 
              Related to this effort, a study will be made to determine optimal
              non-reflecting boundary conditions, for use in the above-mentioned numerical
              method and for use in more general numerical relativity calculations.  A study
              will also be made of matched-filter techniques that can be applied in analyzing
              data from the LIGO detectors to search for merging binary stars which
              involve
significant levels of spin (rotation) of the two stars.

The
              development of a numerical method for computing the spacetime metric on a black
              hole background is important for several reasons.  Such a method might be
              applied to calculate the gradual merger of a small black hole that is orbiting
              around a larger, rotating black hole.  Mergers like this are potentially
              detectable events in LIGO and the proposed NASA/ESA LISA mission.  Computation
              of waves on black hole backgrounds is also an important arena for testing the
              stability of numerical calculations, which is a considerable general concern in
              numerical relativity at present.  Specification of non-reflective boundary
              conditions for such calculations is complicated by the curvature of space
              around black holes.  Development of a more accurate non-reflecting condition is
              an important component to accurately computing gravitational waves and may be
              an important ingredient to stabilizing some numerical calculations.  Existing
              techniques to search through LIGO data will not detect weak signals from some
              merging binaries which have significant individual stellar rotation rates. 
              Including spin effects is straightforward but leads to a computationally
              prohibitive task.  The
goal will be to find a search technique that
              incorporates the essential aspects of spin while remaining computationally
              viable.
