Title       : Social and Economic Context of Early Neolithic Villages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0207662

Award Number: 0207662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Kuijt Ian.Kuijt.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As an evolutionary event the transition from foraging to farming is one of the
              most important social and economic process in human prehistory.  Supported by
              the National Science Foundation Dr. Kuijt and his colleagues will conduct three
              seasons of archaeological excavation at the early Neolithic village of Dhra',
              Jordan, to explore the social, economic, and demographic context of this
              transition.  The early agricultural village of Dhra', dating to approximately
              11,500 years ago and located next to the Dead Sea, provides an important means
              of reconstructing the earliest transition from foraging to farming, and
              developing an understanding of the social context in which food production and
              agriculture first emerged in the Old World.  Archaeological excavations will be
              conducted in a series of broad continuous five by five meter excavation units
              documenting the internal organization of one of our earliest Neolithic
              villages.  This will provide researchers with an understanding of the spatial
              organization of village life, including the location where food preparation
              occurred, how residential areas were organized, the location and nature of food
              storage systems, and where ritual and mortuary activities occurred.  In
              exploring these important evolutionary and anthropological issues, Dr. Kuijt
              and his collaborators will use archaeological data to address three
              interrelated questions: 1) How was the development of new systems of food
              production linked to paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental changes? 2) How might
              the development of new forms of food production be linked to later population
              growth and pressure? and, 3) What was the social context early village life,
              and how did this change with the development of early food production?  Guided
              by these questions, this research provides new insights into the social process
              and impact of the process of plant and animal domestication on small-scale
              foraging/farming communities, including the emergence of social inequality, the
              development of ritual and civic elites, and the development of food surpluses. 
              Bringing together specialists to conduct investigations into the social,
              demographic, and environmental context of food production at Dhra', this
              research contributes towards our understanding of the evolutionary transition
              from foraging to farming on three levels.  First, it will help researchers to
              gain insight into how this transition impacted life at the scale of local
              village life.  Second, this study will help archaeologists to understand how
              village social and economic changes are linked to regional and intra-regional
              changes.  Finally, at the global scale this research will help anthropologists
              and archaeologists to better understand the evolutionary trajectory, and nature
              of, the transition from foraging to farming.

    


