Title       : Thermal and Rheological Controls on the Emplacement of Basaltic Lava Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0207919

Award Number: 0207919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine V. Cashman cashman@uoregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Kauahikaua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thermal and Rheological Controls on the Emplacement of Basaltic Lava
              Flows

EAR-0207919
PIs: Cashman & Kauahikaua

This is a renewal proposal
              that follows directly in theme and approach to the previous award.  Recent
              studies of active pahoehoe and `a`a flows in Hawai`i, including those by the
              PIs, have shown that the explicit link between flow morphology and emplacement
              involves the relative rates of cooling, crystallization, and flow advance.
              Critical are conditions of lava transport from the vent to the flow front.
              Field observations of flow surface morphologies have led to rheological studies
              on yield strength development in crystal-liquid suspensions. Novel experiments
              using PEG wax suggest that solidification in uniform channelized flows may be
              described by a single dimensionless parameter and channel aspect ratio.
              Non-uniformities such as channel divergences, constrictions, and sinuosity also
              may stabilize or disrupt surface crust. Results from the previous award
              illustrate the success of these approaches. The current award will use high
              resolution satellite remote sensing to map basaltic flows, complete additional
              analog experiments to better define important material parameters and flow
              controls, and compare model predictions with detailed field observations of
              flows.  This renewal award continues support for the collaboration between
              Cashman (Univ. of Oregon), Kauahikaua (U.S.G.S., Hawaiian Volcano Observatory),
              and Griffiths & Kerr (Australian National University).  The research team
              brings together expertise on the field mapping and interpretation of Hawaiian
              lava flows and expertise on fluid mechanical analysis of solidifying flows.

