Title       : Quantum Fluids in One and Two Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0207071

Award Number: 0207071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moses H. Chan chan@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a low temperature physics research project.  Liquid He-3 and liquid He-4
              are paradigm systems that exhibit macroscopic quantum behavior, obeying
              respectively Fermi and Bose statistics.  While a great deal has been learned
              about these quantum liquids in bulk, fascinating results are still being
              discovered in atomically thin films of He-3 and He-4 adsorbed on surfaces. 
              Recent measurements found that He-3 atoms tend to float on top of a He-4 film
              and phase separate into 2-dimensional vapor and liquid phases.  Heat capacity
              measurements are planned to elucidate the nature of this phase
              separation/transition to determine whether this intrinsically quantum system is
              also a physical realization of the celebrated 2D Ising model of Onsager. 
              Nuclear magnetic resonance and heat capacity measurements will study the
              properties of He-3 and He-4 adsorbed in MCM-41, a highly porous substrate with
              one dimensional pores of 2.5 to 5.0 nm in diameter and up to 500 nm in length. 
              Results of these measurements will be tested against the theories of one
              dimensional quantum systems.  Undergraduate and graduate students involved in
              these experiments receive rigorous training in cryogenic, high vacuum and
              ultrasensitive electronic measurements.  They must integrate these skills to
              complete demanding experiments, a process that quickly and elegantly prepares
              them for careers in government, industry and academe.

This is a low
              temperature physics project.  All substances freeze into solid when the
              temperature is reduced.  The exceptions being liquid He-3 and He-4, which
              remain liquid even at absolute zero.  The reason for this is related to the
              quantum uncertainty principle.  Although chemically identical, He-3 has one
              neutron and two protons in its nucleus and He-4 has two of each.  All atoms are
              either Fermion or Boson depending on the total number of neutrons, protons and
              electrons they have.  This rule makes He-3 a Fermion and He-4 a Boson, and as a
              consequence, liquid He-3 and liquid He-4 behave quite differently, particularly
              when these "quantum fluids" are forced into volumes where at least one
              dimension is "nanoscopic".  This project seeks to understand the properties of
              one and two-dimensional Fermion and Boson systems, namely He-3 and He-4 atoms
              confined in atomically thin films, or in tiny one-dimensional pores, with
              diameters in the range 2.5 to 5.0 nanometers.  The knowledge we gain in
              studying these quantum liquids contributes to the understanding of
              superconductors and other electronic systems.  Undergraduate and graduate
              students involved in these experiments receive rigorous training in cryogenic,
              high vacuum and ultrasensitive electronic measurements.  They must integrate
              these skills to complete demanding experiments, a process that quickly and
              elegantly prepares them for careers in government, industry and academe.

