Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Plio-Pleistocene Mammal Faunas and Environmental Change
               in the Meade Basin of Southwestern Kansas: A Combined Stratigraphic, Faunal,
               and Isotopic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0207582

Award Number: 0207582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64686              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Martin robert.martin@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      328 Wells Hall
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary purpose of this project is to determine the effects of abiotic and
              biotic factors on the community structure and morphology of small mammals,
              especially rodents, during the past 5.0 million years in the Meade Basin of
              southwestern Kansas. The Meade Basin is a unique natural laboratory, as more
              than 100 fossiliferous localities (representing at least  40 superposed
              intervals) spanning the entire later Cenozoic are found within a small area of
              approximately 45 km2. Three radiometrically dated ashes at 2.1, 1.2-1.5, and
              0.67 Ma provide calibration points for part of the sequence, and a
              magnetostratigraphic chronology will be developed that will add considerable
              refinement to the basic stratigraphic framework. Further field mapping will
              hopefully solve a few remaining thorny stratigraphic problems, especially in
              the upper part of the Rexroad Formation. Systematic studies at appropriate
              museums will refine the rodent database. A preliminary stable isotope study of
              paleosol carbonate nodules and caliche beds in Pliocene sediments has revealed
              significant habitat and climatic gradient changes, reflecting the expansion of
              tropical grasses throughout the Great Plains during this time. The isotopic
              studies will be extended to additional localities and to mammalian tooth
              apatite, to better refine the record of environmental change and to examine the
              response of small mammal diets to environmental gradients.  Finally,
              appropriate analytical methods will  be used with the rodent database to
              examine the dynamics of community assembly and anatomical change within
              lineages. The Meade Basin rodent database and stable isotopic record will
              generate one of the most detailed historical records of habitat, climatic, and
              faunal change in a terrestrial animal community anywhere in the world, and the
              stratigraphic model resulting from this project will provide the primary source
              of late Cenozoic stratigraphic information for the Great Plains region of North
              America.
