Title       : Slow Dynamics and Extended Structures in Complex Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0207106

Award Number: 0207106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bulbul Chakraborty bulbul@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The intricacy and complexity of condensed matter systems are often succinctly
              expressed through effective theories valid in the limit of large length and
              time scales.  Such theories, both in equilibrium and non-equilibrium
              statistical mechanics, arise out of a coarse-graining process which relies on a
              separation of microscopic and macroscopic length and time scales.  This
              separation of scales becomes suspect in systems where extended spatial
              structures lead to large scale heterogeneities.  There is mounting evidence
              from experiments and simulations that such structures exist in granular
              systems, supercooled liquids and foams.  It is also well established that the
              dynamical behavior of these systems set them apart from ordinary liquids and
              suggests that the complexity of dynamical behavior and response can be traced
              back to occurrence of extended spatial structures.  One way of unraveling this
              complexity is to identify the extended structures responsible for the anomalous
              dynamics, and then construct 'effective' equations of motion for these extended
              degrees of freedom.  The objective of this theoretical research project is to
              formulate effective models at the mesoscopic scale of these heterogeneities; a
              scale intermediate between the microscopic one characteristic of molecular
              dynamics simulations and the macroscopic one entering hydrodynamic
              descriptions.  Such a formulation should provide a direct interface between
              theory and experiments since the information at the mesoscopic scale is often
              directly available from experiments.  Numerical simulations will be used as a
              stepping stone in the construction of effective dynamical theories.  The
              techniques will be developed in the context of lattice models and then extended
              to continuum models.  By focusing on geometrical structures at the mesoscopic
              scale, the project aims to explore the emergence of macroscopic physical
              properties from microscopic interactions.
%%%
This theoretical project
              investigates complex and disordered condensed matter systems, such as glasses, 
              and attempts to determine how behavior at the microscopic scale affects
              behavior at the large scale.  This is a fundamental problem in science whose
              solution would have wide impact.
***  

