Title       : Nonlinear Spectroscopy of Planar and Nano-Crystalline Silicon Interfaces:
               Experiments for ab initio Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0207295

Award Number: 0207295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Downer downer@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses "epi-optic" spectroscopy of surfaces -including nonlinear
              second har-monic and sum-frequency generation (SHG/SFG) and linear
              reflectance-difference spectroscopy (RDS)-including quantitative comparison
              between experiment and theory. Prior work reached agreement between experiment
              and theory for SHG spectra of several semiconductor-adsorbate systems (H, Ge
              and B adsorbed on Si(001)-(2x1)) in ultrahigh vacuum within a limited spectral
              range, and theoretical treatment based on ab initio pseudopotential and
              full-potential approaches reproduced essential features of SHG spectra. This
              project has several aims: 1) widen the spectral range of SHG/SFG by nearly one
              order of magnitude, thereby encompassing surface resonances from 0.5 to 4.5 eV,
              using a new femtosecond Ti:sapphire parametric amplifier system. 2) acquire
              SHG/SFG spectra from Si(001), Si(111) and Ge/Si(001) surfaces prepared with
              single-domain reconstructions and small unit cells, using polarization
              configurations in which only a single component of the nonlinear surface
              susceptibility tensor contributes. 3) acquire RDS in parallel with SHG/SFG over
              a similar spectral range (1.5 to 5.0 eV) on the same anisotropic surfaces.
              Linear and nonlinear surface spectra will be calculated from a common
              theoretical basis, to link these two surface spectroscopies. 4) perform
              femtosecond-time-resolved SHG and RDS follow-ing resonant excitation of
              dimer-related surface bands. These experiments are designed to isolate and
              characterize the role played by surface dimer-related dipoles and electron-hole
              pair correla-tions in surface spectra to elucidate some of the most challenging
              theoretical issues. 5) extend SHG/SFG spectroscopy to Si nano-crystals embedded
              in SiO2, with which they form sharply-curved, buried interfaces. Spectroscopic
              SHG/SFG will characterize interface states that underlie light emission and
              charge trapping. Close contact will be maintained with theoretical
              collabora-tors who are improving methods for calculating surface SHG/SFG
              spectra under separate fund-ing. The broad goal is to develop nonlinear surface
              spectroscopy into an exact, quantitative sci-ence applicable to many surface
              systems. 
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical
              area of electronic/photonic materi-als science having high technological
              relevance. Although the proposed work will focus on semi-conductor interfaces,
              anticipated outcomes will have broader implications because of the gener-ality
              and versatility of epi-optic spectroscopy. The results are expected to be
              useful for eventual applications to materials as diverse as metals, polymer
              films, and biological membranes, and could motivate the development of
              commercial epi-optic spectroscopy systems and computa-tional epi-optic
              software. An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on
              education, and the integration of research and education involving graduate,
              and undergraduate students. Through direct involvement in research, students
              will have unique learning and discovery op-portunities in the areas of
              semiconductor and related materials, and advanced materials and inter-face
              characterization. This project is jointly supported by the CHE/EPC and DMR/EM
              programs.
***  

