Title       : A Comparison of RDD and Cellular Telephone Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0207843

Award Number: 0207843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte Steeh arccgs@langate.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since very little research has examined the impact on surveys of the exploding
              growth of wireless communication devices, this study will assess the extent to
              which these devices are likely to change telephone surveys.  This issue will be
              addressed by comparing the results of two national surveys, one using the usual
              list-assisted RDD sample and the other employing a sample of mobile telephone
              numbers.  The questionnaire, which will be identical in both surveys, will
              include substantive items on important policy issues as well as inquiries about
              mobile telephone ownership and use.  The analyses will search for significant
              differences between surveys along four dimensions-coverage, nonresponse, data
              quality, and relationships among variables.  Methodological factors, such as
              the number of attempts, the percentage of sample numbers whose status as
              working or nonworking is indeterminate, and the effects of caller-id, will also
              be compared.  The basic hypothesis underlying all analyses is that there are
              major differences between the two modes along each dimension.

Given that
              wireless communication devices will only become more widely used and more
              sophisticated in the very near future, it is necessary to determine how they
              might enrich and supplement the survey process.  This research will provide
              initial evidence.  Contact through mobile telephones promises to make
              hard-to-reach respondents more accessible and to give voice to groups either
              poorly represented or not represented at all in current surveys.  By gauging
              the reactions of respondents to survey contacts via a cellular telephone, the
              project also will provide practical guidance on incorporating wireless devices
              into the survey process.  Since methodologists now predict that future surveys
              will be multi-modal, mixing present and future wireless communication devices
              with fixed line telephones and the web, this study will describe both the
              opportunities and the pitfalls involved.  The end result will be an expanded
              definition of surveys and better and more valid data upon which to base public
              policy.  This research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and
              Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under the
              Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity.

