Title       : On the Nonlinear Dynamics of Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0207308

Award Number: 0207308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Frankel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0207308
PI: 			Frankel, Michael
Institution:
              		Indiana University 
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: On the Nonlinear Dynamics of Interfaces

The
              main objective  of the research project is the study of the nonlinear dynamics
              of flames. One of the major directions is the study of free-interface problems
              related to combustion and exothermal phase transitions. Free interface problems
              correspond to sharp changes in physical characteristics describing the problem;
              they arise naturally in many models in physics. An important example of
              free-interface problem to be studied is the model of SHS (Self-propagating
              High-temperature Synthesis a.k.a. solid combustion) which exhibits a remarkable
              variety of dynamics scenarios. SHS is a potentially new method of manufacturing
              composite materials with qualities superior to those obtained through
              traditional methods. Frankel  will  show the compactness and finite
              dimensionality of  the attractor for SHS model. Frankel will also study the
              free-interface model of premixed gas combustion. The second major direction of
              the project is the study of surface evolution equations modeling certain basic
              flame instabilities and spatio-temporal patterns associated with them. These
              equations are expressed in terms of instantaneous geometrical characteristics
              and normal velocity of the surface which allows a more natural representation
              of the basic nonlinearities that are of a purely geometric origin. Solutions of
              these equations exhibit wrinkling and self-fractalization similar to those
              observed in experiments. They are also capable of generating the so-called
              fingering of the surface that occurs in many processes in fluid dynamics. The
              proposed work will include rigorous study as well as asymptotic methods and
              direct numerical simulation.

This project addresses mathematical modeling of
              the complex dynamics of flames. The investigator will study two major themes to
              enhance the modeling of flame dynamics: 1) free-interface problems, i.e. ones
              in which there are sharp changes in physical characteristics and 2)  
surface
              evolution problems, i.e. where the equation is associated with the flame front
              deformation and motion. These methods could extend our understanding of flame
              instabilities, wrinkling, fingering as well as a form of solid combustion which
              could have new applications in manufacturing of composite materials.  

              
Date: May 8th, 2002

