Title       : Lake-Level Chronology and Climate Change in the Southern Bolivian Altiplano
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0207850

Award Number: 0207850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Quade jquade@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P. Jonathan Patchett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

There is perhaps no more visible a record of low-latitude shifts in
              climate than the hundreds of miles of tufa-encrusted shorelines and dissected
              diatomites laid down by an enormous (about the size of paleo-Lake Bonneville)
              paleolake that once occupied
Uyuni/Coipasa/Poopo basin in southern Bolivia.
              Appropriately these deposits have been the focus of decades of research,
              including several major coring efforts by both American and French teams. These
              lake records are fuel for a heated debate over the relative role of regional
              tropical insolation versus global temperature in controlling moisture balance
              in lakes and glaciers in the past.

For all the research effort expended on
              the lake deposits, the geochronology is still in disarray. In particular,
              dating of long cores from the Uyuni basin show poor agreement for the critical
              period 30-10 ka, with one chronology supporting the notion of regional summer
              insolation control on lake level, and the other flatly contradicting it.

A
              key challenge in relating the lake-core records to such parameters as
              regional
insolation and global temperature is that there is no direct physical
              evidence for lake depth. Such evidence, however, is available in the superb
              natural exposures of dissected lake deposits, which we surveyed for the first
              time two field seasons ago. The exposures are so impressive that we are
              confident that they will provide the key to reconstructing lake depths and lake
              chronology over the last ~120 ka. Our results so far show that the lake reached
              high elevations only twice in the last 120 ka, from 17 (?) to 14 ka, and from
              108 to 94 ka. We request funds to continue our reconstruction of lake-level
              variations in the Uyuni/Coipasa/Poopo basin in southern Bolivia. Our intent is
              to establish a coherent
stratigraphy and chronology of lake-level fluctuations
              using the natural exposures of lake sediments and shoreline tufas, and by both
              U-Th and 14 C dating of lacustrine tufas and mollusks. We also propose to
              employ 87Sr/86Sr and 234U/238U ratios in lake carbonates as tools for tracking
              changes in the proportions of runoff to ground-water inputs to the lake, and to
              infer lake depths from cores. Our revised lake-level chronology will in turn
              constitute an important test of the potential linkages between lake-level
              stages and variations in global temperature and low-latitude seasonal
              insolation over land and sea.

