Title       : Identifying Causal Mechanisms Underlying Nonignorable Unit Nonresponse Through
               Refusals to Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0207435

Award Number: 0207435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Groves bgroves@isr.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mick P. Couper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eleanor Singer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Presser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is a set of randomized experiments aimed at systematically both
              producing and eliminating unit nonresponse error in survey estimates. 
              Specifically, three attributes of the survey request (topic interest, survey
              sponsor, and monetary incentives) will be experimentally manipulated in concert
              with choice of target population.  Sampling frames containing persons with
              known characteristics (e.g., occupational groups, interest groups, groups of
              consumers of specific products or services) will be used.  Randomly identified
              subsamples of these groups will be asked to participate in self-administered
              surveys on topics of relevance to the frame and topics irrelevant to the frame.
               Crossed with this factor, the sponsorship of the survey will be experimentally
              varied, with one sponsor relevant to the frame and one irrelevant to the frame.
               Finally, the use of a monetary incentive will be crossed with both of the
              other factors to measure the effects of extrinsic benefits of participation.
              The key hypothesis is that topic interest and sponsorship act to produce
              nonignorable nonresponse when the surveys contain items relevant to the frame,
              and that monetary incentives act to reduce the magnitude of nonresponse error
              by bringing into the respondent pool sample persons with low topic interest and
              minimal affect toward the sponsor.  The effects of sponsor affect and topic
              interest are expected to be additive; monetary incentives are expected to
              counteract the nonignorability influences of both factors.

The practical
              importance of this work to statistics based on surveys is:  a) to help agencies
              conducting surveys anticipate when different sponsors may obtain different
              results; b) to provide evidence about potentially harmful effects on
              nonresponse error of interviewers' emphasizing single purposes of a survey; c)
              to produce evidence regarding the ameliorating effects on nonresponse error of
              monetary incentives; and d) to test a conceptual structure that will help
              survey sponsors anticipate when nonresponse rates will affect error and when
              they will not.  This research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and
              Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under the
              Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity.

