Title       : NER: Can Aluminum Nanocluster Complexes Yield Rates of Ligand Exchange at
               Aluminous Mineral Surfaces?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0207709

Award Number: 0207709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93930              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Casey whcasey@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Casey
NER-0207709

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale
              Science and Engineering initiative NSF 01-157, category NER, and is co-funded
              by the GEO Directorate.	The reactions that concern geochemists are often ligand
              exchange reactions, where one atom in the inner-coordination sphere of a metal
              is replaced with another.  Even complicated processes like adsorption and
              mineral dissolution are really ligand-exchange reactions because the
              coordination number of the metal is unchanged by the process.  The rates of
              these reactions vary enormously for different metals yet very little is known
              about the reaction rates at mineral surfaces, which are the key sites that
              affect natural water chemistry.  Stated differently, the functional groups on
              clays and metal-hydroxide minerals are ligands too. Geochemists are coming to
              rely heavily on computational methods of predicting reaction properties because
              so many of the key reactions are difficult to probe experimentally. 
              Unfortunately, the computational cost of predicting rates of ligand exchanges
              at the aqueous-mineral interface are enormous because so many atoms must be
              included in a realistic simulation.  

We pursue an alternative strategy
              where we attempt to establish a correlation between measured rate coefficients
              of water exchange ( ) in aluminum complexes and nanoparticles and structural
              parameters in the complexes that were calculated using ab initio methods.  This
              correlation is novel because it is based on the easily calculated properties of
              the complexes instead of on the costly transition-state structures and provides
              a simple and computationally inexpensive way to predict rates of one of the
              most fundamental classes of geochemical reactions.  By hypothesis, this simple
              approach can be extended to nanoparticles, colloids, and clays and is limited
              only by the feasibility of computer simulations. 

This research is risky
              because there is no guarantee that the important variables will scale with
              molecular size.  Nevertheless, if successful, it promises an inexpensive method
              to predict rates of the most fundamental of reactions in aqueous media across
              an enormous range of molecular sizes.  It is a novel and far-reaching approach
              because it is based on properties of ground-state structures rather than
              transition states.



