Title       : Collaborative Research: US-EAGLE (Ethiopia-Afar Grand Lithospheric Experiment):
               Modification of Lithospheric Structure During Continental Break- Up
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0207878

Award Number: 0207878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346784             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Keller keller@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven H. Harder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0207878
Keller

The architecture of continental margins in terms of how they
              are created is not well understood because most of the previous work has been
              on successfully rifted margins after rifting is complete.  Both continental
              (fault dominated) end-members and oceanic (magma dominated) rift end-members
              are well studied, but the transitional stage is not understood.  This project
              will document this critical transition from continental to oceanic rifting. 
              The PIs will carry out seismic experiments, integrated with geochemical,
              gravity and structural studies, to study lithospheric structure in one of the
              rare areas where the transition from continental rifting to incipient spreading
              is captured - the main Ethiopian Rift (MER).  In the MER the along-axis
              transition to initial seafloor spreading provides a spatial proxy for temporal
              variability.  Specific objectives are: 1) to determine detailed crust and
              mantle structure across and along a transitional rift segment and 2) to
              understand magmagenesis beneath and within the rift.  The PIs will obtain
              crustal P-and S-velocity cross-sections that can be interpreted for lithology
              across the Ethiopian rift at 10 deg. N where active magmatic centers first
              appear, and along-strike to the north to study the transition into fully
              magmatic rifting.  They will interpret existing and new gravity data in light
              of their new seismic data, and use geochemical data to constrain the physical
              state of the upper mantle and magmatic inputs to the crust.

The project (US
              - EAGLE) is fully integrated with the already funded UK - EAGLE initiative. 
              Scientists at Leicester, Leeds and London, have been awarded UK funds to carry
              out a single refraction profile across the Ethiopian rift in January 2003,
              coupled with local seismicity studies and teleseismic recording.  The US -
              EAGLE PIs will shoot and record a complementary orthogonal along-axis
              wide-angle profile; and will shoot fan shots into these linear arrays and the
              local seismic network to provide a measure of 3D coverage.  Together, these
              seismological experiments form a nested, multi-scale seismic image of the
              Ethiopian rift and plume.  The seismic studies will be coupled with geochemical
              and petrological and gravity studies (US), and structural, thermochronological,
              magnetotelluric and additional gravity studies (UK).
***

