Title       : RUI: Computing Patterns in Strings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0207673

Award Number: 0207673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francine Blanchet-Sadri blanchet@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The problem of computing patterns in sequences or strings of characters
from a
              finite alphabet has important applications in numerous areas of
computer
              science, notably in data compression, information theory, and
pattern
              matching. This problem has also important applications in biology.
The
              stimulus for such recent works is the study of biological sequences
such as
              DNA and protein that play a central role in molecular biology. DNA
sequences
              can be viewed as quite long but finite strings of nucleotides of
4 different
              types, while protein sequences can be viewed as finite strings
of amino acids
              of 20 possible types. Patterns such as periodicities and
repetitions make up a
              significant fraction of both DNA and protein
sequences. Although the functions
              of these patterns are not well
understood, they appear important for
              understanding the expression,
regulation and evolution of a biological
              sequence. These patterns can be
used to identify the sequence among other
              sequences, an application that
plays a role in genetic fingerprinting.
              Repetitions in biological
sequences have been associated with human genetic
              diseases. They also
complicate multiple sequence alignment because matches may
              be present in
numerous places.

The literature has generally considered
              problems in which a period u of a
repetition is invariant. It has been
              required that occurrences of u match
each other exactly. Due to the action of
              evolutionary mutation, patterns
in biological strings are seldom exact but
              rather approximate. It
therefore becomes necessary to recognize u' as an
              occurrence of u if the
distance between u' and u is bounded by a certain
              threshold. Several
definitions of distance have been proposed like the Hamming
              distance which
counts the minimum number of character substitutions required
              to transform
u' into u, and the edit distance which counts the minimum number
              of
substitutions, insertions, and deletions of characters required
              to
transform u' into u. Although there is an enormous literature dealing
              with
approximate pattern matching according to these and other definitions
              of
distance, very little is known on approximate repetitions, a version
              of
repetitions where errors are allowed, and much remains to be done.
              Given
the importance of patterns in biological strings and the
              exponential
growth in the DNA database, it is important to develop
              efficient
algorithms for detecting these patterns. The investigators study
              patterns
such as periodicities, repetitions, covers, and seeds and
              their
approximate versions built upon various commonly used distance
              measures.
Techniques include recent combinatorial techniques related to
              partial
strings which are strings where a number of gap characters are
              allowed.
They also include the cover array, the highest scoring paths in
              weighted
grid graphs, the probabilistic models that have been proposed
              for
repetitions, and the subtree max gap problem which is a poweful tool
              in
parallel algorithm design.

