Title       : Monkey Life Histories and Dental Hard Tissue Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0207433

Award Number: 0207433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline E. Bowman bowmanje@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Schoenemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Huss-Ashmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Monkey teeth are known to grow in an incremental manner like trees.  Regular
              layers of enamel and dentine are formed which represent known time intervals in
              the life of the animal.  There is some evidence to suggest that disturbances of
              this regular laying down of dental tissue may be directly related to specific
              life-events such as giving birth to an infant.  These scientists are
              investigating the feasibility of developing a method, using monkeys as a model,
              to 'read' fossil primate teeth for such information.  Such a tool would provide
              invaluable information regarding how life-history events, such as the age of
              first reproduction in females, changed over the course of human evolution.
              
This project aims to provide preliminary data to determine if further
              investigation of this phenomenon is warranted.  Teeth from five adult female
              rhesus macaques will be sectioned and examined under both light and electron
              microscopes.  Any disturbances in their teeth will be precisely aged and the
              results will be compared with the detailed records of their lives.  All are
              known to have had at least one baby while their teeth were still forming.  The
              macaques have been selected from a sample of primate skulls from individuals
              with known life-histories collected as part of an National Science Foundation
              planning grant. 
	This work will support the research efforts of a female
              scientist and will also provide data of value to the broader scientific
              community, especially those concerned with the welfare or conservation of
              primate species.  

