Title       : IIS/HCI SGER: The Iliad - Exploring Human Computer Interaction Research in the
               Performing Arts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0207869

Award Number: 0207869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97523              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos Wagmister fabian@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Dyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This small grant for exploratory research will support investigation of the use
              of media-rich instrumented environments in the performing and media arts. 
              Using as the driver application a specific large-scale performance work, based
              on Homer's The Iliad, this project will begin development of a distributed
              control system.  An important aspect of this system will be the ability of the
              audience to interact with the performance environment.  Participants start
              their experience through a survey on a website, which populates a database used
              throughout the performance process.  In the venue itself, which consists of a
              gallery as well as performance spaces, participants will be linked to their
              database records using standard radio frequency identification tags in their
              tickets, which are read by ubiquitous antennas.  Media and story choices in the
              space will be adapted, based on the particular audience members attending on
              the particular day.  As the experience progresses, the database will be updated
              with sensor data and images collected from the performance.  The responsive
              environment is created by the interconnection of the database, sensors, and
              automated production equipment for the control of lighting, sound, motorized
              scenery, and video or image projection.

In the information society of the
              twenty-first century, technologies to manage, enable, and advance cultural
              innovation will be among the most valuable assets of civilization.  This
              project will explore an emerging area that could be of great commercial,
              social, and scientific importance in the coming decades.

