Title       : The Influence of lst-and 2nd-hand Investigations on Learning Opportunities and
               Outcomes in Inquiry-based Science in the Elementary School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0207651

Award Number: 0207651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $855835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annemarie Palincsar annemari@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This three-year project explores the influence of two modes of investigation,
              1st- and 2nd-hand, on student development of scientific knowledge and
              reasoning.  In 1st-hand investigations students have direct experience with
              phenomena.  In the 2nd-hand investigations students interact with informal
              text, either in a traditional format or an innovative format modeled after the
              notebook of a scientist.  The project proposes to conduct a series of three
              studies in schools with diverse populations: rural, urban-poor, and urban
              bilingual.  In Study 1 and 2, the instruction of the unit will be done by the
              investigators and will be conducted with groups of 12 students during the
              school day.  In Study 3 the instruction will be done by the teachers and it
              will involve four whole classes.  Study 1 is a mixed experimental design in
              which 48 students will participate.  Students, matched for general achievement,
              will be randomly assigned to four sequences.  Sequence varies mode of
              instruction (1st- and 2nd-hand investigations) and topic (force- and
              mass-motion).  Instruction will be videotaped, and interviews will be conducted
              to a randomly selected sample of 4 students on each group.  Study 2 includes a
              third variable: mode of 2nd-hand investigations, traditional or notebook.  It
              is a five-condition study involving different sequences.  During this study, a
              classroom observation instrument will be developed.  Study 3 will involve the
              implementation of the conditions that proved to have the best outcomes in Study
              2.  The study will try to identify individual differences that may interact
              with the type of condition.  Instruction will be documented (taped) twice
              during the course of each mode of investigation.  The classroom observation
              instrument will be administered during each investigation.  A random sample of
              8 students within each class will be interviewed twice in each instructional
              phase.  The study will advance understanding of how instruction can maximize
              student learning in different inquiry contexts.  A new classroom observation
              tool will be developed
