Title       : Collaborative Research: A Multidisciplinary Study of an Exhumed Active
               Continental Margin: The Wrangell Transect, SE Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0207615

Award Number: 0207615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Butler butler@pmag.geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Gehrels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's propose a multidisciplinary study of Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks
              along an east-west transect in the Wrangell - Petersburg - Prince of Wales
              Island area of SE Alaska (= Wrangell transect).  Previous research demonstrates
              that integration of paleomagnetic studies with geochronologic,
              therinochronologic, barometric, and structural geologic observations can
              produce important insights into the tectonic evolution of the Insular
              superterrane and Coast Mountains orogen in western BC and SE Alaska.  The PI's
              recent results from near Prince Rupert show that paleomagnetism is a key
              component of multidisciplinary efforts investigating exhumed shallow and
              mid-crustal sections.  When accompanied by geologic observations resulting from
              a carefully coordinated multidisciplinary research program, paleomagnetic data
              on intrusive igneous rocks 'eld critical information on the tectonic
              development of deformed yi
regions that cannot otherwise be obtained.  For
              example, the PI's have documented that panels of crust containing the Paleocene
              Quottoon igneous complex east of the Coast shear zone have experienced
              east-side-up tilts ranging to 40' during Eocene extension.  In addition, their
              geochronologic, palcomagnetic, barometric, and structural geologic data suggest
              that the midCretaceous Ecstall pluton was folded during west-directed
              thrusting.  These discoveries are fundamental to understanding the crustal
              architecture and tectonic development of the continental margin in the northern
              Cordillera.

Because igneous rocks were emplaced into this part of the
              magmatic arc during the Cretaceous, throughout the Paleogene, and into the
              Miocene, the Wrangell transect provides the opportunity to track deformation of
              an evolving convergent to strike-slip plate margin in space and time.  Methods
              will include U/Pb geochronology of zircon and spheric, Al-in-homblende
              barometry, 40 Ar/39 Ar thennochronology, (U-Th)/He dating of zircon,
              metamorphic petrology, and structural geologic investigations in addition to
              paleomagnetic analysis.  Preliminary investigations on the eastern portion of
              the transect indicate that this area experienced - 1 7' ESEside-up tilt about
              an axis with azimuth 22' since 20 Ma.  Observations from across the transect
              indicate that paleomagnetic directions from Cretaceous plutons are variable,
              with both concordant and discordant inclinations.  Paleomagnetic study of the
              Cretaceous and Tertiary igneous rocks of the Wrangell transect, coupled with
              the geochronologic, thennochronologic, and barometric analyses, can determine:
              (1) when and where Cenozoic defontiation occurred; and (2) whether regionally
              consistent tilting/folding and/or large-scale transport can account for
              discordant paleomagnetic directions from Cretaceous plutons.  Combined with
              results from the Prince Rupert area, successful completion of the proposed
              research can provide a comprehensive model for the tectonic and paleogeographic
              evolution of the Coast Mountains and Insular superterrane for the past I 00
              m.y.

