Title       : Variability of Metamorphic P-T-t Paths in Compressional Magmatic Arcs and the
               Relationship Between Magmatism, Metamorphism, and Crustal Loading: Example from
               the North Cascades, WA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0207777

Award Number: 0207777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold H. Stowell hstowell@wgs.geo.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposed research will provide critical constraints on the nature of
              loading/high pressure metamorphism in contractional magmatic arcs, and greatly
              enhance data available for deciphering the tectonic history of the North
              Cascades. Research will integrate new high precision geochronologic,
              thermobarometric, and metamorphic phase equilibria data from theWenatchee Block
              (WB), Cascades Crystalline Core (CCC) of Washington. Published
              thermobarometric, geochronologic, and structural data for the WB have been used
              to propose tectonic models; however, the metamorphic data are largely
              inadequate to resolve some of the
important problems. For example, tectonic
              interpretations hinge on whether the entire WB experienced synchronous loading
              and high-pressure metamorphism, and the timing of high-pressure metamorphism
              with respect to igneous intrusions in the central WB. Yet, there are few
              reliable ages for peak metamorphism and few P-T-t path determinations for the
              central and northern WB. Available data comprise P-T estimates based on mineral
              rim chemistry, P-T estimates for growth of garnet cores based on zoning, and P
              estimates for pluton emplacement based on Al in hornblende (Ague & Brandon,
              1996). Detailed data are available for the NE margin of the Mt. Stuart
              batholith (Stowell & Tinkham, 1999; Tinkham & Stowell, 2000a, 2000b; Tinkham in
              prep. 2). The PI's preliminary quantitative P-T-t paths for metamorphism
              indicate that regional garnet growth postdates the Mt. Stuart. Geochronologic
              and petrologic data are compatible with post intrusion metamorphism likely
              involving a small P increase. Research will integrate garnet Sm-Nd ages and
              garnet growth conditions north of the Mt. Stuart batholith.  These data will be
              used to develop quantitative P-T-t paths that will complement existing data for
              the NE edge of the Batholith. Metamorphic P-T-t paths and new U-Pb zircon ages
              for orthogneisses at Pear Lake and within the Banded Gneiss on Wenatchee Ridge
              will be used to constrain the heat source for metamorphism. Ages for garnet
              will be estimated from garnet - rock Sm-Nd isochrons. P and T of initial garnet
              growth will be estimated from mineral compositions and pseudosections,
              supplemented with P and T from equilibrium thermobarometry. U-Pb zircon
              geochronology will provide critical ages for magmatic bodies in the Banded
              Gneiss and the Pear Lake orthogneiss that may have provided significant heat
              during metamorphism. Geochronologic
and thermobarometric data will be
              interpreted in the context of structural data to place constraints on the
              conditions and timing of deformation. Integration of these data will help
              define the WB metamorphic history, and elucidate how metamorphism and
              subsequent cooling relates to magmatic arc plutonism and deformation. It will
              also document how detailed garnet thermobarometric and chronologic techniques
              can be used to extract complex tectonic histories. Tectonic models describing
              metamorphic/orogenic processes in a magmatic arc can only be critically
              evaluated after details of metamorphic P-T-t paths have been described, and
              these paths spatially and temporally related to plutonism and deformation. The
              results of this study will help to distinguish between metamorphism resulting
              from advective heat transfer by plutons and conductive heat transfer after
              crustal thickening.
