Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Tropical Vegetation during the Early Part of an Ice Age:
               An Intercontinental Comparison of Mid-Carboniferous Floras in their
               Geochronologic Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0207359

Award Number: 0207359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Gastaldo ragastal@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5930,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: Tropical Vegetation during the Early Part of an Ice Age:
              An Intercontinental Comparison of Mid-Carboniferous Floras in their
              Geochronologic Setting

Robert Gastaldo
EAR-0207359

ABSTRACT

Earth
              history records major climatic intervals that can be generalized as either
              globally warm or cold.  Transitions to a globally cold Earth, representing the
              onset of an ice age in the broadest sense, has happened only a few times since
              the establishment of terrestrial ecosystems, for instance in the Carboniferous
              and Late Tertiary (at the beginning of our current cold climate phase).  At
              such times of transition, there are expected to be significant changes in the
              flora in all environments and at all scales.  This project focuses on the
              changes in tropical terrestrial floras during the initial phases of the
              Carboniferous ice age, up to and immediately after the Mid-Carboniferous
              boundary (320 Ma).  Fossil
plant-bearing rocks from coal basins in the United
              States, Poland, and the Czech Republic provide remarkably stratigraphically
              complete macrofloral and microfloral data sets, which have been collected for
              decades from rocks overlying the coals (macroflora) and the coals themselves
              (microflora).  Additionally, volcanogenic ash-fall tuffs have been identified
              within some sections, providing minerals that can provide isotopic ages,
              permitting control of biostratigraphic correlations within and between the
              basins and other parts of the world.  From these unpublished data and the
              supporting collections, a
standard reference profile of vegetational changes
              will be established that will document the rates of taxonomic turnover through
              time.  These data will allow for a quantitative analysis of the geographical
              extent and dominance-diversity magnitude of vegetational community changes in
              the tropics.  Results from this project can serve as a baseline for the study
              of similar intervals in our current ice age.


