Title       : Conservation Laws with Partial Dissipation in Continuum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0207154

Award Number: 0207154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yanni Zeng zeng@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0207154
PI: Yanni Zeng
Institution: University of Alabama
              Birmingham
Title: Conservation laws with partial dissipation in continuum
              mechanics


This project is concerned with systems of conservation laws
              (balance laws), a broad class of nonlinear partial differential equations
              (PDEs) arising from continuum mechanics.  Of special interest are equations
              with partial dissipation, including hyperbolic-parabolic systems, hyperbolic
              systems with fading memory, and hyperbolic systems with relaxation.  The
              purpose of the research is to obtain a better understanding of the underlying
              physical phenomena through the study of the qualitative behavior of the
              solutions of the PDEs.  The first objective is to obtain the nonlinear
              stability of shock profiles for hyperbolic systems with relaxation, including
              fully dissipative systems and those containing one non-decaying wave in a
              linearly degenerate field (systems of composite type).  The second objective is
              to obtain a similar stability result for initial boundary-value problems for
              hyperbolic-parabolic systems, especially to understand the effect of the
              boundary.  The third objective is to extend the study to contact
              discontinuities and rarefaction waves. 

The research conducted under this
              award is relevant for the study of compressible viscous flows, the motion of
              viscoelastic materials, gas dynamics in thermal nonequilibrium, and
              magnetohydrodynamics.  By including viscosity, heat conduction, electrical
              resistivity, excited internal structures of molecules, chemical reactions, and
              so on we focus on mathematical models that are closer to the real world than
              the traditional ideal ones.  The project has three specific objectives.  The
              first objective is to understand the stability properties of shock profiles in,
              for example, high-temperature gas flows when the internal structure of
              molecules and chemical reactions are no longer negligible.  This problem
              arises, for example, at the reentry of a space shuttle into the atmosphere and
              is quite different from the traditional supersonic flight of an airplane.  The
              second objective is to better understand gas flows near a solid surface.  The
              third objective is to study more complete wave patterns in several
              cases.





