Title       : Hydrology of Braided River Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0207556

Award Number: 0207556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efi Foufoula-Georgiou efi@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Paola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0207556
Foufoula

Braided rivers are complex dynamical systems comprising
              multiple unstable alluvial channels that divide and rejoin around bars and
              islands and migrate frequently across the river's braidplain.  Although not
              common in lowland areas, braided rivers are dominant at high latitudes and in
              areas with rapid sedimentation.  They represent a major management challenge in
              areas such as Alaska and the Pacific Northwest where bridges and pipelines must
              be built across them.  In addition, the alluvial deposits of braided rivers are
              important reservoirs of water, oil, gas, coal, sand, gravel and heavy minerals.
               Their instability and opportunistic flow patterns make prediction of braided
              rivers extremely difficult.
Recent advances have suggested several new ways of
              analyzing these complex dynamical systems.  It is now clear that braided rivers
              exhibit both spatial and dynamic (time-space) scaling; i.e. a small part of the
              river network is statistically similar to a larger part, in terms of planform
              geometry and evolution, under appropriate resealing.  This observation opens up
              the possibility of statistical prediction of rare, high-magnitude channel
              shifts from readily obtainable records of lower magnitude but more frequent
              events occurring at smaller scales.  It is also clear that at least some of
              these system-scaling or "emergent" properties of braided rivers can be
              predicted on the basis of simplified models of the stream dynamics.  Finally,
              recent experimental work has illustrated that the planform pattern and dynamics
              of braided rivers can be dramatically affected by modest amounts of bank
              vegetation; it may even be possible to convert a braided to meandering river by
              vegetation effects alone.
We propose to unite and build on these three lines
              of research, focusing on the following basic issues: (1) extension of scaling
              analysis in braided rivers to the third (vertical) dimension, i.e., scaling of
              flows, velocities, bed elevation and sediment flux, with implications for
              statistical prediction of floods, scour and mobility in modern rivers, and
              stratigraphic architecture in ancient deposits; (2) testing and refinement of
              existing braided-river models using hydrologic scaling results as a model
              metric; and (3) study of the effects of vegetation on braided rivers, focusing
              on how repeated cycles of flow and vegetation can lead to the 'regularization'
              of braided-river flows into a small number of well defined channels, breaking
              the scaling and perhaps leading to the development of the first truly
              self-regenerating meanders.

