Title       : Access to Technical Education Through Sign Language Interpreting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0207394

Award Number: 0207394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $781374             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc E. Marschark MEMRTL@RIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Stinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              More than 23 million people in the United States have chronic, significant
              hearing losses. More than 4.5 million of those individuals acquired their
              hearing losses prior to 18 years of age. Recent evidence indicates that
              educational challenges associated with are largely due to the lack of effective
              communication between deaf students and their hearing parents and teachers.
              Previous studies have described the need for sign language interpreters in
              educational settings and the nature of the interpreting process, but little is
              known about the factors actually influencing the comprehension of interpreted
              material by deaf and hard-of-hearing learners. Such investigations are
              essential if deaf individuals, or others with communication challenges, are to
              have full access to available educational  programs. The proposed research will
              (1) examine factors thought to influence comprehension of educational
              interpreting, (2) identify characteristics of students, teaching situations,
              and interpreters that can foster comprehension of material in postsecondary
              technical education, and (3) contribute to very limited knowledge about the
              education via sign language interpretation in technology and science-related
              classrooms.
	The project will take advantage of the unique setting of the
              National Technical Institute for the Deaf, a college of Rochester Institute of
              Technology, which focuses on science, mathematics, and technical education.
              Participants will be drawn from more than 1300 deaf and hard-of-hearing
              students and more than 120 sign language interpreters. Eight experiments will
              examine the impact of learners' language fluencies and content knowledge,
              interpreter skills and preparation, interpreter knowledge of technical content,
              interpreter-learner familiarity, and the effects of visual presentation formats
              on learning (e.g., distance learning). Of particular interest will be the
              impact of matching communication skills/preferences and background knowledge of
              students and interpreters in technical education classrooms, where complex
              material taxes the impoverished background reading and educational levels
              typical of most deaf students. Such settings also are challenging for sign
              language interpreters, relatively few of whom have educational backgrounds in
              science and technology.
	Both the amount learned and students'
              satisfaction/comfort with classroom experiences will be considered in terms of
              the above factors. The findings will directly facilitate the access of deaf
              learners to educational programs, improve our understanding of ways to
              effectively communication technical material to deaf and hard-of-hearing
              individuals, and describe the impact of new visual technologies on access to
              educational programming by individuals with significant hearing loss. More
              generally, the research will provide valuable new information for optimizing
              technical education for students with language or communication challenges and
              help to expand the pool of individuals with training in science, technology,
              engineering, and mathematics.

