Title       : ROLE Proposal: Formative Assessment in Science through Technology (FAST)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0207961

Award Number: 0207961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $807985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Camins camins@rcn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marco Molinaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hudson Public Schools
	      155 Apsley Street
	      Hudson, MA  01749    /   -

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The FAST proposal seeks to integrate developmental mappings of students
              understanding of science topics with formative assessment.  The basic idea is
              that developmental maps can form the framework for assessing students'
              knowledge of science concepts and for the design of follow-up student
              experiences.  The project extends the Minstrell Diagnoser concept down to the
              elementary level.

The project would involve generating mappings of two
              science concepts and then collecting data to validate student's classification.
               Later phases of the work would lead teachers to use the results of the
              formative assessment to improve student learning.  To do this, they would
              employ hand-held computers to record individual students' states within the
              facet map.  This diagnostic placement would then become the basis of teacher
              reflection.  The investigators are cognizant of the reality of limited time on
              the part of the teacher.  The hand-held computers will display information
              about possible instructional strategies given the state of the learner's
              understanding.  Data collection devices will be teacher journals, classroom
              observation, and student assessments

