Title       : Tamely Ramified Langlands Correspondence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0207231

Award Number: 0207231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Reeder reederma@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The investigator attempts to classify square-integrable tamely ramified
              
representations of split  reductive p-adic groups G and their inner 
forms,
              by means of homomorphisms from the tame Weil-Deligne group into 
the dual
              group of G. This project is part of the local Langlands 
conjecture for such
              groups. The representations are partitioned into 
finite sets, called
              ``L-packets". The method is a p-adic analogue 
of Lusztig's Jordan
              decomposition for finite reductive groups. 
From a functorial point of view,
              the tame L-packets are bijective 
lifts of unipotent L-packets for quasi-split
              groups and their inner 
forms. Properties of the L-packets, such as formal
              degrees 
and Whittaker models, will also be investigated.


Symmetry is an
              effective way to study mathematical and 
physical objects. A Group is a
              collection of symmetries, and 
Representation Theory is the study of how these
              symmetries manifest in 
different ways. As a simple example, there is a group
              of sixty 
symmetries consisting of permutations of five objects, and this
              group 
also manifests as the sixty symmetries of an icosohedron, and of the
              
fullerene molecule. The investigator studies certain infinite groups of
              
infinite dimensional symmetries. In the past forty years, 
mathematicians
              and physicists have guessed that there may be deep 
relations between such
              symmetries and fundamental, as yet undiscovered, 
properties of numbers. The
              investigator attempts to confirm part of 
these conjectures, and make them
              more explicit. 


