Title       : Erosion Beneath the Laurentide Ice Sheet, and its Role in Pleistocene Ice Age
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0207844

Award Number: 0207844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217411             (Estimated)
Investigator: John O. Stone stone@geology.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EROSION BENEATH THE LAURENTIDE ICE SHEET, AND ITS ROLE IN
PLEISTOCENE ICE AGE
              DYNAMICS
Subglacial erosion and sediment dynamics influence the size,
              stability, and climatic sensitivity of large ice sheets. These processes may
              regulate large-scale surging behavior, initiating rapid shifts in climate and
              sea level (MacAyeal, 1993a,b), and perhaps dictate the periodicity of the
              Quaternary ice ages (Clark and Pollard, 1998). We intuitivly associate the
              scoured landscapes of the northern continents with subglacial erosion, yet
              estimates of the rates, timing and spatial pattern of erosion by the
              Pleistocene ice sheets are conflicting or ambiguous. Subglacial erosion is
              difficult to study because: (i) The processes involved take place beneath large
              ice sheets. (ii) As in all eroding landscapes, the record of change is
              continually effaced as the surface is removed, and (iii) Although thick
              deposits of Pleistocene glacial sediment, which contain information about
              erosional conditions, survive around the margins of former ice sheets, they are
              patchily preserved and difficult to date.

We propose to study the history of
              erosion by the Laurentide ice sheet, using the
cosmogenic isotopes 10 Be and
              26 Al. First, we will date glacial sedimentary sequences at the southern margin
              of the former ice sheet using the technique of "burial dating" (Granger et al.,
              1997). Cosmogenic 10 Be and 26 Al are produced within the crystal structure of
              sedimentary quartz grains while the sediment is exposed to cosmic radiation
              near the Earth's surface. Once the sediment is buried, these isotopes decay at
              different rates and their ratio provides a measure of the burial time. We have
              used this technique in trial measurements on glaciofluvial sands interbedded
              with till, providing stratigraphically consistent mid-Pleistocene bracketing
              ages on previously undated glacial deposits. Second, we will use
              atmospherically-produced 10 Be, which accumulates in soils and is highly
              concentrated near the surface of deeply weathered terrains, to investigate the
              contribution of pre-glacial regolith to Laurentide tills. We presume the deep
              regolith that covered the Canadian Shield prior to the Quaternary must have
              contained an enormous inventory of 10 Be, far exceeding what could have
              accumulated on the craton during Quaternary interglacial periods. By measuring
              the 10 Be content of sediments eroded and deposited by the Laurentide ice sheet
              throughout the Pleistocene, we will track the removal of pre-glacial regolith
              and evaluate the ice sheet's response to the onset of hard-bed conditions. Our
              initial measurements show that mid-Pleistocene tills contain enormous
              concentrations of 'meteoric' 10 Be. Concentrations in Wisconsin till are two
              orders of magnitude lower. It appears that the Laurentide ice sheet was
              'mining' a cover of heavily-weathered surficial material in the middle
              Pleistocene, but that this source has now been largely exhausted.

We will
              apply these methods to well-studied sequences of till and interbedded
              glaciofluvial sediments in southwestern Minnesota, and early Pleistocene tills
              bracketed by well-dated ash layers in drill cores from South Dakota and
              Nebraska. This combination will provide samples of material eroded by the
              Laurentide Ice Sheet throughout the Pleistocene. The field area in southwestern
              Minnesota provides access to at least nine separate till units in outcrop and
              drill core. Extensive prior work in the area, and easy access to both surface
              and subsurface samples make it ideal for this study.

