Title       : Tempo and Mode of Early Animal Evolution: Estimating Metazoan Divergence Times
               with a Molecular Clock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0207766

Award Number: 0207766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Peterson kevin.peterson@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tempo and mode of early animal evolution: estimating metazoan divergence
              times
Kevin Peterson
EAR-0207766
ABSTRACT
Accurate dating of when the first
              bilaterally-symmetrical animals (i.e., Bilateria) arose is crucial to our
              understanding of early animal evolution. The fossil record suggests that
              bilaterians arose about 555 Ma ago, whereas most previous molecular-clock
              analyses estimate they arose between 800-1000 Ma ago. Because of this
              pronounced disparity, PI seeks to show that a molecular clock can accurately,
              and with precision, date deep divergences among metazoan taxa. Distance
              analysis of four concatenated proteins from nine invertebrate taxa gives the
              correct phylogenetic topology, and regression analysis using four calibration
              points shows that branch lengths are directly correlated with time. PI's clock
              estimates appear to be accurate, because a molecular estimate of the divergence
              between echinoderm subphyla (507 Ma) falls within the range established from
              the fossil record (485-520 Ma). His analyses estimate that bilaterians arose
              570 Ma ago, and animals themselves arose almost 700 Ma ago. Intriguingly, these
              originations follow two of the most extreme environmental episodes in the
              history of life ("snowball earth").   The objective of this proposal is to
              further test these ideas by first calibrating the clock using the same methods
              as above, but from bivalve molluscs. Using both sets of calibration points the
              age of the origination of Bilateria will be more reliably ascertained.
              Furthermore, PI will test two hypotheses concerning the ecology of these early
              animals. First, did metazoans live in the plankton during snowball earth?
              Because of the putative global planktonic shut-down during snowball earth, food
              would be very scarce suggesting that metazoans could not be wholly planktonic
              during this geological interval. If metazoans were not planktonic, then they
              must have been benthic, but if they were they must have been very small in
              order to explain the absence of trace fossils during this interval of time.
              Hence, PI's second question concerns these benthic micrometazoans: are living
              animals like gastrotrichs, which are very similar to these purported early
              animals, basal bilaterians? Fulfillment of the goals of this proposal will give
              unique insight into the tempo and mode of animal evolution, and serve as the
              training ground for at least one undergraduate's intellectual foray into the
              Precambrian/Cambrian transition. 


