Title       : Space Weather: Construction of Web-based Empirical Models of the Earth's
               Ionosphere Using Data from Multiple Incoherent Scatter Radars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0207748

Award Number: 0207748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339244             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Holt jmh@haystack.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Construction of three comprehensive web-based models of the ionosphere using
              data from eight incoherent scatter radars (ISRs) is proposed.  These models
              will greatly extend recent models based on data from the Millstone Hill ISR. 
              The model will include three main parts.  The first two are North American and
              European regional models of basic and derived scalar parameters, including
              electron density (Ne), electron and ion temperature (Te and Ti), neutral
              meridional wind and exospheric temperature: the third is a model of the ExB
              plasma drifts and corresponding electrostatic potential patterns as obtained by
              the EISCAT mainland and VHF radars.  The North American regional model will be
              based on data from the Sondrestromfjord, Millstone Hill and Arecibo ISRs.  The
              European regional model will be based on data from the EISCAT Svalbard, EISCAT
              mainland UHF and VHF, Kharkov and St. Santin ISRs.  The parameters to be
              modeled have been identified by the National Space Weather Program (NSWP)
              Implementation Plan as important ones which must be specified and forecast in
              response to customer operational support requirements.  All of them have also
              been identified by the NSWP Metrics Panel as either first, second or third
              priority parameters which define the state and condition of the
              ionosphere-thermosphere (IT) system.  The high-latitude electric field and its
              variability has also been identified by the Metrics Panel as one of two first
              priority "driver" parameters of the IT system.
