Title       : Kinematic Evolution and Exhumation History of the South Tibetan Detachment
               System, Everest Massif, Tibet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0207524

Award Number: 0207524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Law rdlaw@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Within the central-eastem sector of the Himalayan orogen the highest grade
              metamorphic rocks are exposed in the High Himalayan slab, a 20-30 km thick
              northward-dipping wedge of deep crustal rocks metamorphosed at 14-56 km depth
              at 35-15 Ma.  The slab is bounded along the base by the south-vergent Main
              Central Thrust (MCT), and along the top by the South Tibetan Detachment System
              (STDS) of north-vergent normal faults which separate the metamorphic and
              anatectic core of the Himalaya from unmetamorphosed rocks of the Tibetan
              plateau.  Beginning in Early Miocene time, southward extrusion of the High
              Himalayan slab has had a profound influence on the geologic and geomorphic
              evolution of the Himalaya, and the highest topography and deepest erosion
              corresponds with the upper part of the extruding wedge.  The regional scale
              geometries of the thrust and non-nal faults bounding the slab are now
              reasonably well known, and much work has been done on documenting shear sense
              indicators along the upper and lower surfaces of the slab and constraining the
              early stage PTt paths of rocks within the slab.  However, critically important
              gaps remain in our understanding of both the kinematics (vorticity) of flow and
              relationships between flow and progressive exhumation within the extruding
              wedge.  Deten-nining the spatial and temporal relationships between timing and
              magnitude of displacement along the wedge-bounding faults and the kinematics of
              flow within the evolving wedge are crucial to understanding of the crustal
              thickening, exhumation, and erosional history of the orogen.  For example, is
              the interior of the slab dominated by pure shear deformation and bounded by
              stretching faults as suggested in one recently published extrusion model, or is
              flow throughout the slab dominated by simple shear as suggested in other
              models.  Identification of a pure shear component is critically important
              because operation of a significant pure shear component would result in: 1)
              thinning and dip-parallel extension of the slab itself, 2) relative to strict
              simple shear, an increase in both strain rates and extr-usion/exhumation rates.
               Testing of extrusion models requires that spatial and temporal distributions
              of kinematic (vorticity) domains be mapped out across the slab, and also
              requires a close integration between kinematic and PTt analyses in order to
              constrain progressive deformation and exhumation paths.  Only one published
              quantitative vorticity analysis has been made along a basal section of the High
              Himalayan slab, and no such studies exist for the upper-middle sections of the
              slab.  The PI proposes to undertake an integrated study of the kinematic
              evolution and exhumation history of the High Himalayan slab along a N-S
              traverse across the slab, and has chosen the Everest region for this study.  In
              the Everest region the N-S transect across the slab is some 60-80 km in length
              and, given the detailed fieldwork required for the study, it would be
              impossible to complete the entire transect across the slab in the 2-3 years of
              a standard NSF-funded project.  The PI therefore proposes to break the transect
              into two separately funded stages starting in this Proposal at the northern end
              of the transect with rocks lying in the immediate footwall to the STDS that are
              exposed in the Rongbuk and Kangshung valleys on the north and east sides of Mt.
               Everest respectively.  For the vorticity part of the project he will employ a
              range of different analytical techniques allowing him to cross-check between
              results.  The reconnaissance studies in the Rongbuk area, using three different
              analytical techniques, demonstrate that mean kinematic vorticity numbers (Wm)
              range between 0.73-0.98. These data indicate that although a simple shear
              component is generally dominant, particularly in samples adjacent to the STDS,
              there is also a major component of pure shear in samples located at 400-600 in
              beneath the detachment (pure and simple shear make equal contributions to flow
              at Wk=0.75). Closely spaced sampling sites are essential, however, for
              identifying potential step functions in the kinematic vorticity number that may
              exist with depth beneath the STDS.  The almost continuous exposure in the
              region is ideally suited for this work, and will allow the PI to sample to
              depths of 3-4000 in beneath the STDS.  Temporal variations in vorticity will be
              correlated with deformation temperatures using microstructural and petrofabric
              criteria, and these will in turn be linked to exhumation paths determined by
              then-nobarometry and excimer laser 4OAr/39Ar microprobe analyses.

