Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evaluating the Contribution of Late Cretaceous
               Biogeography to Earliest Cenozoic Biodiversity in North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0207732

Award Number: 0207732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72827              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne I. Weil annew@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative research: Evaluating the contribution of Late Cretaceous
              biogeography to earliest Cenozoic biodiversity in North America

Anne Weil,
              Thomas Williamson, Steven Semken

In this project, the investigators will use
              a recently discovered, diverse, terrestrial microvertebrate fossil assemblage,
              found in the Naashoibito Member of the Kirtland Formation, in the San Juan
              Basin of New Mexico, to test the following hypotheses: (1) that there was
              mammalian faunal provinciality in the latest Cretaceous of North America, and;
              (2) that recovery faunas of earliest Cenozoic North America are derived at
              least in part from diverse provinces present in Late Cretaceous North America.
              Terrestrial ecosystem recovery following the end-Cretaceous mass extinction is
              best known from studies of the North American Western Interior.   This recovery
              is typified by the appearance of mammals whose lineages are unknown from North
              America in the preceding Late Cretaceous period.  That may be because knowledge
              of latest Cretaceous mammalian faunas has been geographically restricted to the
              northern region of the Western Interior.  In collecting this new, southern
              fauna, better establishing the age of the Naashoibito Member, and incorporating
              this new fauna in analyses of existing phylogenetic and biogeographic data
              bases, the investigators will advance understanding of how biogeographic
              factors preceding the most recent mass extinction contributed to the subsequent
              recovery of terrestrial ecosystems.
A secondary goal of this project is
              undergraduate education through involvement in original research, directed in
              part toward Native American students.  The Kirtland Formation outcrops along
              the edge of the Navajo (Dine) Nation; this project offers an unique opportunity
              to educate Dine students in the geological history and vertebrate fossil
              resources of this part of their homeland, as well as in field and laboratory
              research methods.  The findings of this project will be integrated into
              undergraduate geoscience curricula for science majors and pre-service K-12
              teachers in the region.

