Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Nuclear Chiral Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0207601

Award Number: 0207601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aron M. Bernstein bernstein@mitlns.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tsung-Shung H. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0207601
Bernstein

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on nuclear chiral dynamics to be held in
              Honolulu, Hawaii from February 17-20, 2003.  The co-organizers are Professor
              Aron Bernstein at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Professor
              Makoto Oka at the Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan.  The seminar will
              focus of two general areas.  The first is on the structure of the nucleon and
              its interactions with the Goldstone Bosons.  Specific topics include:  1) the
              deviations of the nucleon and it's first excited state from spherical symmetry
              as measured in electromagnetic pion production experiments; 2) the
              polarizabilities of the nucleon as measured in Compton scattering;  3) the
              question of isospin breaking, caused by the difference of up and down quark
              masses, in pi N scattering and electromagnetic pion production with polarized
              targets; and  4) electromagnetic kaon and eta production and scattering from
              nucleons.  Theoretically these are treated by Chiral Perturbation Theory (ChPT)
              and dynamical meson-exchange models.  The second general area to be discussed
              is the use of effective field theories for the nucleon-nucleon interactions and
              for few-nucleon physics.  Here the experimental basis is much further developed
              although there are still important new measurements, particularly involving
              spin degrees of freedom and neutron properties, that need to be further
              explored.  

Research topics to be discussed are being actively pursued by
              theorists and experimentalists in the U.S. and Japan.  In the U.S. there are
              new electromagnetic apparatus and facilities at Bates, Jefferson Lab and LEGS. 
              In Japan there are the new Spring-8 photon facility and the Tohuku University
              electron ring. The project advances international human resources through the
              participation of a postdoc and graduate student. Through the exchange of ideas
              and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to
              publish proceedings of the seminar on their Web sites.

