Title       : Constraining Non-Linear Lithospheric Viscous Flow Laws From Postseismic Surface
               Deformation Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0207617

Award Number: 0207617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland Burgmann burgmann@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0207617
Roland Burgmann

This project relies on observations of
              postseismic surface deformation following the 1992 Landers and 1999 Hector Mine
              earthquakes to infer the flow laws that characterize the apparent non-linear
              viscous rheology of the lithosphere beneath the Mojave Desert.  Non-linear or
              power law behavior, in which strain rate is proportional to stress raised to a
              power and exponentially dependent on temperature, has been demonstrated in
              laboratory experiments and surmised from an inferred change in effective linear
              viscosity following the Mojave quakes.  However, the specific non-linear flow
              laws that characterize the rheology of the Mojave lithosphere have not been
              determined.  Non-linear rheology has been difficult to infer in the past due to
              a lack of sufficiently resolved observational constraints.  The unprecedented
              GPS and InSAR coverage of postseismic deformation following the Mojave quakes,
              combined with the ability to numerically model complex slip distributions and
              non-linear rheology, allow for the determination of the appropriate flow law
              parameters governing continental lithospheric behavior in this region. The work
              consists of compiling the geodetic data sets in a form useful for constraining
              a numerical model and development of a 3-D viscoelastic finite element model of
              the Landers and Hector Mine ruptures.  This constrained model is used to (1)
              partition postseismic deformation between viscous processes and other
              mechanisms such as afterslip, (2) determine the depth distribution of viscous
              flow, and (3) infer applicable non-linear flow laws.  The results provide
              insight into how forces generated within the Earth's interior manifest
              themselves at the surface and how stresses induced by earthquakes are
              redistributed during interseismic periods.  The latter of which is important to
              understanding seismic hazards. An additional byproduct of this research
              consists of guidelines for conducting future geodetic investigations of
              non-linear lithospheric rheology by noting the most useful locations for
              instrumentation relative to strike-slip earthquakes.
