Title       : Collaborative Research: Coordinated TIMS U-Series Dating and Paloenvironmental
               Interpretations of Pedogenic Carbonates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0207486

Award Number: 0207486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53718              (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver A. Chadwick oac@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY 
 
With prior support from NSF, we have shown that TIMS
              (Thermal Ionization Mass 
Spectrometry) U-series dating of pedogenic carbonate
              can provide a precise chronology of 
pedogenesis and reliable ages for
              appropriate Quaternary alluvial deposits (Sharp et al., 
accepted). Though the
              U/Th ratios of pedogenic carbonate of carbonate-clast dominated 
alluvium at
              Kyle Canyon (Nevada) are too low for U-series dating, pedogenic carbonate in
              
granitic-clast dominated gravels of the Wind River Basin (Wyoming) is highly
              suitable.  
Precise U-series ages  (1-2 percent, 2) may be measured on a few
              cubic millimeters of 
pedogenic carbonate and require only very small
              corrections for detrital 230Th.  Suites of 
ages may be screened for
              reliability using criteria inherent in the U-series results. The time 
lag
              between clast deposition and accumulation of datable carbonate.a critical
              parameter 
if U-series dates of innermost clast-rinds are to be used to date
              host Quaternary deposits.
is estimated to be 5+  5 kyr in the Wind River
              basin.  O- and C-isotope analyses of a trial 
suite of pedogenic carbonate
              samples shows that a temporally resolved stable isotope 
paleoclimatic record
              can be constructed using pedogenic carbonate dated by U-series. 
Funds are
              requested to further develop U-series dating of pedogenic carbonate and its
              
application to the refinement of a Rocky Mountain glacial chronology. 
              Emphasis will be 
placed on resolving the timing of Bull Lake glacial advances
              (at their type locality) with 
respect to other regional and global climate
              records. Moreover, we propose to characterize 
the spatial and temporal
              accumulation of pedogenic carbonate in relict soils of Late-
Middle to Late
              Pleistocene deposits, and measure the O- and C-isotopic compositions of
              
carbonate samples dated by U-series. We will interpret these data to provide
              a 
comprehensive history of paleoenvironmental change in the Wind River Basin
              throughout 
much of the late Illinoian and Wisconsin glacial cycles.
              Ultimately, our goal is to correlate 
the soils-based paleoenvironmental
              record with the geomorphic expressions of 
paleoclimatic change.the
              well-preserved glacial moraines and glacio-fluvial terraces of 
the Basin.by
              establishing a common chronological framework based on precise U-series 
ages.
              
 
This is a collaborative proposal. Warren Sharp and Ken Ludwig (Berkeley
              Geochronology 
Center) will be responsible for U-series analyses and age
              interpretations; Ron Amundson 
(U.C. Berkeley) will provide field and
              laboratory expertise in pedology and stable isotope 
analysis and
              interpretation; Oliver Chadwick (U.C. Santa Barbara) will provide expertise
              
in Quaternary geology, geomorphology and soil stratigraphy as well as
              familiarity with the 
Wind River area.  
 
