Title       : Flexible Krylov Methods and Schwarz Preconditioners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0207525

Award Number: 0207525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Szyld szyld@euclid.math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
title: Flexible Krylov methods and Schwarz preconditioners.
Proposal Number:
              0207525

Krylov subspace methods are nowadays the premier iterative methods
              for the solution of linear algebraic systems of equations, especially for those
              which arise from the discretization of differential equations. The strength of
              these methods derives in part by the use of preconditioners, which are matrices
              (or operators) changing the spectral properties of the linear system. In recent
              years, several researchers (including the PI), have proposed and analyzed
              Krylov methods in which the preconditioner is allowed to change from one
              (outer) step to the next. In particular, the preconditioner can be a Krylov
              method itself. Some of these inner-outer methods have been shown experimentally
              to work well.  As part of this project, it is proposed to undertake a detailed
              analysis of general inner-outer methods of this kind.  This analysis should
              give us an understanding of these methods, and also indicate how to think of
              new inner-outer methods. Experiments will be conducted with all these methods
              together with comparison with restarted ones.
 
Inexact Krylov subspace
              methods refer to the situation where the matrix-vector multiplication at each
              step is not performed exactly. This situation appears in numerous applications,
              including block matrices and the approximation of Schur complements at each
              step. It was shown experimentally by some researchers that the amount of
              inexactness can be allowed to grow as the iterations progress. We propose to
              study this phenomenon in detail, both to provide an understanding of this
              phenomenon, and to devise bounds on the amount of inexactness to be used
              computationally. 

During the last few years we have developed a new
              algebraic formulation of additive and multiplicative Schwarz methods. These
              methods, which are used as fixed) preconditioners for the (parallel) solution
              of differential equations, are extensively used in industry, science and
              engineering applications. This new formulation allow us to study these methods
              using the rich theory of linear algebra. This new theory complements the
              analytical theory usually used for these methods. For example, we have recently
              completed the analysis of the Restrictive Additive Schwarz (RAS)
              preconditioner, for which there is no analytical convergence results.In the
              second part of this project, it is proposed to further use this new formulation
              to analyze other Schwarz variants. 
 


