Title       : CSEDI: Collaborative Research:The Influence of Thermal Conductivity on
               Stabilization and Feedback in Mantle Convection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0207176

Award Number: 0207176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Yuen davey@krissy.msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0207176
David A. Yuen


The investigators propose a three-year
              collaborative investigation of the pressure (P), temperature (T), and
              compositional-structural (X) dependence of thermal conductivity (k) to shed
              light on possible feedback mechanisms and plume stabilization in the mantle.
              The current spectroscopic model of k(T,P,X), based on classical damped harmonic
              oscillators, reproduces the essential features of available measurements.  The
              spectroscopic model will be improved as follows: (1) The theory for the
              radiative component of k will be made exact by including the dependence of the
              emitted light on frequency. Impurities (hydrous species, Fe2+ and Fe3+) will be
              focused on because their vibrational and electronic absorptions greatly modify
              the black-body curve.  (2) IR and visible spectra at T and P will be acquired
              from mantle candidate phases.  (3) The model will be benchmarked against k(T)
              obtained using the laser flash technique: this method circumvents previously
              encountered experimental difficulties. Geodynamical models incorporating
              k(T,P,X) will be independently constrained by analogy with convection
              experiments on colloids that have a strongly nonlinear diffusion coefficient,
              through collaboration with an Italian physics group performing these laboratory
              studies.  The issues in geodynamic numerical modeling include (1) how the
              mechanics of the lithospheric and slab dynamics are affected by the interplay
              of k with rheology, and (2) whether variable k and  phase transitions can
              induce layered convection,  delay secular cooling of the core-mantle system, or
              stabilize mantle flows.  The geodynamic modeling will reveal which variable (T,
              P, X) has the greatest influence on mantle convection, and thus will guide the
              mineral physics experiments.  The team plans to disseminate findings on the
              effects of nonlinear diffusion, because of its far-reaching, fundamental
              nature, to educational institutions in disciplines other than geosciences.
