Title       : Southwestern Center for Arithmetical Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0207478

Award Number: 0207478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $544380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Ulmer ulmer@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bjorn M. Poonen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Nakamaye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando Rodriguez-Villegas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Southwestern Center for Arithmetical Algebraic Geometry was founded in 1997
              with support from a Group Infrastructure Grant from the National Science
              Foundation.  The organizing premise was that by
creatively deploying the
              current concentration of research strength in Arithmetical Algebraic Geometry
              in the Southwest, we could recreate, outside of the traditional centers, some
              of the best aspects of the best programs for the benefit of our own research
              and that of students and post-docs, both locally and nationally.  

Our
              premise that it is possible to recreate in concentrated form the virtues of the
              traditional centers has been amply demonstrated to be correct.  The current
              project will build on this base and will contribute to research and education
              in a wider area of mathematics and across the country.

The principal goals
              of the project are: to spread our model of a concentrated, interactive, and
              highly collaborative center to other areas of mathematics and other areas of
              the country; to develop and distribute high-quality reusable components from
              the Arizona Winter School and our distinguished lecture series (such as lecture
              notes, project descriptions, and video footage of lectures); and to continue to
              serve our constituency of advanced graduate students and post-docs in
              arithmetical algebraic geometry.
