Title       : Reduce False Alerts, Uncover High-Level Attack Strategies and Predict Attacks in
               Progress Using Prerequisites of Intrusions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0207297

Award Number: 0207297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peng Ning ning@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas S. Reeves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Current intrusion detection systems (IDSs) usually generate many false alerts
              and often do not detect novel attacks or variations of known attacks. Moreover,
              most existing IDSs focus on low-level attacks or
anomalies; none capture the
              logical steps or strategies behind these attacks. In situations where there are
              intensive intrusions, not only will actual alerts be mixed with false alerts,
              but the number of
alerts will also become unmanageable. As a result, it is
              difficult for human users or intrusion response systems to understand the
              nature of the attack and to take appropriate actions.

To address these
              issues, this project will investigate techniques to correlate intrusion alerts
              on the basis of the prerequisites and consequences of attacks. The research
              uses a formal and rigorous
approach to study the fundamental issues involved
              in alert correlation, including representation of prerequisites and
              consequences of attacks, efficient algorithms to process alerts, expressiveness
              of the high-level representation mechanisms, effectiveness of the technique in
              reducing false alerts, impact of
false alerts and undetected attacks on the
              technique, and methods to predict attacks in progress. Expected impacts of the
              proposed research include (1) a reduction in the number of false alerts, (2)
              
identification of attackers' high-level strategies, and (3) early
              configuration of effective defenses against attacks in progress. If successful,
              the research will lead to better tools for intrusion
detection and thus to
              improved computer and network security.  
