Title       : SGER: An Assessment of US Electric Power Grid Geomagnetic Disturbance Hazard
               Risk Due to SSC, SI and Related Magnetospheric Shock Disturbances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0207058

Award Number: 0207058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49969              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Kappenman JKappenma@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Radasky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Metatech Corporation
	      358 South Fairview Avenue, Ste E
	      Goleta, CA  93117    805/683-5681

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Geomagnetically-Induced Currents (GICs) are generally produced by the
              rate-of-change of the local geomagnetic field caused by a geomagnetic storm. 
              The GIC when large in magnitude and/or geographically wide-spread can lead to
              severe power system problems.  Failures of equipment can occur due to this
              interaction of the GIC with the power grid.

It has been previously
              understood that electrojet-driven geomagnetic storm processes were responsible
              for local geomagnetic field disturbances and GICs affecting power girds,
              especially for power grids at high magnetic latitudes, which are in close
              proximity to the electrojet currents.  However, a large number of reported
              power system problems did not fit the timing or location pattern as being
              associated with intensification of auroral electrojets.  Rather, they were
              associated with the onset times of geomagnetic storm commencement (SC) events. 
              A preliminary review of power system disturbance and storm climatology data
              reported in Solar Cycle 22 and to date in Solar Cycle 23 indicates that a
              number of severe power system impacts have been observed due to this SC
              process.  Severe impacts to power system operations have been observed as far
              south as Los Angeles, Texas-New Mexico, and all across the southeastern US, as
              well as traditional mid and northern latitude locations.

No rigorous study
              has been conducted in the US to do even a preliminary assessment of this risk
              potential.  The PI will undertake a US-focused geomagnetic hazard study and
              assessment to further develop detailed understanding of this important storm
              process and how this storm process couples to important ground-based
              infrastructures such as power girds and communication cables.
