Title       : A Novel Surface Nanocrystallization and \(SNH)\ Process for Improved Fatigue and
               Wear Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0207729

Award Number: 0207729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon L. Shaw lshaw@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter K. Liaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project is on a novel surface nanocrystallization and hardening (SNH)
              process wherein metallic parts are impacted with high-energy balls under a
              controlled atmosphere. It will be suitable for both large and small engineering
              components and offer superior fatigue and wear properties derived from the
              synergy of the tailored microstructure, the smooth gradients of both
              composition and grain size, and the desired residual stress distribution. The
              University of Connecticut (UConn) and the University of Tennessee (UT) have
              joined together to investigate the key issues related to the SNH process. UConn
              will bring in expertise in the high-energy ball milling and SNH process, while
              UT will provide expertise in the area of fatigue mechanisms and modeling. A
              major goal of the study are to develop and construct a special SNH machine with
              independent control of a variety of the SNH process variables such as the
              surface grain size, grain-size gradient, composition gradient, formation of new
              compounds, residual stresses, and surface finishing.  The objective of the
              project is to perform systematic and comprehensive experiments to establish the
              processing maps for surface nanocrystallization of the Ti-6-4 alloy including
              detailed microstructure and dislocation density studies using high-resolution
              transmission electron microscopy (HREM). Based on the mechanisms established,
              analytical and numerical models will be developed to predict the general trend
              of surface nanocrystallization. Mechanical properties of the SNH-processed
              Ti-6-4 alloys will be quantified using nanoindentation, pin-on-disc wear, and
              high-cycle fatigue tests. The fatigue mechanisms established in these studies
              will be used as a basis to develop theoretic models for the prediction of
              fatigue crack initiation and propagation behavior in the material with surface
              nano-grains and a grain-size gradient.

The work under this grant attempts to
              develop bulk nanocrystalline metallic components with superior mechanical
              properties through the development and testing of a new process known as
              surface nanocrystallization and hardening (SNH). The ultra fine grain size in
              the surface with appropriate grain size gradient into the bulk is expected to
              result in improved fatigue life of the structural components. The project plans
              include participation of undergraduate and high school students along with
              graduate researchers.

