Title       : International: Biostratigraphy, Biogeography, and Phylogeny of Vertebrates from
               the World's Oldest Known, Eutherian Dominated Fauna (Dzharakuduk, Uzbekistan)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0207004

Award Number: 0207004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249999             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Archibald darchibald@sunstroke.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Dieter Sues  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The 100m, Upper Cretaceous Dzharakuduk section (Kyzylkum Desert, Uzbekistan)
              includes river and marine sediments that yield over 100 species of vertebrates.
               Collecting microvertebrates at these sites was begun by the late Russian
              paleontologist Nessov and has been continued by an international consortium of
              Uzbek, Russian, British, American, and Canadian (URBAC) scientists.  Large, new
              collections of marine invertebrate from the upper part of the section that can
              be correlated to type sections in Europe, indicate a Coniacian/Santonian age
              (about 85 million years old).  This reconfirms that the underlying terrestrial
              vertebrates are at least 85-90 million years old, thus older than the more
              famous Gobi Desert sites.  Locally abundant vertebrate remains are fragmentary,
              but often preserve exquisite detail.  Most fossils were rapidly buried,
              possibly by flash floods, with little reworking.  Paleoecology is similar to
              the Late Cretaceous North American coastal plains.  Postcranial and cranial
              elements of pterosaurs, mammals, and dinosaurs remain common from the newly
              screened 55 tons of matrix.  Among amphibians, salamanders are much more common
              than frogs.  Among reptiles, aquatic turtles, and hadrosaur and tyrannosaur
              dinosaur fragments are common, while lizards, small theropod, ankylosaur,
              ceratopsian, and sauropod dinosaurs are relatively rare.  Birds are diverse,
              including both extinct groups, as well as species closer to living birds.  The
              rodent-like multituberculate mammals and relatives of marsupial mammals are
              rare.  Eutherian mammals, the group of mammals to which humans belong, are the
              most common mammalian species at Dzharakuduk, with some 11 species.  These
              include the world's earliest relatives of the group that gave rise to rodents
              and rabbits, as well as the group that may have given rise to at least seven
              orders of hoofed mammals and whales.  All indications show that previous work
              has only begun to uncover the fossil riches of Dzharakuduk.  The next three
              years of work there will provide answers to many of the remaining questions
              regarding these 85-90 million-year-old vertebrate faunas.
