Title       : Testing the Generality of Macroevolutionary Patterns with Bellerophont Molluscs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0207874

Award Number: 0207874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68319              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Wagner pwagner@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to test the idea that macroevolutionary
              parameters might be fairly general among larger groups.  Bellerophontiform
              molluscs share numerous shell characters with contemporaneous gastropods even
              though bellerophonts are bilaterally symmetrical whereas early gastropods are
              asymmetrical.  Workers consider many of these features to have similar
              biological implications for both bellerophonts and asymmetrical gastropods.  If
              so, then PI expects to see similar rates of change in those characters as well
              as similar driven trends (i.e., biased productions of particular character
              states).  He will evaluate alternative hypotheses using likelihood approaches
              designed by the author to simultaneously test phylogenetic and character
              evolution parameters.  In doing so, tests will assess whether character
              parameters for bellerophonts are significantly different than for asymmetrical
              gastropods and, if so, in what ways.  A secondary goal of the study is to test
              basic ideas about bellerophont relationships, such as whether they are
              monophyletic or polyphyletic, and ideas about how closely related bellerophonts
              are to asymmetrical snails.  
