Title       : Developing Teacher's Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0207649

Award Number: 0207649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1112498            (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather C. Hill hhill@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Ball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite repeated calls for improved scholarship and more empirically grounded
              policy recommendations, research into teacher learning has suffered from a
              number of chronic methodological difficulties. Most importantly, this research
              has been constrained by what scholars have been able to measure: the processes
              of teacher learning as they appear in in-services or study groups; teacher
              attitudes and beliefs which result from those processes; and, to some extent,
              teacher practices which emerge after such encounters. Left unmeasured, however,
              is a component which threads through all these observable outcomes and,
              ultimately, which proves the most significant target of interventions designed
              to improve teaching: teachers knowledge of content matter and content-specific
              teaching methods. Without direct measures of this knowledge, researchers have
              had few opportunities to learn which teacher education practices contribute to
              its development.  In a recent review of teacher preparation, Wilson, Floden,
              and Ferrini-Mundy (2001) show the vast gaps in the field's knowledge of the
              content required for good teaching and of the ideal combination of pedagogical
              and content. The situation is equally weak with respect to knowledge about
              professional development (Wilson & Berne, 1999). The study we are proposing
              would aim to help redress the lack of disciplined study of teachers'
              learning.

The study will take advantage of measures developed recently at
              the Study of Instructional Improvement (Ball, Cohen & Rowan, Principal
              Investigators) to identify effective professional development practices, and
              pioneers new methods for evaluators and scholars in this field.

These items
              are designed to tap three constructs critical to teachers' capacity to deliver
              high-quality mathematics instruction to students: teachers ability to
              understand fundamental topics in elementary mathematics; teachers' ability to
              use mathematical knowledge to interpret students' thinking; and teachers'
              ability to make sound choices when faced with common problems of teaching
              mathematics. In all three cases, items are drawn from realistic dilemmas facing
              teachers of mathematics.  The study will use these measures in a longitudinal
              study of programs designed to improve teachers' knowledge of mathematics and
              its teaching, tracking a large number of teachers before, during, and after
              their involvement with professional development, teacher-supportive curriculum
              materials, and innovative site-based initiatives. We will also use this
              opportunity to conduct a small validation study of our measures of mathematical
              learning opportunities and teachers' knowledge for teaching. Finally, we will
              interview and observe a small group of teachers before, during and after their
              participation in intensive mathematics professional development, hoping to
              better understand, from teachers' perspectives, what and how one can learn
              mathematics content for teaching.


