Title       : Undergraduate Scholarships in Engineering to Improve Retention and Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0207173

Award Number: 0207173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Spall spall@fluids.me.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Crow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Olsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Furse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Thurgood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Significant increases in the number of engineering and related technology
              graduates from the Utah State System of Higher Education will be required over
              the next several years to advance the intellectual and economic well being of
              the state and its citizens. In response, the State Board of Regents has
              developed an Engineering and Computer Science Initiative within the state
              system of higher education with intentions to double the number of graduates in
              engineering and related technology majors by the year 2006. The faculty within
              the College of Engineering believe that efforts to improve retention, and to
              increase enrollment opportunities for students from underrepresented
              minorities, will contribute significantly toward that goal. Central to this
              effort is an increase in the number of scholarship opportunities available to
              engineering students within each of the 5 departments in the College of
              Engineering. For each year of the four year duration of this project, 30
              need-based scholarships at $3,125 each are being awarded. The scholarships
              allow students to spend more time on academic pursuits, and less time employed
              outside the University. Scholarship recipients must: 1) be U.S. citizens, 2)
              enroll full time within the College of Engineering, 3) demonstrate financial
              need as defined by the U.S. Department of Education rules for Federal Financial
              aid, and 4) show academic potential or ability. Recruitment is done through the
              USU Office of High School/College Relations, the Multicultural Student Center,
              and the College of Engineering. In addition to traditional recruiting methods,
              the college recruits through its annual Engineering State program, a four day
              event held each spring in which approximately 250 high school juniors from
              throughout the State of Utah are introduced to the opportunities available in
              the various fields of engineering. In addition to scholarship opportunities,
              the program also provides CSEMS scholars with: 1) a formal program through
              which they can receive academic assistance and advising, 2) a mechanism to
              promote interaction with upper-division students and faculty on a regular
              basis, 3) research opportunities with faculty mentors, and 4) early access to
              co-op/internship opportunities and industry mentors. The CSEMS program is
              directed by faculty members from the College of Engineering and staff from High
              School/College Relations, the Multicultural Student Center, and USU Career
              Services.
