Title       : Inhomogeneous Field Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0207123

Award Number: 0207123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Epstein cle@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel H. Preston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Epstein is presently a professor in the Mathematics department at the
              University of Pennsylvania. He proposes to spend a year visiting the magnetic
              resonance research group in the Radiology Department of the Hospital of the
              University of Pennsylvania, where Dr. Felix Wehrli has agreed to be his host.
              While there he will study topics related to magnetic resonance imaging and gain
              hands on experience with imaging apparatus. His study will be directed toward
              determining the practical feasibility of magnetic resonance imaging using an
              inhomogeneous background field and non-linear gradient fields. The initial part
              of this problem involves the analysis of certain special solutions of Maxwell's
              equations. The next step is to study the practical invertibility of a class of
              integral transforms which are perturbations of the standard Fourier transform.
              Hopefully this will lead up to designs for magnets whose fields, though
              inhomogeneous, can still be used for magnetic resonance imaging. The ultimate
              goal is to build a working prototype.  If inhomogeneous field imaging should
              prove feasible it could reduce the cost of the imaging apparatus and increase
              the flexibility and applicability of this technology.  This IGMS project is
              jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and
              the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
