Title       : Dissertation Research: The Co-Production of Knowledge and Legitimacy in
               Bioethics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0207377

Award Number: 0207377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4158               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Croissant jlc@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project will examine how contemporary academic
              bioethics in the U.S. balances the aspiration to guide biomedical research and
              practice with the need to become an institutionally legitimate force in
              society. Since its inception three decades ago, to what extent has bioethics
              made biomedicine more socially accountable? At the same time, to what extent
              has bioethics been made into a public-relations tool for academic and corporate
              biomedicine? This project will investigate the co-production of the legitimacy
              and intellectual content of the academic field of bioethics by examining
              theactivities of bioethicists in three professional arenas: the establishment
              and furtherance of an academic bioethics unit, the testimony of expert
              bioethics witnesses in the judicial forum, and the deliberations and
              recommendations of a federal bioethics commission. Bioethicists' efforts to
              legitimize their field are viewed as competition and collaboration with other
              professionals to stake out an emblematic expertise, which is then tendered to
              various societal clients. A case study of an academic bioethics unit will be
              conducted to reveal how the unit's efforts to secure material resources and
              organizational legitimacy shapes the center's intellectual output, drawing on
              the unit's archival documents and interviews with the unit's director, faculty,
              staff, and graduate students. Discourse analysis will be used to explore how
              bioethicists and other professionals seek to legitimize and circumscribe their
              respective expertise, making use of courtroom proceedings in bioethics cases
              and the proceedings of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission related to
              the human stem cell research debate. The proposed research on the social
              aspects of the intellectual and organizational basis of recent bioethics shifts
              attention in the budding sociology of bioethics from clinical to academic
              bioethics, and highlights the institutional and power relationships between
              bioethics and public policy. This study will also contribute to the fields of
              higher education studies and science and technology studies, where ethics, and
              the relationship between legitimacy and knowledge content, have not been
              sufficiently explored. The findings of this project will provide useful insight
              into the challenges and opportunities bioethicists face in cultivating socially
              responsible biomedical science and technology.

