Title       : Carbonate-Associated Sulfate in Modern Sediments of South Florida: Diagenetic
               Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0207565

Award Number: 0207565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Lyons lyonst@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Carbonate-Associated Sulfate in Modern Sediments of South Florida: 
Diagenetic
              Relationships 
 
Biogeochemical cycling of sulfur at and near the earth.s
              surface is intimately linked.through a 
complex  set  of  feedbacks.to 
              ambient  redox  conditions,  including  the  availability  of 
atmospheric 
              oxygen.    Our  ability  to  delineate  and  quantify  these  cycles  and  the 
              associated 
biospheric  impacts  hinges  on  the  strong  preferential 
              utilization  of  32S  relative  to  34S  during 
bacterial  sulfate 
              reduction.    Historically,  temporal  trends  in  the  relative magnitudes  of
               critical 
redox  pathways  have  been  estimated  by  monitoring  the  34S of
              the ocean as manifested in  a 
limited sedimentary record of gypsum. 
              Consequently, the models are only as good as the data, 
which fail to provide
              even minimal constraints for most of the Precambrian.  During the earth.s
              
early history,  gypsum deposition was less abundant, and preservation is poor
              due to its 
vulnerability during weathering.  In light of these complications,
              carbonate-associated sulfate or 
CAS, which is complementary to but generally 
              not overlapping with a promising new barite 
approach, has emerged as a viable
              alternative.  CAS, which often occurs at concentrations of 
hundreds to
              thousands of ppm, is a component  of most limestones and  dolostones and shows
              
great promise for continuous, high-resolution records of ancient seawater
              sulfate.  Interest in the 
method is peaking,  yet applications  greatly 
              outnumber studies tracking  even the basic 
systematics of CAS and the
              potential loss of seawater signals through diagenesis. 
 
Despite encouraging
              initial results for CAS in ancient sediments, no systematic attempt has been
              
made to test the method in a modern setting where the  controlling factors
              are more easily and 
independently constrained.  Furthermore, any attempts at
              modern calibration have neglected the 
precursor of the most abundant
              carbonate component of the geologic record.carbonate mud.
and the effects of
              diagenesis.  The primary objective of the proposed study is to understand how
              
CAS is incorporated, distributed and preserved in modern carbonate sediments
              in south Florida.  
Specifically, we will observe isotopic and concentration
              trends across a carefully chosen set of 
well-characterized depositional
              settings in Florida Bay and at lagoonal sites seaward of the Keys.  
The 
              resulting  diversity  translates  into  spatial  and  temporal  gradients  in 
              the  parameters  that 
control sulfur cycling, such as the  availability  of
              labile organic compounds, salinity and the 
physical and biological properties
              of the sediment.   
 
What is the overall fidelity of the seawater isotopic
              signal recorded in bulk mud samples that are 
undergoing carbonate
              dissolution, precipitation and mineral transformations on early diagenetic
              
time  scales  within  the  confines  of  an  evolving  pore-water  sulfate 
              reservoir?  Although we 
recognize the profound  differences between modern
              and ancient settings, it is these bulk mud 
samples  that  will  illuminate 
              the conditions under which primary signals may or may not be 
preserved. 
              Various coarser sketetal components will also be tracked from life through
              burial to 
depths up to several meters.  These goals are facilitated by Lyons.
              experience working in modern 
settings,  including  south  Florida,  although 
              many  of  the  questions  asked  will  stem  from  the 
ultimate goal of
              testing the robustness of a paleoenvironmental proxy.  In particular, Lyons.
              past 
work with sediment diagenesis, carbonate sedimentology/geochemistry and
              sulfur geochemistry 
will be most helpful.  The tight focus of this study.as
              requested by the panel following review of an earlier version of this
              proposalwill allow us to track CAS within a rigorous organic and 
inorganic 
              geochemical context.  The multi-component approach, including  rate
              measurements 
and concentration and isotopic determinations for a wide range
              of relevant species, is designed to 
provide the biogeochemical sulfur mass
              balance necessary  for understanding ppm levels of 
sulfate within reactive
              carbonate  grains.   In the  end, CAS may help fill  the many  gaps in the
              
.Claypool curve. through use of continuous sections of shallow-water
              carbonates from even the 
oldest rocks. But as with all carbonate proxies for
              ancient seawater, our interpretations are only 
as good as our understanding
              of the multiple diagenetic pathways. 
