Title       : Investigation of Archean Ophiolites and Oceanic Crust and Mantle Fragments in
               Melange, North China Craton: Implications for Archean Tectonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0207886

Award Number: 0207886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99907              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Kusky kusky@eas.slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding Archean crustal and mantle evolution hinges upon proper
              identification and characterization of oceanic lithosphere.  The PI has
              discovered and reported a complete, albeit slightly dismembered and
              metamorphosed, Archean ophiolite sequence in the North China Craton.  The top
              of the ophiolitic succession is marked by sulfide-rich chert and banded iron
              fon-nation overlying several tens-to one hundred meters of variably deformed
              pillow lavas.  These grade down through a mixed dike/pillow lava section into a
              2 km thick I 00% sheeted dike complex mapped continuously for more than 5 km
              along strike; reconnaissance mapping suggests that the dike complex may extend
              for more than 20 km.  The dikes consist of diabase, basalt and hb-pyx-gabbro. 
              Most have chilled margins developed on their NE sides, but not their SW sides,
              indicating one-way chilling.  The sheeted dike complex is underlain by several
              km of mixed isotropic and foliated gabbro, which develop compositional layering
              approximately 2 km below the sheeted dikes, and then over several hundred
              meters merge into strongly compositionally layered gabbro and olivine-gabbro. 
              The layered gabbro becomes mixed with layered pyroxenite/gabbro marking a
              transition zone that grades into cumulate ultramafic rocks including dunite,
              pyroxenite and wehrlite, and finally into strongly defon-fied and serpentinized
              olivine and orthopyroxene-bearing ultramafic rocks that may be depleted mantle
              harzburgite tectonites.  The PI has obtained a U/Pb zircon age of 2.505 Ga from
              gabbro of the Dongwanzi ophiolite, making it the world s oldest recognized,
              laterally- extensive complete ophiolite sequence.  Study of this remarkable
              ophiolite may offer the best constraints yet on the nature of the Archean
              oceanic crust and mantle, and offer insights to the style of Archean plate
              tectonics and global heat loss mechanisms.  The Dongwanzi ophiolite is one of
              the largest well-preserved greenstone belts in the Zunhua structural belt (part
              of the Central orogenic belt),that divides the North China craton into eastern
              and western blocks.  More than I 000 other fragments of gabbro, pillow lava,
              sheeted dikes, harzburgite, and podifonn-chromite bearing dunite occur as
              tectonic blocks in a blotite- gneiss matrix in the Zunhua structural belt.  The
              PI interprets these rocks as an Archean ophiolitic melange and recognize that
              some of the blocks preserve deeper levels of oceanic mantle than the Dongwanzi
              ophiolite.  The PI and co-workers have designed a comprehensive series of
              studies to fully document the field, structural, geochronological,
              mineralogical, and chemical characteristics of this ophiolite and related
              melange.  They will assess what these data mean in ten-ns of Archean crustal
              and mantle evolution, thermal state of the early Earth, and ideas about
              Precambrian plate tectonics.  They regard this as an unsurpassed opportunity to
              evaluate fundamental properties of Archean crust and mantle, and to understand
              processes critical for evaluating Archean oceanic crustal and mantle evolution.
               Understanding Archean oceanic processes in the North China craton will provide
              a valuable contrast with similar processes recorded in younger ophiolites,
              indicating how mid-ocean ridge processes may have evolved from a period of high
              heat production to one of lower heat production.  Detailed mapping will
              accurately delineate the extent, thickness, and relationships between
              individual units, which is important for understanding mechanisms of Archean
              sea floor spreading and heat loss.  Structural analysis of mantle tectonites
              will reveal deformation conditions in the Archean oceanic mantle.  U/Pb
              geochronology will be used to establish the age and duration of magmatism
              represented in the ophiolite and document the structural chronology by dating
              igneous dikes and plutons that intruded between different events, as
              deten-nined by mapping.  Geochemical analyses will be aimed at determining
              relationships between the crustal and depleted mantle components of the
              ophiolite, and comparing these data with younger ophiolites from different
              tectonic settings, and also from Archean greenstone belts, some of which may
              include severely dismembered Archean ophiolite fragments.  Analyses will
              include major, minor, trace, REE, and several isotopic systems (in
              collaboration with geochemists from several cooperating institutions)and will
              be used to assess crustal and mantle evolution.  Archean oceanic lithospheric
              structure is likely to have been as complex and variable as that in the
              present-day plate mosaic.  Documentation of the characteristics of the
              Dongwanzi ophiolite and related rocks may serve as the first reference column
              for Archean oceanic lithosphere, since it is the most complete Archean
              ophiolite known on the planet.

