Title       : Composition and Structure of Gouge from the Focal Depths of Recent Earthquakes:
               Rupture Zones in South African Gold Mines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0207847

Award Number: 0207847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Dewers tdewers@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is impossible to access the rupture zone of an earthquake at its focal depth,
              and thus the perception of earthquake rupture zones is inferred from indirect
              observations of surface rupture and exhumed fault-zones. A different approach
              is used here: direct observations in deep gold mines of South Africa where the
              PI recently mapped the rupture zones of three earthquakes. These mapped zones
              are associated with moderate earthquakes of magnitudes 3.7 to 5.1 that cut
              across the thick quartzite sequences of the western Witwatersrand basin. He
              found that a typical rupture zone of a single earthquake consists of 5-20
              crosscutting gouge zones that were active during the earthquake. The gouge
              zones contain crushed, quartzitic powder, rock fragments or clay minerals; some
              of these zones are 15 cm thick. The PI proposes to analyze in detail the
              composition, microstructure and geochemical stability of the gouge found in
              these rupture zones. He plans to determine gouge mineralogy, high-pressure
              phases, gouge surface area and gouge solubility. He will examine the
              fragmentation processes at the microscopic scale and the transition from intact
              rock to gouge powder. The gouge material will be subjected to long term (1-3
              months) cementation experiments at hydrothermal condition (< 500) to explore
              its stability and strengthening under mid-crust conditions. This study will
              resolve some central questions of earthquake processes and seismic
              hazard.

1. Is the slip during the earthquake localized along a single
              frictional surface or is it distributed along many fractures?
2. Do
              high-pressure and high-temperature mineralogical phases form during an
              earthquake (they could be unstable and not be found in exhumed faults)?
3.
              Could pseudotachylites form during shallow earthquakes?
4. How much gouge is
              formed during a single earthquake?
5. What portion of the mechanical energy of
              the earthquake is invested in gouge formation?
6. Is the formed gouge good
              starting material for fault-zone cementation during the interseismic stage?
7.
              Which properties of ERZ are indicators of the seismic activity and could be
              used for distinguishing between an exhumed seismic fault and an exhumed
              creeping?
8. How fast does gouge compact and cement (lithify), and how does
              that affect fault strength?	
