Title       : Evolution of the Cetacean Body Plan: Eocene Whales from India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0207370

Award Number: 0207370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes G. Thewissen thewisse@neoucom.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. Taseer Hussain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern Ohio C of M
	      4209 State Route 44
	      Rootstown, OH  44272    330/325-6500

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Evolution is the process that governs the entire diversity of living organisms
              on Earth.  Evolutionary changes accumulate slowly, and, for most organisms,
              cannot be studied within the life span of one human observer.  The most
              impressive evolutionary changes involve great modifications in all aspects of
              the design of an animal, its bodyplan.  Such macroevolutionary changes become
              obvious only after they accumulate over a long time period.  Actual examples
              are rare because the fossil record rarely grant researchers this level of
              detail.  One of the best examples of macroevolutionary changes that are
              documented in the fossil record is the origin of whales, dolphins, and
              porpoises.
All modern whales, dolphins, and porpoises (together constituting
              the Cetacea) are fully aquatic mammals, perfectly adapted to their watery
              environment and unable to survive on land.  However, cetaceans have ancestors
              that lived on land, with a body plan that roughly resembled that of a wolf, and
              very unlike that of modern cetaceans.  In less than 15 million years, this
              archaic body plan was modified into that of modern cetaceans.  The present
              proposal aims to study these transformations from several points of view. 
              First, PIs will collect cetacean fossils in India that document the land-water
              transition.  Second, they will study the evolution of locomotor and sense
              organs, as cetaceans passed through this transition.  Finally, they will study
              dolphin embryos in order to relate changes in cetacean embryology to
              evolutionary changes. 
The cetacean bodyplan is determined, to a large extent,
              by the unusual mode of swimming of cetaceans (swinging the horizontal tail
              fluke through the water).  However, fossil cetacean had very different modes of
              swimming and these can be studied with fossils.  The evolution of the cetacean
              bodyplan can also be studied indirectly, by determining its interaction with
              the sense organs.  The most important sense organ with respect to this is the
              organ of balance and (associated with it) the organ of hearing.  These will be
              studied using CT-scan methods.  Finally, the modern cetacean bodyplan is also
              influenced, to an unknown degree, by its embryologic development, and this will
              be studied using embryos of modern dolphins.  

