Title       : Collaborative Research: Recent Kinematic Evolution of the Northern Eastern
               California Shear Zone from Geologic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0207245

Award Number: 0207245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis Owen lewis.owen@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Finkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Plate circuit calculations indicate that motion of the Pacific plate relative to
              North American plate changed from westerly to NW at ~8 Ma.  This observation
              corresponds extremely well with geologic data which indicates that motion of
              the Sierran-Great Valley block relative to the Colorado Plateau changed from
              westerly to NW at ~8-10 Ma.  Geologic studies indicate that the rate of right
              lateral shear at ~8 Ma within the Eastern California Shear Zone north of the
              Garlock fault was ~15 mm/yr accounting for ~30%of relative plate motion. 
              Geodetic studies indicate a present-day dextral shear rate of 10-12 mm/yr,
              providing clear evidence that the Eastern California Shear Zone is still an
              important component of deformation within the Pacific-North America plate
              boundary zone. In spite of its tectonic importance, the space-time evolution of
              much of the Eastern California Shear Zone is only broadly understood.  This
              proposal requests support for investigating the kinematics of a system of
              intraplate dextral faults in the northern part of the Eastern California Shear
              Zone using an integrated approach of field mapping, tectonic geomorphology,
              paleoseismology, and geochronology.  The proposed research is motivated by
              ongoing geodetic investigations on present-day magnitude of strain accumulation
              and spatial distribution across the Eastern California Shear Zone.  In light of
              these geodetic constraints on strain accumulation, it is timely to improve the
              understanding of the spatial and temporal patterns of strain release during the
              late Neogene and Quaternary. The two data sets will provide important
              constraints on geodynamic hypotheses proposed for the evolution of the Eastern
              California Shear Zone.  An accurate characterization of the spatial and
              temporal patterns of strain release within the Eastern California Shear Zone is
              crucial for understanding tectonic processes over a much broader area of
              intraplate deformation associated with the interaction of the Pacific and North
              American plates.
