Title       : Collaborative Research: Analysis of the Transport and Storage of Contaminated
               Sediments in the Rio Pilcomayo Basin, Bolivia: A Geochemical-Geomorphic
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0207452

Award Number: 0207452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53897              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dru Germanoski germanod@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5926,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0207452
Germanoski

	The Rio Pilcomayo heads on the Cerro Rico de Potosi
              precious metal-polymetallic tin deposits of Bolivia.  Mining of the Potosi
              deposits was initiated by the Spanish in 1545 and has continued without
              interruption to the present.  Our previous studies have demonstrated that the
              release of mining and milling wastes to the environment during the past 450
              years has resulted in extensive contamination of water and sediments of the
              upper Pilcomayo valley.  The primary objective of this investigation is to
              determine if Pb isotopes can be effectively used in a large river system to
              quantify the decadal scale transport and storage of contaminated debris from
              mining operations.  Inherent in the study is an analysis of the linkages
              between geomorphic processes and the long-term dispersal of contaminated
              materials.

To accomplish the project objectives several tasks will be
              completed:  (1) Pb sources within the upper reaches of Rio Pilcomayo basin will
              be identified and characterized in terms of their geographical distribution and
              Pb isotopic signatures.  This step will involve the collection and analysis of
              ore samples from Cerro Rico, the major bedrock units that underlie the
              watershed, mineralized zones within tributary basins, and channel bed sediments
              within major tributaries;  (2) the alluvial stratigraphy and geomorphology of
              the tributary basins will be documented and linked to the existing
              geomorphic-stratigraphic data on the Rio Pilcomayo to (a) refine our
              understanding of the timing, magnitude, and nature of historic geomorphic
              events that have occurred along the Rio Pilcomayo, and (b) gain insights into
              the timing and magnitude of sediment influx to the Rio Pilcomayo from
              tributaries (both of which are believed to have had an impact on the downstream
              movement of contaminated sediment); (3) spatial variations in the total
              concentration of selected metals and Pb isotopic ratios will be documented
              perpendicular to flow, downstream, and vertically within age-constrained
              alluvial deposits.  Emphasis will be placed on the analysis of 1.5-2 m long
              cores extracted from contaminated alluvial terraces composed of vertically
              accreted flood deposits; and (4) sediment mixing models will be used to
              quantify the relative proportion of Pb in alluvial deposits that is derived
              from each of the delineated Pb sources.   

