Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Biotic Diversity and Vertebrate Evolution in Late
               Devonian Non-Marine Ecosystems of North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0207721

Award Number: 0207721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Daeschler daeschler@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract

Collaborative Research: Biotic diversity and vertebrate evolution
              in
Late Devonian non-marine ecosystems of North America

Neil
              Shubin-EAR-0208377
Edward Daeschler-EAR-0207721

The Late Devonian (375-360
              MYA) witnessed a burst of diversification of vertebrate life, including the
              origin of limbed vertebrates, and the elaboration of plants and invertebrates
              in terrestrial ecosystems. Accordingly, the description and analysis of Late
              Devonian vertebrates and ecosystems offers the ability to generate important
              data on the emergence of new taxa, new anatomical structures, new faunas, and
              new habitats during this critical moment of evolution. Our prior work (1993 to
              present) in the Late Devonian (Famennian Stage) Catskill Formation in
              Pennsylvania has produced well-preserved, highly diverse vertebrate assemblages
              from the same stratigraphic horizons as macrofossil plants, palynomorphs,
              arthropods, and bivalves. Exploratory work (1999-2000) in the Late Devonian
              (Frasnian Stage) Okse Bay Group in the Canadian Arctic has also revealed
              significantly fossiliferous units in this virtually unexplored region.
This
              project will document and interpret the diversity of the non-marine parts of
              these Late Devonian systems in eastern North America. The temporal range will
              cover the Frasnian and Famennian Stages of the Late Devonian, a critical window
              in evolution. Fieldwork in the Famennian-age Catskill Formation has taken a
              significant step; the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation has given
              permission to remove a large wedge of overburden from the Red Hill locality,
              source of two early tetrapod taxa and a very diverse fauna and flora. Fieldwork
              in the Frasnian-age Okse Bay Group in the Canadian Arctic will focus on areas
              now recognized for their fossil productivity. The first major goal is the
              recovery, preparation and description of Late Devonian fossil material. Ensuing
              investigation of the phylogenetic affinities and stratigraphic position of
              fossil assemblages will allow both intraformational and global comparisons of
              biotic diversity. Assessment of intraformational stratigraphic relationships
              will enable an understanding of the biotic diversity in different portions of
              the fluvial systems. These analyses will inform: 1) higher level phylogenetic
              hypotheses of gnathostome vertebrates, 2) biostratigraphic and biogeographic
              analysis of the distribution of the Late Devonian tetrapods and fish, and 3)
              paleobiological investigation of the elaboration of terrestrial and freshwater
              ecosystems.

