Title       : Collaborative Research: Initiation and Long-Term Slip History of the Altyn Tagh
               Fault System, Northern Tibetan Plateau, NW China: A Tertiary Basin Piercing
               Point Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0207364

Award Number: 0207364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan A. Graham graham@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The Altyn Tagh fault system, which delineates the northern edge of the Tibetan
              Plateau, is one of the largest and most striking, yet also most enigmatic
              features attributed to collision between India and Eurasia. In spite of a
              generally poor understanding of the structural geology and slip history of the
              Altyn Tagh fault, its tectonic significance has been the subject of much
              speculation, and the fault figures prominently in models of the
              Himalayan-Tibetan orogen. Recent attempts to gain better knowledge about the
              Altyn Tagh fault have primarily used indirect methods to interpret age of fault
              initiation and magnitude of displacement, or geodetic techniques to interpret
              slip rate. Direct investigation of fault displacement using geologic piercing
              points has not been widely attempted. As a result three critical questions
              remain concerning the offset history of the Altyn Tagh fault: (1) What is the
              age of initiation of the Altyn Tagh fault? (2) How has the slip-rate on the
              Altyn Tagh fault varied over geologic time? (3) How does the magnitude of slip
              vary along the length of the Altyn Tagh fault? In order to answer these three
              questions it is essential to identify pre-slip and multiple syn-slip piercing
              points on each segment of the fault. These piercing points will allow the
              history of offset on the fault to be determined for each segment of the fault
              (western, central, and eastern) and thus demonstrate slip magnitude, slip rate,
              and variation in these parameters along the length of the fault. The proposed
              study will directly address the Tertiary slip history of the Altyn Tagh fault
              and the distribution of slip on the fault, by identifying multiple Eocene-Upper
              Pliocene sediment-source matches across the fault for ten Tertiary basins that
              are truncated by the Altyn Tagh fault. By identifying multiple piercing points
              of various ages from a single basin, the slip history for that segment of the
              fault ca be reconstructed throughout the Tertiary. Furthermore, by examining a
              series of basins along the length of the fault, along-strike changes in
              displacement can be documented. These results will provide a robust and
              unambiguous data set from which the timing and rate of faulting can be directly
              determined, and that will also allow ideas about systematic changes in slip
              magnitude along the fault to be tested. The PI's prior work on the Altyn Tagh
              fault (Ritts, 1998; Yue and Liou, 1999; Ritts and Biffi, 2000; Sobel et al.,
              2001; Yue et al., in review) has demonstrated their ability to identify and
              document piercing points of a variety of ages and a variety of types on the
              Altyn Tagh fault. The proposed research includes documentation of
              lithostratigraphy and chronostratigraphy, physical sedimentology and
              lithofacies, provenance, and paleocurrents of ten Tertiary sedimentary basins
              that are truncated by the Altyn Tagh fault. Two major field seasons will focus
              on the characterization of sedimentary basins as well as potential sediment
              source terranes on the opposite side of the fault. Fieldwork in the Tertiary
              basins will include description of measured sections, collection of
              paleocurrent and conglomerate composition data, and geological mapping.
              Fieldwork in potential sediment source areas will focus on lithologic
              description and verification of Chinese mapping, as well as collection of
              potential source units for analytical work. Analytical techniques will be
              applied to conglomerate clasts and potential source units in order to test
              sediment-source correlations that are proposed based on field data. These
              techniques will include petrographic examination, trace and major element
              geochemistry, and U-Pb and 40 Ar/ 39 Ar geochronology. Biostratigraphic
              analysis of mudstones will be used to confirm the ages of the Tertiary units.
              This study will constrain the geology of Tertiary basins in order to construct
              a series of time- displacement curves to characterize the history and
              along-strike variability of the Altyn Tagh fault. The resulting data will
              better define the role that the Altyn Tagh fault plays in accommodating
              Cenozoic convergence between India and Asia, and thereby distinguish the
              relative importance of mechanisms such as extrusion tectonics in continental
              deformation. 

