Title       : Dynamic Superpipelining: Shaping Microarchitecture for Variable Frequency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0207785

Award Number: 0207785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229241             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Rotenberg ericro@ece.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Microprocessor performance enhancements tend to be inefficient in terms of
              power, especially as new sources of performance become scarce.  Yet,
              performance remains a key competitive factor in the microprocessor market and
              inefficiency is somewhat inevitable.

     Microprocessors that support
              multiple frequencies are strategic because they can manage inefficiency. 
              Performance requirements of systems change over time.  Microprocessors with
              variable frequency can be used to balance performance, power, and energy by
              adapting frequency to changing performance requirements.

     This project
              predicts that the need for variable frequency will have a profound impact on
              the way microprocessors are designed in the future.  Current hardware support
              for variable frequency is predominantly circuit and technology oriented:
              dynamic voltage scaling accommodates higher or lower frequency by raising or
              lowering supply voltage, respectively.  In the future, support for variable
              frequency should also be an integral part of microarchitecture design.

    
              To demonstrate this overall vision, this project puts forth a novel
              microarchitecture called dynamic superpipelining (DSP).  DSP switches from low
              to high frequencies by dynamically doubling the number of pipeline stages.  DSP
              combines the advantages of two very different pipeline design styles (shallow
              and deep pipelines) that are optimized for different frequency targets.  A
              flexible pipeline delivers better performance across a wider range of
              frequencies, ultimately improving the energy efficiency of the microprocessor. 
              To evaluate DSP, it will be used as a variable-frequency substrate for a
              speculative frequency reduction technique recently proposed by the PI.

