Title       : Integrating Hydraulic, Tracer, and Geophysical Methods to Image Flow-Channeling
               Behavior in Fractured Bedrock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0207720

Award Number: 0207720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118443             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew W. Becker mwbecker@geology.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Becker
0207720

It has long been hypothesized that ground water flows through
              bedrock fractures in a channelized manner, implying that contaminated ground
              water may be very difficult to detect or predict.  To date, flow channeling at
              the field scale has been detected only in boreholes or tunnels.  This research
              will yield, for the first time, map-view images of channeling in a fracture
              plane.  Saline tracer will be injected into a single saturated sub-horizontal
              bedding-plane fracture, and its distribution will be mapped using
              high-resolution ground-penetrating radar.  Experiments will be conducted in
              floor of a limestone quarry so that the water table is shallow and there is no
              overburden to obstruct the radar signal.  Several forced gradient hydraulic
              configurations will be used to allow both low-resolution time-variant and
              high-resolution time-invariant imaging of saline tracer.  Monitoring holes will
              simultaneously detect saline concentration, so that the efficacy of borehole
              monitoring in the presence of channeling can be evaluated.  Finally,
              fluorescent dye will be injected into the fracture and the rock above the
              fracture removed so that flow channeling can be mapped directly.  Ground
              penetrating radar, monitoring well concentrations, dye distribution, and
              hydraulic testing will be used to calibrate a finite difference ground-water
              flow and transport model.  This model will be used to investigate errors
              associated with monitoring ground-water pollution and design hydraulic and
              tracer tests to characterize effective porosity in fractured bedrock.  Although
              the geophysical techniques employed in this research are not practical for most
              contaminated sites, tracer and hydraulic methods developed from this project
              could have a significant impact on how contaminated sites in fractured bedrock
              are monitored, characterized, and remediated.


