Title       : Collaborative Research: Influence of a Proterozoic Southern Laurentia Long-Lived
               Convergent Orogen In the Lake Superior region, USA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0207392

Award Number: 0207392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel K. Holm dholm@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's propose to employ recent advancements in geochronometric techniques to
              refine their understanding and models of the Proterozoic geology of the
              southern Lake Superior region. Their objectives are two-fold: 1) to use U-Pb
              monazite geochronometry (both ion probe and EMP) to document and directly date
              Penokean and subsequent metamorphic events (i.e., Yavapai, Mazatzal and Wolf
              River metamorphism) in an attempt to link these episodes to continued
              subduction after the Penokean orogeny; and 2) to use Ar-Ar laser microprobe
              grain-scale age mapping to evaluate the influence of multiple crustal events on
              the regional thermal record. Their results will be used ultimately to establish
              the Proterozoic geology of this historical region in the context of a
              long-lived convergent orogen model (Karlstrom et al., 2001).

Metamorphic
              geochronometry. Results of recent NSF-supported research (Holm and Van
Schmus)
              on the origin of post-Penokean granites show that magmatism long thought to be
              solely
1760 Ma, actually occurred in three separate, generally
              southeastward-migrating pulses at 1800,
1775, and 1750 Ma. Van Schmus, Holm
              and their co-authors have postulated that these
magmatic pulses could
              correlate with northward-directed subduction associated with southward
growth
              of the continent. In one possible scenario, geon 17 Yavapai-age slab rollback
              of a
northward subducting oceanic plate caused continental arc magmatism to
              step generally
southeastward between 1800 and 1750 Ma. As the slab steepened,
              it would have disengaged
from the overlying, overthickened crust. The reduced
              compressional stresses and increased
thermal input allowed for extensional
              collapse of the orogen and subsequent but short-lived
crustal stabilization.
              The PI's propose to carry out a detailed metamorphic study to test the
              hypothesis that widespread metamorphism (and not simply widespread cooling)
              occurred with the migrating arc magmatism and might be linked spatially to
              tectonic extrusion (i.e., collapse) structures. Their preliminary SHRIMP and
              EMP dating of metamorphic monazites appear to support this. These data will
              provide the first direct timing constraints on both Penokean and post-Penokean
              metamorphism in the southern Lake Superior region.

Metamorphic
              thermochronometry. In the 1990's, NSF-funded (Holm) Ar-Ar mineral age
              data
were used to document the timing and extent of orogenic cooling and later
              thermal reheating
across the Penokean orogen. For instance, abundant 1760-1720
              Ma plateau cooling ages are
interpreted to be associated with a rapid crustal
              collapse/stabilization period and 1630-1600 Ma
plateau ages are interpreted to
              indicate reheating/deformation associated with the Matzatal
orogeny to the
              south. However, preliminary Ar-ion laser microprobe age data documents
              the
presence of significant age gradients across muscovite crystals (500 m.y.
              in one case). These
results merit further scrutiny of the existing
              thermochronologic data. Specifically, do the 1630-
1600 Ma Ar-Ar plateau ages
              i) reflect the time of widespread deformation and mild reheating;
              ii)
represent partial resetting associated with geon 14 magmatism; iii) or
              perhaps represent slow
cooling? Ar-Ar muscovite laser probe age mapping will
              allow the PI's to better constrain the medium-temperature history of the region
              and, especially to relate it to younger overprinting events in the thermally
              reheated areas. The data collected in this study are critical to properly
              interpret the new igneous ages (obtained by Van Schmus, Holm, and others) and
              existing Ar-Ar ages and to evaluate the Proterozoic geology of southern Lake
              Superior region in the context of a long-lived convergent orogen model.
