Title       : Cooperative Dynamics in Polymer Fluids: Melts, Blends, and their Glass
               Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0207949

Award Number: 0207949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Guenza mguenza@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports theoretical research for the development of a rigorous
              microscopic approach to describe polymer dynamics in structurally homogeneous,
              but dynamically heterogeneous polymer melts and blends as a function of their
              chemical structure and of the thermodynamic conditions.  The achievement of a
              molecular level understanding of the properties of polymer melts and blends is
              relevant for the development of new materials.  This research is an extension
              of the original approach developed over the past few years of the prior grant,
              where the equations were formalized and the dynamics of unentangled polymer
              melts were investigated.  For the first time, we were able to describe
              quantitatively the onset of anomalous dynamics observed in computer simulations
              and experiments of unentangled polyethylene dynamics.  

For the new research
              we focus on extending our approach to describe the motion of dynamically
              heterogeneous fluids in polymer melts, undercooled polymer melts and polymer
              blends.  The presence of dynamical heterogeneities, increasing in size with
              decreasing temperature, appears to be the mechanism responsible for the onset
              of the glass transition.  A study of the interplay between heterogeneous
              dynamics and concentration fluctuations is likely to explain the dynamical
              anomalies present in structurally homogeneous polymer blends, such as the
              breaking of time-temperature superposition.
%%% 
This grant supports a
              theoretical investigation of the dynamical response of polymer systems.  The
              theory developed will fill an important gap in the desciption of these
              materials and should have wide application.
***

