Title       : BAC Libraries for the Reptilia, Including Birds: Genomic Resources for
               Comparative Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0207870

Award Number: 0207870
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1095539            (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott V. Edwards sedwards@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris T. Amemiya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Robert Macey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,1619,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0207870
Edwards

Bacterial artificial chromosome libraries are collections of
              large (100, 000 - 200,000 DNA base pair) DNA fragments that are made
              retrievable and manipulatable by insertion into a specialized vector.  As
              resources for easily obtaining large amounts of DNA sequences for comparative
              purposes, for understanding the structure of eukaryotic genomes, and for
              expressing and manipulating genes and their phenotypic effects in developing
              embryos, BAC libraries are unsurpassed.  However, constructing BAC libraries is
              beyond the abilities of most laboratories not specifically tailored for this
              purpose.  This project will consist of constructing, archiving and
              disseminating to the international community of scientists BAC libraries from
              five species of Reptilia, including a bird.  The five focal species will be
              Painted Turtle (Chrysemys picta), Tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus), South American
              Worm Lizard (an amphisbaenian; Amphisbaea alba), American Alligator (Alligator
              mississippiensis), and the flightless Emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae).  In the
              event that an appropriate Tuatara sample is not available (a distinct
              possibility given its endangered status and restricted range in New Zealand), a
              BAC library from a snake will be constructed.  Reptilia, consisting of birds as
              well as species commonly referred to as reptiles, are poorly studied from
              genetic, developmental, genomic and phylogenetic perspectives; although
              Reptilia are much more diverse than their sister group, the mammals, mammals
              are much better studied as model biological species.  The construction and
              arraying of BAC libraries from these species will open up many new avenues of
              research into reptile genomics that were previously unapproachable.  There will
              be many scientific uses for these BAC libraries, including facilitating
              acquisition of comparative DNA data for phylogenetic and comparative genomic
              purposes, and a better understanding of the function of genes responsible for
              many features first appearing in the reptiles, such as feathers,
              temperature-dependent sex determination, limb reduction and loss, and
              large-scale genome reduction compared to mammals.  Thus these libraries will
              fill a major gap in our understanding of vertebrate genomics, a rapidly
              progressing discipline spurred on by the recent sequencing of the complete
              human, mouse and pufferfish genomes.

