Title       : Collaborative Research: Cognitive and Physiological Effects of Stereotypes on
               Problem Solving: Causal Mechanisms and Prescriptive Measures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0207723

Award Number: 0207723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92339              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Fein Steven.Fein@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Talia Ben-Zeev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The failure of large groups of students to perform to their potential.such as
              females in 
math, or African Americans across a variety of academic
              disciplines.is one of the great 
tragedies in our educational system. The
              significance of this problem has inspired numerous 
investigations of its
              scope, nature, and potential causes. A recent breakthrough points to the
              
power that social context can have in creating, perpetuating, or eliminating
              the underperformance 
that has hindered these groups. Steele, Aronson,
              Spencer, and their colleagues have demonstrated 
the crucial role of
              stereotype threat, a situational phenomenon that occurs when individuals who
              
are targets of stereotypes alleging intellectual inferiority are reminded of
              the possibility of 
confirming these stereotypes (e.g., Spencer, Steele, &
              Quinn, 1999; Steele, 1997).  For example, 
Spencer et al. (1999) showed that
              high-achieving female college students performed significantly 
worse than
              males on a standardized math test when the stereotype about their math ability
              was 
made salient (.Males have performed better than females on this test in
              the past..). However, this 
gender gap was eliminated simply by changing the
              words used for introducing the test (.Males 
and females have performed
              equally well on this test in the past..).  A counterintuitive finding is 
that
              only individuals who are highly identified with success and achievement in
              given 
stereotyped domains are the ones who show deficits under threat, in
              contrast to stigmatized 
individuals who are not achievement oriented in these
              domains (Steele, 1997). Thus, it is the 
people in the vanguard of their group
              who are the most vulnerable to situations in which 
stereotypes about their
              ability become salient. The detrimental effects of stereotype threat extend
              
to African Americans (e.g., Steele & Aronson, 1995), Latinos (e.g., Aronson &
              Salinas, 1997), 
and students of low socioeconomic status (e.g., Croizet &
              Claire, 1998), who are concerned with 
academic success. 
We hypothesize that
              the priming of a stereotype results in heightened physiological 
arousal.
              According to the classic Yerkes-Dodson (1908) law of physiological arousal,
              
performance is optimal at intermediate levels of arousal and decreases when
              arousal is either low 
or high, resulting in an inverted-U shaped function. 
              More recent neurophysiological research has 
corroborated and expanded on the
              classic findings of the Yerkes-Dodson law in animals and in 
humans.  For
              example, Lupien and McEwen (1997) provided evidence for an inverted-U shape
              
relationship between the level of the corticosteroid, cortisol, and cognitive
              processes in a variety 
of animal and human studies. We hypothesize that
              high-achieving individuals in stigmatized 
domains approach a problem-solving
              task in the given domains with an optimal level of arousal 
for performing
              well. Stereotype threat may interfere with these individuals. performance by
              
leading to arousal that exceeds an optimal level, causing performance
              deficits.  By trying to 
uncover the role of physiological arousal in
              mediating stereotype threat and the cognitive nature 
of the resultant
              deficits, we are hoping to contribute to understanding the theoretical
              
underpinnings of stereotype threat as well as to help stigmatized
              high-achieving students to 
overcome its effects. In the psychometric
              literature, Gallagher (1992, 1998) has shown that 
females performed more
              poorly than males on math-SAT problems that required the use of 
meaningful
              mental short cuts and estimation (versus problems that required standard
              calculation).  
There is reason to believe that cortisol reactivity may be
              implicated in defaulting to rote 
algorithmic versus meaningful problem
              solving (Forget, Lacroix, Somma, & Cohen, 2000).  We 
will test interventions
              for combating stereotype threat by reducing arousal, improving the use of
              
meaningful problem-solving strategies, and creating a practice of
              self-affirmation. In sum, the 
proposed research is designed to examine: (1)
              the role of physiological arousal as a mediator of 
stereotype threat; (2)
              whether reasoning becomes more algorithmic and less meaningful under
              
stereotype threat; and (3) ways in which the detrimental effects of
              stereotype threat can be 
mitigated or eliminated.
