Title       : GOALI: The Study of Luminescent Heavy Metal Complexes and their Incorporation as
               Emitters in OLED Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0207018

Award Number: 0207018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Eisenberg rse7@chem.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ching W. Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry J. Gysling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis J. Rothberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 1504,1762,1968,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program in the Division of Chemistry, the Solid State Chemistry program in the
              Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              in the Directorate of Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports research by a
              collaborative academic/industrial group headed by Professor Richard Eisenberg
              at the University of Rochester and the Eastman Kodak Company to study the
              luminescence of heavy metal complexes and their incorporation as emitters into
              OLED devices.  Dopant emitters are used in organic light-emitting diode (OLED)
              materials to make them more efficient and versatile for display applications. 
              Luminescent heavy-metal complexes emit light through triplet excited states
              (exicitons) providing a route for higher efficiency than organic polymeric
              materials alone.  Several classes of metal complexes including square planar
              iridium and platinum systems and polynuclear metal complexes will be prepared
              and their photophysical properties tuned through variations in their ligands. 
              The emission quantum yields and lifetimes of these complexes will be studied in
              rigid media.  Computational studies will suggest trends to support and direct
              the experimental work.  Complexes with metal centered excited states include
              Au(I) and Cu(I) complexes as well as face-to-face square planar systems.  New
              complexes will be examined by incorporation into prototype OLED devices and
              assayed for photoluminescence and stability under operating conditions. 
              Selected dopant emitters will be investigated as to their excitation mechanisms
              and the factors limiting their efficiency in order to identify molecular
              property alterations that improve performance in OLED displays.

This
              academic-industrial partnership will also involve a reciprocal seminar series
              in which personnel from the University of Rochester will present seminars at
              the Kodak Research Laboratories and industrial personnel will present their
              work at the University of Rochester.  These researchers will also develop a
              demonstration and teaching unit on photochemistry and display devices for
              presentation to elementary and secondary schools.  The unit will also be shared
              with the Rochester Museum and Science Center for public presentations.  In
              collaboration with the Rochester Section of the American Chemical Society, a
              pilot program for an Industrial Mentor Partnership will be initiated in which
              undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Rochester will have a
              industrial mentor at the Kodak Company.

New metal complexes will be studied
              to improve the efficiency of materials used as light emitting displays in
              electronic devices.  Educational opportunities for students in an industrial
              setting are involved and educational demonstration units will be provided to
              local schools and museums.


