Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleometeorological Records from Sand Dunes and Eolian
               Sandstones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0207893

Award Number: 0207893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262570             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Loope dloope1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton M. Rowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Collaborative Research:Paleometeorological Records from Sand Dunes

              and Eolian Sandstones

This three-year proposal requests support for
              collaborative research on modern and ancient sand dunes by earth scientists at
              University of Nebraska-Lincoln and University of Nevada's Desert Research
              Institute. Field and laboratory work will concentrate on the
              190-million-year-old Navajo Sandstone of the southwestern United States and on
              modern dunes in California and Nevada. 

The Navajo Sandstone accumulated in
              the subtropics, near the western edge of Pangea, the largest continental mass
              known from Earth history. The ancient rocks contain evidence for annual cycles
              in the direction and strength of the dominant wind, as well as evidence for
              heavy rainfall events, brief wind reversals, and a surprisingly high level of
              animal activity. Because we can recognize annual cycles of deposition, we can
              ascertain the migration rates of the sand dunes, and the seasonality and
              frequency of rainfall events. The rains may have occurred during long rainy
              episodes similar to conditions that prevailed in the Sahara desert between
              14,000 and 5,000 years ago. A high water table between dunes may explain why
              abundant animal and plant life was present even while the dunes were actively
              migrating. The brief wind reversals may represent the passage of fronts. 

We
              will monitor modern sand dunes during frontal passages to see if they record
              these events with deposits similar to those we have seen in the rocks. Modern
              dune studies may also allow us to better estimate the height of ancient dunes.
              Although many features in the Navajo Sandstone can be interpreted to be similar
              to modern analogs, others indicate very different conditions. It appears that
              the Jurassic dunes were migrating more rapidly than most large modern dunes,
              indicating strong, persistent winds. Plants apparently could not stabilize
              these dunes, even during the rainy episodes. The dominant winds were out of the
              northwest, but nowhere do westerlies prevail in areas so far to the south
              today. High winds are commonly attributed to strong temperature gradients, and
              the thermal contrast between the poles and equator today causes strong
              atmospheric circulation. In the Jurassic, however, few, if any, glaciers
              existed and there is evidence that temperatures at high latitude positions were
              considerably milder than today. We hypothesize that in the southern summer, the
              supercontinent Pangea developed an effect similar to that over Asia today, and
              drew in air from the northwest across the equator. Our field studies of modern
              and ancient dunes will help us to develop a global climate model for the
              Jurassic. Experiments with the model will test several hypotheses relating to
              atmospheric circulation over Pangea.

Ancient dune deposits record
              meteorological, hydrological, and biological events in amazing detail.  Our
              study will attempt to mine this information with an eye toward better
              understanding atmospheric circulation under conditions different from those of
              today's Earth.

