Title       : QuarkNet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0207072

Award Number: 0207072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3661221            (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal C. Ruchti rruchti@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Quarknet has been funded as a partnership among the ESIE program of EHR ; the 
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Elementary Particle Physics
              Program (Division of Physics) , both within MPS; as well as the Division of
              High Energy Physics at DOE. 

QuarkNet is a national program that partners
              high school science teachers with particle physicists working in forefront
              experiments at the scientific frontier. These experiments are searching for
              answers to fundamental questions about the origin of mass and about the nature
              of symmetries that govern physical processes. QuarkNet provides valuable
              research experience to teachers enabling them to teach the basic concepts of
              introductory physics in a context that students find exciting. QuarkNet's goals
              are to establish a lasting national community of researchers that includes high
              school teachers and students as well as physicists, to attract young students
              to careers in science and technology, to help develop scientific literacy in
              society, and to develop links between the high school classroom and experiments
              and techniques used to explore the scientific frontier. QuarkNet is led by a
              group of teachers, educators and physicists with many years of experience in
              particle physics workshops and institutes, materials development and teacher
              research programs. Five "staff" teachers help design, coordinate and run the
              project. QuarkNet has been envisaged and designed as a multi-decade-long
              program with a "growth" phase of 5 years followed by an "operational" phase of
              at least twice that duration. In this schema, the growth phase admits twelve
              new centers per year until a maximum of 60 centers is reached; the operational
              phase oversees the maturation of the centers into an inclusive and engaging
              community of researchers. Currently completing its third year, QuarkNet
              comprises 36 centers located at universities and laboratories around the
              country. Under this five-year proposal, QuarkNet will complete the growth phase
              by the end of the second proposal year, with science education centers
              participating in a variety of experiments at Fermilab, CERN, SLAC, and in
              non-accelerator and astrophysics programs. In this two-year period 48 "lead"
              teachers, two from each new center, will hold 8-week research appointments and
              will work under the guidance of physicists from a university or laboratory near
              their homes. In the operational period to follow (proposal years 3-5), QuarkNet
              will revisit existing centers (again in groups of 12) to offer 8-week
              scientific appointments, and to strengthen ongoing research experiences and
              activities by engaging high school students directly in research projects under
              the direction of physicists and supervising teachers, for periods up to 8 weeks
              duration. Key features of QuarkNet are the establishment of mentor
              relationships between teachers and scientists, summer research experiences of
              up to 8-weeks for lead and supervising teachers and 1-3 weeks for associate
              teachers, the inclusion of high school students as researchers, and the
              development of scientific "community" within and among centers. Over the five
              years 2002-2006, this proposal is expected to reach up to 720 teachers, more
              than 100 physicists, and eventually more than 50,000 students, approximately
              300 of whom will have summer research experiences.  

