Title       : Collaborative Research: Correlogram Migration of Scattered Teleseismic Body
               Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0207264

Award Number: 0207264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55773              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard T. Schuster schuster@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A new methodology for the imaging of the earth's reflectivity distribution by
              correlogram migration of scattered teleseismic body waves is being
              investigated.  The correlation migration methods developed for applications in
              seismic exploration  are being extended to the imaging of crustal and upper
              mantle structure beneath a dense receiver array using teleseismic body waves.
              These waves include P to SV and P to P surface reflected phases, in addition to
              other direct and surface scattered phases.  The result is an image of the
              reflectivity distribution beneath the recording array for each of the scattered
              waves.  The current imaging methods using receiver functions for laterally
              varying structure mostly use directly converted P to SV arrivals for subsurface
              illumination.  Correlation imaging of ghost reflections provides complementary
              resolution to that of P to SV transmitted waves.  Questions concerning the
              practicality of using correlogram migration of different phases for the imaging
              of laterally varying media using teleseismic array data are being addressed. 
              Also, the limitations of correlogram migration as a function of data quality,
              receiver spacing and type of teleseismic data used are being investigated.
              Since for practical teleseismic array configurations, some aliasing effects
              will result, a new beam-like migration algorithm, call wavepath migration,
              which is less sensitive to these effects, is being tested for the imaging of
              teleseismic array data. The correlogram migration of teleseismic data is being
              tested using different teleseismic array configurations across the Wasatch
              Front.  The significance of this research is the development of new imaging
              methods for laterally varying structure using teleseismic data, which
              generalizes receiver function imaging to include converted as well as ghost
              reflections. Correlogram imaging is most effective for dense seismic networks.
