Title       : Annual Copper Mountain Conferences on Multigrid and Iterative Methods, Copper
               Mountain, CO 2003-2006
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0207885

Award Number: 0207885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Van Henson henson5@llnl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Front Range Sci Computatio
	      1390 Claremont Drive
	      Boulder, CO  80305    303/554-1232

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Copper Mountain Conference Series, begun in 1983, is held in early April at
              Copper Mountain, Colorado; the subject of these meetings alternates yearly
              between Multigrid Methods and Iterative Methods.  The Series is an important
              forum for the exchange of ideas in these two closely related fields.  The
              meetings are planned for five days, with sessions consisting of individual
              talks of approximately a half hour each.   By tradition, these conferences will
              have an egalitarian style with no invited talks and student presentations put
              on equal footing with all others. One of the main goals is to enhance the
              participation in this meeting by students, women, and minority mathematicians. 
              This is accomplished through a student paper competition, and a special fund to
              augment travel support for women and minority mathematicians.

Several topics
              of emphasis have been selected for this Series: the coming conferences will
              emphasize advanced architectures (reflecting a heightened interest due to
              multiprocessor computing), algebraic methods (spurred by the recent advent of
              very large discrete problems arising from unstructured grids), eigenvalue
              problems (where recent trends include robust parallel implementations of
              classical methods),  and preconditioning (where great improvements have come
              from domain decomposition or parallel approximate inverses). One important
              feature of the multigrid conference series is the use of tutorials. The series
              has featured half-day tutorials on basic multigrid, algebraic multigrid,
              multigrid for parallel computers, and cache-aware multigrid.  Other important
              features of the conference proceedings include preliminary proceedings, given
              out upon registration, and special issues of major journals (SIAM SISC, ETNA,
              etc.) devoted to the conferences. 
