Title       : Absolute Chronology of the Pazyryk Culture and Climate Variability in the Altai
               Mountains Inferred from Tree Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0207654

Award Number: 0207654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irina P. Panyushkina Panush@ltrr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Irina Panyushkina, Jeffrey Dean,
              and their colleagues will undertake a dendrochronological (tree-ring) analysis
              of wood from Iron Age archaeological sites in Central Asia focussing on the
              Scythian Pazyryk Culture (1,000 B.C.) in the Altai Mountains, which lies across
              Russia, Mongolia, China, and Kazakhstan states.  Crossdated tree-ring sequences
              from living trees, dead trees in glacial valleys, and archaeological timbers
              will be used to build a 3,000-year continuous master tree-ring chronology,
              which will provide calendar dates for Scythian, Tagar, Hun-Sarmatian, and
              Turkic archaeological sites.  This achievement will be a quantum advance like
              that of the 1920s when dendrochronology precisely dated hundreds of
              Paleo-Indian sites in the U.S. Southwest.  The Altai project is a scientific
              partnership between the United States and the Russian Federation to study the
              archaeology, dendrochronology, and paleogeography of Central Asia.  The project
              integrates efforts of Russian, German, American, Kazakhstani, and French
              archaeological teams conducting multidisciplinary studies of Iron Age steppe
              nomads in the region.

The project will directly address (1) the absolute
              chronology of the Siberian Scythians and of the Iron Age in Inner Asia, (2) the
              place of the Pazyryk people in the general cultural and historical context of
              the region, (3) the extent to which climatic variability and extremes during
              the last few thousands years (Late Holocene) impacted nomads of the Eurasian
              steppe.  Although diagnostic Pazyryk artifacts and decorative styles commonly
              are used to establish connections among the pastoral and sedentary groups of
              Eurasia, the insecure dating of the Pazyryk expression impedes understanding
              the interactions among these Iron Age societies.  Application of the 3,000-year
              master tree-ring chronology to dating wood objects from Scythian tombs will
              provide an absolute chronological framework for systematizing existing
              archeological data and future finds.  An absolute chronology for the study
              region will clarify ideas about Indo-European origins, the prehistory of
              pastoral societies before Mongol expansion into Inner Eurasia, and Scythian
              influence on the cultures of Asia Minor and the Mediterranean Basin.  Combining
              the dendroclimatic records with other indicators of environmental changes will
              produce high resolution (seasonal and annual) environmental reconstructions for
              the last 3,000 years.  These data will be used to assess the degree of
              environmental stress on the pastoral steppe nomads whose animal herds, a vital
              component of their economy and social organization, where highly vulnerable to
              fluctuations in climate and vegetation.  This, in turn will indicate the degree
              to which climatic variability "forced" the sequent waves of Scythian impact on
              the agrarian cultures to the west. 

