Title       : Random Models for Turbulent Fluid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0207242

Award Number: 0207242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Kramer kramep@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is directed toward the general goal of developing some fundamental
              understanding of nonlinear processes in turbulent fluids, with particular
              attention to the development of effective equations which describe the dynamics
              of complex systems on a coarse-grained level.  Two particular physical
              phenomena are examined: the mixing and transport of substances immersed in a
              turbulent fluid and the interaction between weakly nonlinear waves. The common
              mode of investigation is a precise analysis of simplified stochastic models.
              The main feature of the turbulent transport model is its inclusion of both a
              large-scale mean flow, which can depend on both space and time, and a
              small-scale fluctuating component of the velocity field.  This allows a study
              of how the large and small scales of a turbulent fluid interact in determining
              the effective evolution of the passive scalar density.  The work will be
              directed toward extending some rigorous homogenization theorems and
              investigating some physical phenomena which arise from the new features of the
              model.  The second research area concerns the development of simplified
              equations to describe wave propagation under the influence of weak
              nonlinearity.  A well-known weak turbulence theory has found some success in
              treating such systems in a number of contexts, but its foundations and
              limitations are still under active investigation.  Some particular aspects of
              the weak turbulence theory will be scrutinized and illustrated on the
              Fermi-Pasta-Ulam model.  The outcomes of this analysis will be used to suggest
              modifications of the standard kinetic equations of weak turbulence theory which
              may improve their accuracy and generalize their domain of
              applicability.

Both of these studies are directed toward achieving a better
              understanding of how turbulent systems can be effectively described through
              simplified equations.  A chief application of this research theme is in
              atmosphere-ocean models designed for climate and weather prediction. 
              Limitations on both available data and supercomputing resources make fully
              detailed simulations impossible for the forseeable future, and the effects of
              turbulence must be represented by some managable set of parameters.  The
              research described above will contribute toward a better understanding of how
              turbulence can be parameterized in atmosphere-ocean science models in a more
              rational and effective manner.
