Title       : Collaborative Research: Investigating the Processes and Timescales of Andesite
               Differentiation: A Comprehensive Petrological and Geochemical Study of Arenal
               Volcano, Costa Rica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0207316

Award Number: 0207316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94089              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: Investigating the processes and timescales of andesite
              differentiation: a comprehensive petrological and geochemical study of Arenal
              Volcano, Costa Rica

EAR-0207185; EAR-0207287; EAR-0207761; EAR-0207316
PIs:
              Gill; Reagan; Tepley; Gardner

Arenal Volcano in Costa Rica is an excellent
              natural laboratory in which to test specific hypotheses regarding
              differentiation mechanisms and the timescales of magmatic processes and their
              relationship to eruptions. Our objective is to undertake a multi-pronged
              petrological and geochemical investigation to take advantage of existing data
              and models. 
The on-going eruption of Arenal volcano has undergone complex
              changes in eruptive behavior, and a crucial question is whether those changes
              relate to different magma storage conditions, such as varying depths and hence
              initial volatile contents, or to different degassing styles and rates. We will
              investigate this important issue through several techniques. We seek to
              determine the timescales of degassing, the residence times and ascent rate of
              degassed magmas, and the timescales of degassing-induced plagioclase
              crystallization. We will measure short-lived nuclides within the uranium decay
              series to constrain the timescales of magmatic processes as well as measure the
              long-lived isotopic compositions of whole rocks, and mineral separates and
              individual minerals in the case of Sr, to determine whether there is evidence
              for involvement of isotopically distinct components during differentiation
              processes. Lastly, we will measure a suite of major- and trace-element
              concentrations to evaluate the secular change in Arenal lava composition.
The
              data from these tests will help answer questions such as whether rates of
              differentiation depend on the depth and degree of crystallization and on the
              extent and character of degassing; whether crystal and magma residence times
              can be as short as days to months during near steady-state eruptions of
              andesite; whether within-eruption changes of magma composition are caused by
              open-system processes of fractional crystallization plus recharge or
              assimilation or both; and whether eruption styles are related to degassing
              history and magma residence time.

