Title       : Collaborative Research: Retreating-trench, Extension, and Accretion Tectonics
               (RETREAT): A Multidisciplinary Study of the Northern Apennines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0207980

Award Number: 0207980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  2002   
Expires     : September 30,  2008  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Pazzaglia fjp1@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0207980
Pazzaglia

The paradox of how horizontal contraction and extension
              can occur simultaneously in convergent mountain belts remains a fundamental and
              largely unresolved problem in continental dynamics. The Apennines represent one
              of the most accessible "type locality" areas of syn-convergent extension. 
              Rollback - which describes the tendency of a subducting plate to retreat from
              the orogenic front - is commonly invoked as an explanation for syn-convergent
              extension, but this idea does not address how the retrograde motion of the
              subducting plate, which is a mantle-based process, causes horizontal extension
              in the overlying zone of crustal convergence, especially in light of the large
              accretionary fluxes typically associated with continental subduction.

The
              goal of the project (project RETREAT) is to develop a self-consistent dynamic
              model of syn-convergent extension, using the Northern Apennines as a natural
              laboratory. This part of the Apennine orogen has been the site of relatively
              steady orthogonal convergence and 2D (plane strain) orogenic deformation since
              ~30 Ma.  GPS measurements indicate that convergence is presently active, and
              tomography indicates that the full length of subducted slab is still intact to
              depths of 250 km.  Syn-convergent extension has been active since at least 15
              Ma.  The Northern Apennines are well studied, and all important features of the
              orogen are onland and thus directly accessible for detailed geological and
              geophysical research.

The specific objectives of project RETREAT are 1) to
              determine in detail the velocity field across the orogen, including deformation
              in the orogenic wedge, the motion of lithospheric plates, and the flow fields
              in the surrounding asthenospheric mantle, and 2) to use this kinematic
              information to develop and test specific dynamic models for deformation in the
              orogenic wedge and underlying mantle.  The research techniques to be used
              include; geodesy, tectonic geomorphology, low-temperature thermochronometry,
              structural geology and tectonic syntheses, seismic studies, and geodynamic
              modeling.  

The RETREAT project links together a broad multidisciplinary
              group with eleven PIs from six institutions, plus some 27 foreign collaborators
              in Italy, Switzerland, Canada, and France.
***


