Title       : Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Statistical Theories of Turbulent Geophysical
               Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0207064

Award Number: 0207064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Turkington turk@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research project applies modern methods in analysis, computation
and
              probability to the modeling turbulent flows arising in geophysical
fluid
              dynamics.  Specifically, the projects investigates statistical
theories of
              coherent structures in turbulence, which in a model
atmosphere or ocean
              usually take the form of long-lived, large-scale
jets and vortices.  The
              approach builds on recent developments in the
equilibrium statistical theory
              of such structures, which has now
matured to the point that it can be
              justified mathematically,
implemented computationally and applied succesfully
              to geophysical
models.  A prime example is the recent model of the zonal jets
              and
vortical spots in the atmosphere of Jupiter, whose predictions
              agree
remarkably well with observational data.  In light of
              these
developments, the goals of the project are two-fold.  First,
              the
equilibrium statistical theory of coherent structures is elaborated
for
              increasingly realistic geophysical models, such as
              multi-layer
quasi-geostrophic models and shallow-water models.  The
              physical
implications of the theory are investigated by computing families
              of
equilibrium structures and deriving nonlinear stability theorems for
them.
               Second, a novel approach to statistical closure is developed
from the
              corresponding nonequilibrium theory.  Unlike traditional
closure schemes for
              fluid turbulence, this new methodology derives
macroscopic equations for some
              specified resolved variables by
conditioning random paths of microstates on
              the ensemble-averaged
dynamics for those resolved variables.  A combined
              theoretical and
computational investigation of this approximation to
              nonequilibrium
behavior is undertaken for some prototype problems.  In the
              context of
model geophysical systems with damping and driving, this approach
              is
envisioned as a general procedure for deriving effective
              subgrid-scale
parametrizations of unresolved eddies.


Turbulent fluid flow
              remains one of the unsolved puzzles of physical
science.  A better theoretical
              understanding of turbulence is needed
as a basis for the computational
              simulation of almost all natural
fluid motions.  This is especially true of
              geophysical fluid flows --
the motions of the Earth's oceans and atmosphere --
              which involve
complex motions over a wide range of scales, from meters up to
              the
planetary size.  Every modern computer code used in weather
forecasting
              or climate prediction requires special, but often
unreliable, assumptions
              about how the small-scale turbulent motions
affect the computed large-scale
              behavior.  The research conducted in
this project addresses the general issue
              of modeling a complex fluid
flow -- a mathematical prototype of an atmosphere
              or ocean -- in such
a way that its predominant large-scale features can be
              captured
reliably without resolving the full complexity of its
              small-scale
motions.  In particular, the work seeks to develop the
              mathematical
and computational tools necessary to predict the behavior of
              modeled
geophysical fluid systems which exhibit organized features on
              large
scales but disordered and random motions on a range of small scales.
To
              do so, the project draws on sophisticated techniques from
statistical physics
              to construct theoretical models of complex systems
of this kind, and thereby
              to provide efficient and reliable methods
for computing their expected or most
              probable behavior.  A recent
example of this approach is the remarkably
              successful explanation of
the persistent jetstreams and vortices, such as the
              Great Red Spot, in
the atmosphere of the giant planet Jupiter, which for the
              first time
shows quantitative and qualitative agreement between
              mathematical
theory and NASA spacecraft observations.  In the context of
              Earth's
atmosphere and oceans, such theoretical models and
              computational
methods can used as building blocks in predictions about the
              long-term
trends in the ocean-atmosphere system.

