Title       : Phase Formation, Microstructure and Mechanical Properties in Mixed Metal/Silicon
               Carbide Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0207522

Award Number: 0207522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Krzanowski jamesk@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this research program the structural and mechanical properties of mixed
              transition metal carbide/silicon carbide thin films will be studied.  The
              strong chemical immiscibility between the metallic carbides and SiC, as well as
              the use of low-temperature deposition processes will promote the formation of
              heterophase nano-scale microstructures.  Fundamental mechanisms of phase
              formation and microstructural evolution in these films, with particular
              emphasis on the structures formed near the percolation threshold of a-SiC on
              the grain boundaries of the metallic carbides, will be examined. 
              Characterization methods will include high-resolution transmission electron
              microscopy and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.  In addition, models of
              surface vs. bulk diffusion processes will be used to rationalize the observed
              microstructures, including observations of phase separation.  The mechanical
              properties of these films, particularly the deformation mechanisms operating in
              these films by observing the microscopic deformation structure present after
              indentation, will also be investigated.
%%%
Recent research reports on the
              mechanical properties of mixed metal nitride/silicon nitride thin films with
              nano-scale heterophase structures have claimed dramatic property enhancements,
              including hardness levels exceeding that of diamond and high fracture
              toughness.  The ability to create materials with hardness levels above that of
              diamond is a long-standing quest for materials scientists.  If this objective
              can be achieved, it would allow significant advances in applications such as
              coatings for cutting tools and bearings.  In this research program we will
              study transition metal carbide/silicon carbide coatings that are analogous to
              the nitride systems that have been the subject of much recent research
              interest.  Using advanced characterization and testing methods, along with
              thermodynamic and kinetic modeling, we hope to achieve an improved
              understanding of strengthening mechanisms in these materials, along with new
              candidate ceramic materials for improved industrial coatings.
***
