Title       : U.S.-Bulgarian Workshop: Use of Information Technologies in Modeling the
               Bulgarian Firm in Transition from a Planned to a Free Market Economy, May 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0207141

Award Number: 0207141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Madeline Johnson johnsonm@uhd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Alo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Downtown
	      One Main Street
	      Houston, TX  77002    713/221-8000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510202   International Economic Modeling         
Program Ref : 0000,5958,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a US-Bulgarian workshop on the use of information technologies in
              modeling the Bulgarian firm in transition from a planned to a free market
              economy.  The workshop will be held in Bulgaria.  The co-organizers of the
              workshop are Drs. Madeline Johnson and Richard Alo from the University of
              Houston-Downtown and Dr. Nikola Yankov from the Tsenov Academy of Economics in
              Bulgaria.

The goal of the workshop is to bring together faculty, students
              and other experts from the U.S. and Bulgaria to discuss and develop joint
              research toward the development of a strategic and tactical decision-making
              simulation of a Bulgarian firm in transition from operating in a planned
              economy to a free market economy.  The simulation will support research,
              training and education on the strategic and tactical processes that will speed
              the transformation required to operate successfully in a free market economy. 
              The objectives of the workshop are (a) the identification of the constructs to
              be modeled in the simulation and (b) the identification of the relationships
              among the constructs to be modeled in the simulation.  The outcomes of the
              workshop will include data collection, model building, and software engineering
              to explicate the simulation.  

This workshop in economics fulfills the
              program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and
              Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
              areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
              reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
