Title       : Dynamics of Mush Column Magmatism: Experiments Involving Transport of
               Particle-Laden Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0207254

Award Number: 0207254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227277             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Marsh bmarsh@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dynamics of Mush Column Magamtism: Experiments Involving Transport of
              Particle-Laden Fluids

EAR-0207254
PI: Marsh

The nature and behavior of
              the plumbing system that carries magma to large volcanic centers can be looked
              upon as a magmatic mush column. Mush columns are envisioned as a vertically
              extensive stack of horizontal sheets (or sills) and chambers of magma
              interconnected by a plexus of pipe-like and/or dike-like conduits stretching
              downward for distances as great as 50 km. Because of their longevity and
              complexity, mush columns may play a central role in the evolution of magma and
              in the general geologic evolution of Earth-like planets. Mush column dynamics
              may be central to understanding the connections between magmatism and
              volcanism, between eruptive flux and magma composition, between chamber and
              conduit geometry and cumulate bed formation, between conduit clogging and
              volcanic tremor, and between magma transport and layered intrusions, among many
              other issues. 
This project will design and build a scale model of a mush
              column to study experimentally the dynamics of magma charged with crystals as
              it ascends through a series of interconnected magma chambers. Particle-laden
              fluid will be used to simulate magma carrying crystals, where the fluid and the
              sizes and densities of the particles are carefully chosen to achieve dynamic
              similarity with melt and crystals in a real system. The geometry of the
              plumbing of the scale model will be based on geophysical and geological studies
              of real volcanic systems.  A primary goal of this project is to delineate in
              detail how the loss, gain, and deposition of crystals depends on local and
              large scale geometry of the system and on the magnitude and time history of
              flux of magma.  A series of reconnaissance experiments using a simple scale
              model has shown the feasibility of this approach to study transport and
              emplacement of crystal-rich magma.  


