Title       : OPNMR- A Local Probe of Spin Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0207539

Award Number: 0207539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean E. Barrett sean.barrett@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              At low temperatures and at high magnetic fields, electrons in quantum
              semiconductor heterostructures exhibit a wide variety of interesting phases
              (e.g., quantum Hall states), due to the combined effects of strong
              interactions, reduced dimensionality, disorder, and quantum fluctuations.
              Measurements of the electron spin magnetization and spin dynamics provide
              important insights into these novel states. This project will directly measure
              these quantities, on atomic length-scales, using optically pumped nuclear
              magnetic resonance (OPNMR) spectroscopy. The OPNMR measurements will move in
              new directions to address emerging questions, e.g., (1) what happens as
              skyrmions localize?, and (2) what are the electron "stripe" and "bubble"
              phases?  The undergraduate and graduate students who carry out this research
              activity will receive training while working with advanced instruments, such as
              a unique NMR magnet (supported by NSF's MRI program).  The proposed research is
              integrated into the PI's educational activities, through teaching and
              outreach.


Today's computers use electronic circuits that process
              information using the electron's charge. As circuit dimensions are rapidly
              approaching their smallest possible size, the development of alternative
              technologies becomes even more important.  One approach hopes to make use of
              the intrinsic magnetism of electrons known as "spin", to build new kinds of 
              devices ("spintronics"),  or even a powerful new class of computers ("quantum
              computers").  To reach these long-term goals, it is imperative to develop local
              probes of electron spins located inside a semiconductor.  This research project
              will greatly extend the capabilities of one such probe, called optically pumped
              nuclear magnetic resonance (OPNMR) spectroscopy.  These extensions will be
              driven by the pursuit of fundamental research into the properties of novel
              phases of an interacting electron system, at low temperature and in strong
              magnetic fields. The undergraduate and graduate students who carry out this
              research will receive training while working with advanced instruments, such
              
as a unique NMR magnet (supported by NSF's MRI).  The research activity is
              integrated into the PI's educational activities, through teaching and
              outreach.



