Title       : Large Eddy Simulation: Mathematical theory and Numerical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0207627

Award Number: 0207627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136599             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Layton wjl+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Large eddy simulation is widely considered to be the most promising approach to
              simulating turbulence and its mathematical validation and development are
              important to its further evolution. Current eddy-viscosity models are of
              limited usefulness in long time simulations because they can overly diffuse the
              large structures. They are of limited accuracy because their connection to the
              physics of turbulent fluctuations is tenuous.  Layton  will first test an
              improved eddy viscosity model which arises from a more careful mathematical
              description of the involved physical  processes and which is less diffusive
              than the Smagorinsky model.  A second idea of eddy viscosity acting only on the
              finest resolved scales will be investigated. Most present de-convolution models
              are limited by an incorrect under-attenuation of high frequencies and an
              incorrect global kinetic energy balance.  The proposed research on
              de-convolution models will seek to correct both difficulties. The usefulness of
              LES in industrial applications is severely limited by the crude near wall
              models currently used.  Layton has developed improved near wall models for
              channel flow with the correct double-asymptotics (Re -> infinity and delta ->
              0).  These will be extended to produce nonlinear near wall models suitable for
              recirculating flows.  Layton will also investigate a new variational multiscale
              method based on a multiscale decomposition of the fluid stresses rather than
              fluid velocities.

Layton proposes to continue the mathematical development
              of large eddy simulation.  Large eddy simulation addresses the problem of
              predicting, using mathematical analysis, physical modeling and high performance
              computing, the large, energetic eddies (or swirls) in the flow of fluids at
              high Reynolds numbers. This problem is a core difficulty in many important
              applications such as global change studies, geophysics and the environment, 
              aeronautics and aerospace applications and even in the design of artificial
              hearts. Large eddy simulation is widely considered to be the most promising
              approach to simulating turbulence and its mathematical validation and
              development is important to its further evolution. This proposal aims to
              improve eddy-viscosity models, de-convolution models, and near-wall models by a
              thorough mathematical analysis. 
