Title       : Collaborative Research: Co-evolution and Dynamic Interplay of the San Jacinto
               and Southernmost San Andreas Fault Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0207437

Award Number: 0207437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Bennett rbennett@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The PI's request funds to analyze the dynamics of fault interaction between the
              San Jacinto (SJFZ)and southernmost San Andreas (SAFZ) fault zones in southern
              California. They seek to address whether there has been a decrease in the slip
              rate along the Indio segment of the SAFZ related to the birth and continued
              maturation of the SJFZ, and/or whether these two fault zones alternatively
              assume dominant roles in accommodating relative plate motion across the region
              over any time scales. These questions have proven difficult to address with any
              one geological/geophysical technique or data type.  They will therefore employ
              an integrated, cross-disciplinary approach to investigate the evolution,
              present-day behavior,and dynamics of these active faults. Specifically, the
              PI's propose to:

- Investigate trade-offs between fault model parameter
              estimates derived from geodetic observations. They will use the SCEC and SCIGN
              data sets together with inverse elastic fault
models and more realistic
              visco-elastic finite element forward models to perform resolution
and
              covariance analyses to explore the trade-offs between slip rate, locking depth,
              creep, and
seismic cycle effects on these faults. They will (1)determine
              marginal confidence bounds on the
range of present-day boundary conditions on
              fault evolution models, and (2)determine what
improvements in geodetic
              coverage (e.g.,PBO station locations and station density)will be
necessary in
              order to further narrow the class of admissible fault evolution
              models.

-Investigate the relative importance of, and feedbacks between,
              fault zone geometry, and lithospheric rheology by numerical simulations using a
              3-D visco-elastic finite element modeling
approach. Their investigations will
              include an assessment of how the presence of the restraining
bend in the SAFZ
              affects partitioning of strain between the SJFZ and SAFZ, how the
              eastern
California shear zone affects this partitioning, and whether there are
              resolvable differences in
fault zone strength between the SAFZ and the
              SJFZ.

- Determine the age of offset alluvial deposits using cosmogenic
              dating techniques which were
not available ten years ago, at the present-day
              precision.  The order-of-magnitude increase in
precision of the offset
              alluvial fan ages will allow the PI's to discriminate between competing models
              for fault zone evolution over the 10 to 100 ka time scale. These new cosmogenic
              dating measurements will be made at no additional cost under this proposal. 
              Rather, funds to cover the
costs of this component of our research are
              anticipated from Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft
(DFG proposal pending, Prof.
              Friedrich, P.I.).

- Construct a model for the co-evolution of the SJFZ and
              SAFZ incorporating an aggregation
of new and existing displacement history
              data sets across a broad range of time scales for
both fault zones, as well as
              dynamical considerations. Our integrated approach will provide
a more
              comprehensive test of fault slip dependence between these fault systems than
              any
individual technique could possibly provide on its own.

The strength of
              our proposal is that our multidisciplinary research will be coordinated by
              the
over-riding goal of testing competing hypotheses for the evolution of this
              complex fault system.
