Title       : Chiral Probes of Polymer Conformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9629972

Award Number: 9629972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Green mgreen@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Garetz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shiro Matsuoka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert Morawetz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With funding from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division,  
              Professor Mark M. Green and co-investigators S. Matsuoka, H. Morawetz,   and B.
              Garetz, all of Polytechnic University, will study chiral probes of   polymer
              conformation.  Chiral polymers containing chiral monomer groups   exhibit
              optical activity properties which are identical whether formed   from monomers
              which are enantiomerically pure or formed from a mixture of   the enantiomers
              in which the enantiomeric excess is only slight.  The   result is understood as
              a cooperative effect in which the preferred   conformations of the polymer are
              driven by local conformational effects.   This project will extend the concept,
              so far proved only for linear   (polyisocyanate) polymers in solution, to
              liquid crystalline polymers,   dendrimers, and polymeric amorphous solids. It
              also will apply the   concepts developed to study fundamental questions of
              secondary and   tertiary structure in synthetic polymers, as well as to
              understand   solvent sorting (called local composition effects industrially). 
              Systematic and predictable variation of the properties of materials   offers a
              prime strategy for optimization of their behavior.  This work   will explore a
              new approach to studying and controlling properties of   polymeric materials. 
              The materials to be studied provide an opportunity   for amplification of small
              optical effects and, for example, for use of   the materials as optical
              switches based on circularly polarized light.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
