Title       : Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Population Regulation in Migratory Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9629488

Award Number: 9629488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Holmes richard.t.holmes@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629488  Holmes  This research is designed to test and evaluate the mechanisms
              (i.e., processes) determining population size in North American migratory
              songbirds.  The study will help in understanding why some species are currently
              showing population declines. The work focuses on breeding populations of
              Black-throated Blue Warblers (Dendroica caerulescens) in the Hubbard Brook
              Experimental Forest in north central New Hampshire.  Through monitoring and
              experimental studies, we will quantify the occurrence and strength of two types
              of population regulation, namely density-dependence and site-dependence.  Each
              type is capable of generating negative feedbacks on population size.  One test
              will involve evaluating the effects of experimental reductions of local
              population density, while monitoring will examine how habitat quality
              influences bird survival and reproduction.  Habitat quality will be defined in
              terms of food abundance, weather, predator abundance, and vegetation
              composition and structure.  The ability of these measures, singly and
              collectively, to predict territory-specific reproduction, survival, and
              dispersal of these species over broad spatial and altitudinal scales will be
              examined.  Data from these studies will be employed in computer simulation
              models for comparisons of the regulatory strength of the two potentially
              important regulatory processes.  Model projections and analyses will help to
              identify, assess, and integrate the factors and processes determining
              population changes and abundances of this migratory bird species.  Results of
              this research will contribute not only to basic ecological theory, but also
              will have direct management applications for migratory songbirds, some of which
              are declining in abundance and are of conservation concern.
