Title       : Conducting Polymers Derived from Novel Electron Rich Condensed Heterocycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9629854

Award Number: 9629854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Reynolds reynolds@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Katritzky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award, made in the Special Projects Office of the Chemistry Division   and
              the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research continues   support
              for the research of Professors Reynolds and Katritzky at the   University of
              Florida. The goal of the research is to design, synthesize   and characterize
              electron-rich conducting polymers prepared from   substituted condensed
              heterocycles including indolocarbazoles,   bis(thieno)-benzenes,
              bis(pyrrolo)naphthalenes and bisindoles. These   selected monomers lend
              themselves to facile electropolymerization.  The   planarity induced within the
              repeat unit and the low redox switching   potentials will make the polymers
              quite stable when oxidatively doped and   highly conducting. Pendant
              substituents will be incorporated onto the   polymers to control polymer
              physical properties. Alkyl substitution will   facilitate solubility and
              processibility. Polar substituents will be   incorporated to enhance polymer
              interactions with electrolyte and   ion-transport during redox switching. 
              Alkyl sulfonate substitution will   be used to induce water solubility and will
              lead to a new family of   self-doped conducting polymers.  Electropolymerized 
              polymers formed on  conducting surfaces can be easily   switched between redox
              states resulting in highly controllable physical   and electonic properties
              such as conductivity, ion content, volume and   color. These materials are
              likely to find application in electrochromic   devices, ion release electrodes,
              biosensors and transducers. The design,   synthesis and characterization of new
              structures will advance the   fundamental understanding of structure-property
              relationships in   conducting polymers.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
