Title       : Career Advancement Award: Epithelial Chloride Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9629733

Award Number: 9629733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy K. Wills NKWILLS@UTMB.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Chloride channels play key roles in epithelial ion transport in cells and in
              regulation of cell volume.  However, little is known about the molecular
              mechanisms of chloride-channel function and regulation.  The cultured amphibian
              renal-cell line A6 is a uniquely suited model for such studies because these
              cells are well differentiated and have robust, hormonally regulated, sodium and
              chloride transport mechanisms.  At present we lack sufficient knowledge about
              the structures responsible for gating of epithelial chloride channels, their
              membrane localization, and the mechanisms for modulation of channel activity by
              hormones and intracellular messengers.  Dr. Wills will use PCR and
              expression-cloning methods to isolate, sequence, and functionally express
              chloride channels from A6 epithelium.  In preliminary studies, she has shown
              that chloride channels similar to the ClC family and pICln are present in these
              cells.  Dr. Wills will obtain full-length clones for these proteins and assay
              their channel properties from whole-cell current or single-channel measurements
              following expression in Xenopus oocytes or in insect (SF9) cells.  The results
              of these studies will contribute to basic knowledge of epithelial
              chloride-channel function and will allow characterization of two novel ClC
              chloride channels.  The unique features of A6 amphibian renal-epithelial cells
              should facilitate the functional expression of these chloride channels and
              allow the first expression of wild-type clones of osmotically-regulated ClC
              channels.  The project will provide the foundation for future
              structure-function studies of epithelial ion channels.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
