Title       : Research Planning Grant: Phloem Water Relations: Direct Measurements of
               Sieve-Tube Turgor Pressures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9629742

Award Number: 9629742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel M. Holbrook holbrook@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The water status of the xylem and phloem are closely coupled, yet the driving
              force, tissue structure, and generally the direction of transport are
              diametrically opposed.  In contrast to the numerous studies on how xylem
              structure influences patterns of water transport, the water relations of sieve
              tubes and their effect on assimilate transport have received little attention. 
              Lack of a technique to monitor sieve-tube turgor pressures means that some of
              the most basic questions regarding phloem transport remain unanswered.  In
              particular, estimates of the magnitude of turgor gradients and how sieve-tube
              turgor responds to changes in xylem water potential are largely unknown.  This
              project lays the groundwork for a long-term effort in phloem water relations
              and phloem:xylem interactions.  Dr. Holbrook will develop techniques for
              in-situ monitoring of sieve tube-turgor pressure through combining aphid
              stylets and cell-pressure probe, and will explore spatial and temporal
              variation in sieve-tube turgor pressure in response to changes in plant water
              balance.  With this Research Planning Grant, she will visit other labs to learn
              component skills and will perform preliminary experiments in her own lab. 
              Development of an in-situ method for monitoring sieve-tube turgor pressure in
              intact plants will greatly enhance understanding of phloem water relations.  In
              particular, it would enable researchers to examine interactions of xylem
              tension and phloem physiology and to explore experimentally how the capacity
              for water transport through the xylem is balanced with the requirement of
              generating sufficient turgor pressures for long-distance movement through the
              phloem.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
