Title       : Research Planning Grant: Dynamics of Trophic Interactions during Early Colony
               Formation in the Primitive Termite Mastotermes darwiniensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9629523

Award Number: 9629523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. Nalepa christine  nalepa@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1305,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Theories that have been postulated for the evolution of eusociality in insects
              are rarely applicable to termites, which are taxonomically and ecologically
              remote from the ants, bees and wasps.  Based on her studies of subsocial
              cockroaches, Dr. Nalepa has hypothesized that the manner in which nitrogenous
              materials are distributed during trophic interactions in incipient colonies of
              termites is the proximate cause of the reproductive and developmental changes
              associated with attaining eusocial status.  Dr. Nalepa will test this
              hypothesis using the Australian termite Mastotermes darwiniensis.  Through
              behavioral observations, measurements of individuals and colonies, colony
              manipulations and chemical analysis of the food and secretions involved in the
              care of dependents, she will quantify how the reserves of the adults, the
              demands of the developing brood and the input from the first workers in the
              colony are interrelated, and how these parameters change as the young family
              makes the transition to eusociality.  Dr. Nalepa's research employs a
              cross-disciplinary approach in analyzing termite social behavior, in that it
              attempts to relate ecology and nutritional physiology to behavior and social
              structure.  These studies will substantially contribute to our understanding of
              the affinities between cockroaches and termites, but also bear on much wider
              issues in the biological and social sciences.  The analysis of eusociality in
              insects has always played a central role in the analysis of sociality in all
              animals, and indeed, of evolution itself.  Clarifying the proximate causes of
              eusociality in the traditionally neglected termites may provide biologists with
              new ammunition in characterizing the origins of social systems.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
