Title       : Collaborative Research: Systematics and Evolutionary Biology of the Drosophila
               Quinaria Species Group
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9629517

Award Number: 9629517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Grimaldi grimaldi@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629517  GRIMALDI   This award will support Dr. David Grimaldi's contribution to
              a research project being done in collaboration with Dr. Greg Spicer.  Grimaldi
              will utilize morphological, ecological, and behavioral information for a group
              of flies, the Drosophila quinaria species group (Insecta: Diptera:
              Drosophilidae), to derive a phylogeny of relationships among the species.  He
              will also pursue a biogeographic analysis of the group which is largely
              Holarctic in distribution but does include a single described species of
              unknown affiliation from China that may represent the tip of an iceberg of
              undescribed species from that region.  Grimaldi's results will be integrated
              with those of Spicer who will pursue a molecular phylogenetic analysis of these
              same species.  At present, the group is of a manageable size, with 28 described
              species that show interesting biological diversity in habitat and breeding
              sites.  It is hoped that the combined morphological and molecular evidence will
              result in a fully resolved phylogeny that, in the future, can be used to
              address several interesting evolutionary questions, including determinants of
              Drosophila host range in parasitic nematodes and phylogenetic constraints on
              shifting to a new ecological niche such as mushroom breeding with possible
              concomitant shifts in tolerance of mushroom toxins.   This award will
              contribute to our understanding of an element of insect biodiversity and begin
              to provide information concerning how species change habit and host
              associations through time.
