Title       : Experiment in Graduate Education with an Environmental and Public Policy Focus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9629857

Award Number: 9629857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $809848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Spiro spiro@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With this award, the Division of Chemistry supports the early stages of  
              development of the Princeton Environmental Institute: Research Initiative   in
              Science and Engineering.  Ten science and engineering departments will  
              participate in a joint effort to prepare science and engineering graduate  
              students for life-time careers of effective participation in   environmental
              problem-solving.  In addition to pursuing the usual   departmental research
              programs, students will engage in a supplemental   course of study and research
              addressing the environmental implications of   their research topic.  This
              educational effort is also expected to result   in a better alignment of
              faculty research programs with environmental   objectives.  Emphasis will be
              placed on improving information flows among   various disciplines and the
              development of interdisciplinary research   programs.  The program will be led
              by Dr. Thomas G. Spiro, Chemistry   Department, Princeton University, and Dr.
              Robert G. Socolow, Director of   the Center for Energy and Environmental
              Studies in the School of   Engineering.  Faculty from the Woodrow Wilson School
              of Public and   International Affairs in the area of Science, Technology, and
              Public   Policy will staff courses on policy issues.  Students will have  
              opportunities for internships in industrial and other non-academic   settings. 
              Examples of case studies to be examined include: interplay of   stratospheric
              ozone chemistry with advanced engine design for supersonic   transport; metals
              cycling in the ocean; pollution management at   coal-fired power plants; dioxin
              transport in the biosphere; and dioxin   formation in combustion of chlorinated
              feedstocks.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
