Title       : Dissertation Research: Mate Choice and Competition Among Female Hamadryas
               Baboons in the Awash National Park, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9629658

Award Number: 9629658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Cords mc51@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past two decades, the role of female strategies in nonhuman primate
              societies has  become a major topic of investigation.  Studies of many primate
              species have shown that both  female and male behavior contribute to primate
              social organization.  Hamadryas baboons,  however, have long been considered to
              be a very male-dominated species, in which the role of  females has been
              assumed to be negligible.  Male behavior is distinct and highly visible in 
              hamadryas society: males, in trying to prevent females from mating with other
              males, are very  aggressive toward females and often `herd` them by biting them
              on the neck.  Females are  generally described as lacking opportunity, and
              perhaps even motivation, to escape male  coercion and behave independently. 
              However, both observations of hamadryas baboons in  captivity and evidence from
              other primate species suggest that females do pursue their own  reproductive
              interests, independent from the behavior of males.  This study will be the
              first to  investigate female mate choice and competition among wild female
              hamadryas baboons and will  thus help to clarify the role of females in this
              presumably male-dominated species.  The study  will take place in the Awash
              National Park, Ethiopia, over a period of 18 months.  Focal females  will be
              observed and social and sexual behavior between females and males, as well as 
              competitive interactions among females, will be recorded.  Fecal and blood
              samples will be analyzed genetically to determine paternity of infants born to 
              focal females, which will indicate the males with which females have mated and
              conceived.   This study will contribute to our understanding of social and
              sexual behavior of wild hamadryas  baboons.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
