Title       : Does Bacterial Community Structure Covary with Functional Response of Gradients
               of Dissolved Organic Carbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9629816

Award Number: 9629816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart E. Findlay findlays@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Sinsabaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The sediments below and adjacent to the stream channel are collectively called
              the hyporheic zone (hypo - beneath and rheos - flow, therefore, below the
              flow).  The microbial communities in these sediments rely on the supply of
              materials from surface water entering the hyporheic zone.  This research
              project will examine how these microbes respond to variations in the supply of
              dissolved organic carbon entering this zone.   The principal investigators will
              vary carbon supply in an experimental mesocosm facility to determine whether
              the bacteria in this zone simply change their growth rates or whether a new set
              of bacteria become predominant as the carbon supply changes.  By extracting
              bacterial DNA from samples collected from different hyporheic sediments they
              will determine the similarity among hyporheic bacterial communities.  The
              investigators will perfect techniques to extract DNA from hyporheic sediments
              and conduct DNA-DNA hybridization assays.     Stream ecologists have recognized
              that the sediments beneath the visible stream channel are an important habitat
              for a wide range of aquatic organisms.  Many of the chemical changes that occur
              in stream water can be attributed to the action of microbes inhabiting the
              subsurface sediments adjoining streams.  Human activity tends to increase
              dissolved organic carbon in streams, and understanding the response of
              microbial communities to chemical changes in streams will enhance management of
              stream water quality and stream community function.
