Title       : Mathematical Sciences: An Interdisciplinary Meeting on Recent Developments in
               the Theory and Application of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Numerical Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9629834

Award Number: 9629834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold Zellner arnold.zellner@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zellner  9629834       the investigator and colleagues organize a workshop on 
              Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques.  These techniques,  originally
              developed in mathematics and physics, have come to be  of great importance in
              many sciences and fields of application.  Their use allows researchers and
              applied workers to solve many  theoretical and applied  problems.  While MCMC
              techniques have  already been shown to be of great value, more work has to be
              done  to improve them.  For example, new methods are being developed to  speed
              convergence of MCMC techniques, to check on the convergence  and accuracy of
              MCMC output, and to provide computer systems and  programs needed to implement
              MCMC techniques in a user-friendly,  interactive environment.  These are a
              subset of the topics,  including new applications, that are discussed at the
              workshop.       the investigator and colleagues organize a workshop on  Markov
              chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques.  Monte Carlo  techniques are ways to make
              probabilistic estimates of  quantities.  For example, the volumes of a
              complicated shape can  be estimated by making random samples of the shape when
              embedded  in a simpler shape.  MCMC techniques have already been of great 
              value in solving important problems in science, industry and  government.  In
              this connection, models are employed to explain  past behavior, predict future
              outcomes and evaluate proposed  policies.  Deriving good solutions involves
              needed calculations  that are best carried out by use of MCMC techniques in
              many  instances, e.g. in connection with the analysis of global  warming,
              financial asset-pricing, industry personnel decisions,  on-line quality control
              and governmental policy problems.  Better  MCMC techniques, and more informed
              users of them, contribute to  better solutions to these and other private and
              public scientific  and policy problems.
