Title       : CAA: Protein Folding in Yeast/Gene Silencing in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9629780

Award Number: 9629780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46629              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Lopilato   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Simmons College
	      300 The Fenway
	      Boston, MA  021155820    617/738-2000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lopilato  9629780  To update the research skills of Dr. Lopilato, this Career
              Advancement award is provided. A six month sabbatical is being taken in a yeast
              Molecular Biology research laboratory at Dana Farber Cancer Institute (Boston,
              MA), followed by six months with a reduced teaching load at the home
              institution, in order to apply those skills to research in her laboratory.  
              Both the scope and effectiveness of the her research will be expanded by
              employing new techniques and approaches to problems that have been under study
              in her laboratory for the past few years.  Participating in a research project
              at an institution where research is the primary activity will allow her to have
              time to focus her energies on increasing her research productivity and
              potential.  In order to progress in her work on gene silencing in bacteria, Dr.
              Lopilato will benefit from new ways of approaching projects.  She will be
              studying protein folding in yeast during the first six months of the
              sabbatical, which is a clear expansion of her research interests.  In
              particular, she will be exploiting two types of genetic interactions, namely
              synthetic lethal interactions and suppressor analysis, to detect and identify
              proteins involved in protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum of yeast
              cells.  These approaches will be directly applied to her own research during
              the second six months of the sabbatical, and hopefully, will lead to
              identifying new proteins which are involved in gene silencing.  A specific
              skill that she will gain while at the research institution is DNA amplification
              using polymerase chain reaction, which will be incorporated immediately into
              her research and into the courses that she teaches.  The activities that will
              advance her research include the genetic and molecular approaches described
              above and cell biology approaches such as protein tagging and localization
              techniques.  All of these methods and approaches will enhance her ability to
              pursue research projects and maintain an active research l aboratory at Simmons
              College, an undergraduate college where both teaching and faculty research are
              high priorities.
