Title       : Molecular Systematics of Homobasidiomycetes Emphasizing Polyporaceae and
               Corticiaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9629427

Award Number: 9629427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Donoghue   (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Hibbett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629427  Donoghue   Homobasidiomycetes are a diverse group of fungi that
              includes mushrooms, polypores, puffballs, stinkhorns, coral fungi, and others.
              Many species decay dead organic matter and are important in nutrient cycling.
              Others include plant pathogens, ectomycorrhizae (symbiotic associates of tree
              roots), lichen-forming fungi, and mutualist partners with arthropods such as
              the leaf-cutter ants of the neotropics. Despite their ecological and economic
              importance, the evolutionary or phylogenetic relationships of
              homobasidiomycetes are not well understood. One reason for this is that fungi
              are anatomically simple, and hence they display few characters that could be
              useful for discriminating among them and inferring taxonomic relationships.
              Another confounding factor is the poor fossil record for fungi in general, and
              for fleshy homobasidiomycetes in particular.   Research by Drs. Michael
              Donoghue and David Hibbett at Harvard University is directed toward the goal of
              determining evolutionary relationships among the homobasidiomycetes using DNA
              sequences. The genes to be sequenced, called rDNA, encode the nucleic acids
              that make up ribosomes (organelles involved in protein synthesis). The rDNAs
              are highly conserved in sequence, which makes them useful for inferring very
              ancient evolutionary divergences. Both nuclear and mitochondrial rDNAs are
              being sequenced, from the same set of exemplar taxa. The sequences are aligned
              to each other and analyzed using computer algorithms that estimate
              relationships among genes based on the pattern of variation (mutational
              substitutions) in their DNA sequences. The resulting evolutionary hypothesis is
              represented as a phylogenetic tree. Two main groups of homobasidiomycetes are
              the focus of this research, the Polyporaceae and the Corticiaceae. The
              Polyporaceae includes fungi with poroid fruiting bodies such as many "bracket
              fungi", whereas the Corticiaceae includes fungi that have simple, resupinate
              (smooth, crust-like) fruiting bodies. Both families are de limited primarily on
              the basis of a few macromorphological features, but anatomical evidence
              suggests that they are composed of species from many different evolutionary
              lineages. One major question being addressed is: are the morphologically simple
              corticioid fungi a plesiomorphic (primitive) group from which other more
              complex forms have been derived, or have the corticioid forms evolved by
              reduction and simplification from more elaborate forms?
