Title       : Species Richness and Host Specificity of Leaf-Chewing Insects Feeding on
               Rainforest Trees in Papua New Guinea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9629751

Award Number: 9629751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Orsak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yves Basset  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 5927,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629751  Miller  Despite far reaching implications for rain forest conservation
              and management, understanding of host specificity of plant-feeding tropical
              insects remains more a matter of conjecture than hard data.  The approach taken
              here overcomes three major problems associated with previous studies:  (1)
              overlooking the importance of "transient" species that are not actually part of
              the community under study; (2) inadequate sampling programs without rearing and
              observation of live insects; and (3) need for "long-term" presence in the
              tropics with sufficient sampling effort.  A previous NSF project proved that a
              thorough sampling of the leaf-chewing insects associated with 15 tree species
              was feasible within one year.  The field methodology of the present study
              includes testing live insects to determine the plants on which they will
              actually feed, which allows exclusion of transient species.  The study also
              builds on the solid infrastructure, technical assistance and relationships
              developed with local villagers near Madang, Papua New Guinea.  The specific
              study goals are to (1) compare local faunistic composition, species-richness
              and host specificity of leaf-chewing insects feeding on two unrelated plant
              families; (2) compare species abundance distribution among the 30 communities
              of leaf-chewing insects studied; and (3) explore relationships of local insect
              variables (species richness, host specificity and abundance) to local host
              variables (abundance, leaf production patterns, other physical and biological
              characteristics).  Formulation of forest management and conservation strategies
              that maximize maintenance of insect diversity depend greatly on how that
              diversity is distributed, including how dependent the insects are on specific
              plants.  In other words, how much of the host plant diversity must be preserved
              in order to maintain the insect community.  Besides the obvious conservation
              importance, the same principles extend to management of forest insect pests and
              biological control agen ts.  This projects represents a significant example of
              the integration of taxonomic expertise in answering essential questions in
              community ecology and conservation biology, with links to training and resource
              management.
