Title       : Mechanisms Regulating Transcription of the Ldh-B Locus in Populations of
               Fundulus Heteroclitus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a9629572

Award Number: 9629572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Somero   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis A. Powers  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9629572  Powers  Differences in the expression of genes that encode
              intracellular  enzymes are a particularly important potential source of genetic
              diversity for species; these differences may provide the kind of genetic
              plasticity that allow adaptation to large  changes in environmental parameters,
              like temperature, salinity, and others.  While studies documenting changes in
              gene expression in relation to such environmental parameters are few, studies
              delineating the mechanisms responsible for  these changes are even fewer. The
              present research project will provide one of the very few detailed studies of
              the molecular mechanisms that differentially regulate the expression of one of
              these loci.   Dr. Powers and his colleagues take advantage of the well
              characterized model teleost, Fundulus heteroclitus, and an equally  well
              characterized gene system, i.e., the intracellular enzyme common to heart and
              other aerobic red muscle tissue, the lactate dehydrogenase-B gene (Ldh-B).  
              Because the teleost model is distributed along the east coast of North America,
              i.e., from Newfoundland to Florida, populations at the extremes of the species
              range are exposed to very different environmental temperatures.  Since fish are
              "cold blooded" animals, this temperature difference could have a profound
              effect on them, if there were no compensatory adaptive changes.  One such
              change already uncovered is a difference in gene expression of Ldh-B between
              fish from the cold waters of Maine and those from the warm waters of Florida. 
              The proposed research will delineate the detailed molecular  mechanisms
              underlying this difference in gene regulation of Ldh-B. Factors involved in the
              regulation of the Ldh-B gene will be identified and variation in these factors
              and their functional consequences will be examined using a wide variety of
              modern molecular techniques.  Identifying the molecular mechanisms underlying
              the variation in transcriptional regulation between populations of this model
              teleost, is a first important step  toward a detailed understanding of the
              evolution of gene regulation, in general.  In addition to addressing the basic
              research issue of the molecular mechanisms that underlie direct evolutionary
              change at the regulatory level, this research will also provide important
              fundamental information about the regulation of a critical enzyme system in
              intermediate metabolism that has not been previously determined. The new
              knowledge uncovered about the details of Ldh-B gene regulation will provide an
              important scientific basis for a better understanding of the regulation of
              genes encoding metabolic enzymes.  This knowledge can be used to provide
              insight about other organisms, including humans. This study will also provide
              gene regulation information that may eventually be useful in the genetic
              engineering of disease-resistant, fast growing, environmentally safe, fish for
              the aquaculture industry in the future.
