Title       : Risk Sensitive Control of Hybrid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9629866

Award Number: 9629866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thordur Runolfsson thordur@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9629866  Runolfsson    Dynamic systems that depend on a auxiliary parameter
              that characterizes the mode of operation of the system arise in many
              applications.  In some applications this parameter can be measured, in others
              it can be estimated and in still others it is completely unknown except for,
              perhaps, some apriori estimate about its size.  The methods that are chosen in
              incorporating the auxiliary parameter in the design of a control systems
              depends on the characteristic of the parameter.  If the parameter is
              deterministic and can be measured, gain scheduling methods are frequently
              employed in the design of real systems.  If the parameter is (deterministic)
              unknown and not measurable, robust design methods are usually used.  If, on the
              other hand, the parameter is stochastic with known statistic, stochastic
              methods are usually employed.  A particular case of this situation is the case
              when the auxiliary parameter can be modelled as finite state continuous time
              Markov chain.  Such systems arise in various applications and system
              formulations such as power systems, manufacturing systems and fault-tolerant
              control system.      In this research we study risk-sensitive control for
              hybrid systems with a Markovian jump parameter.  In particular, the objective
              of the control is to minimize the infinite-horizon risk-sensitive cost
              functional. Preliminary investigations show that the relationship between H(_
              control, linear differential games and risk-sensitive control does not hold for
              hybrid systems.  The main reason for this appears to be that the risk
              sensitivity cost functional measures the risk sensitivity of the system to
              transitions caused by the random jump parameter as well as the noise input. 
              The risk sensitivity of the cost functional to transitions induced by the jump
              parameter may be of a great value in the design of systems where it is desired
              to make the system performance as insensitive to the effects of the jump
              parameter as possible.  In this research we will develop risk sen sitive
              control of hybrid stochastic systems and study in detail both system theoretic
              properties and design techniques for such systems.  Furthermore, the benefits
              of the developed techniques will be evaluated for the applications described
              above.
