Title       : Desorption Ionization Studies Using Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2000  
File        : a9629966

Award Number: 9629966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $616000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Russell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              targets the  construction and characterization of a tandem instrument using ion
              cyclotron resonance with  ion mobility spectrometry and a time-of-flight mass
              spectrometer (ICR/IMS/TOF MS) for  the determination of the volumes of large
              biological molecules.  The ICR will select  particular mass-to-charge ions, the
              IMS will sort these particular mass-to-charge ions by  volume, and the TOF MS
              will detect these ions. Measurement of ion volumes for isomass  ions will
              provide fractional composition information about different structural forms of 
              these large biological molecules.  In this work Professor Russell and his
              students of the  Department of Chemistry at Texas A & M University will
              construct a new instrument that  will be used in conjunction with matrix
              assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) MS to  probe how phase parameters
              influence molecular conformation.  The goal of this project is to build and
              characterize a new tandem mass spectrometer that  can be used to determine the
              structure of large biological molecules.  Professor Russell and  his students
              at Texas A & M University will construct this instrument using principles of 
              ion cyclotron resonance, an ion mobility spectrometer, and a time-of-flight
              mass  spectrometer.  This instrument will then be coupled to a matrix assisted
              laser desorption  ionization source so that large biological molecules
              introduced into the gas phase from the  solid matrix can be then sorted and
              characterized according to their structure.  The aim is to  determine the
              affect of the solid matrix upon the structure of the biological molecules. 
              This  new instrument will be useful in a number of areas in biotechnology and
              in the chemical  sciences.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
