Title       : Multi-Species Metapopulation Dynamics: Experiments in a Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9629876

Award Number: 9629876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel Holyoak maholyoak@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan P. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629876  Holyoak  How spatial structure affects populations dynamics, and how
              habitat fragmentation affects biodiversity are two of the most important
              questions in modern ecology.  In metapopulations of single species, or sets of
              species that do not interact, subdivision of a habitat is expected to cause
              collapse to global ("metapopulation") extinction, such that species with the
              lowest dispersal rates will go extinct soonest.  In contrast, metapopulation
              models of interacting species predict that an intermediate degree of
              subdivision can promote coexistence of otherwise unstably interacting species. 
              The present study offers a unique opportunity to investigate how habitat
              subdivision influences the structure and persistence of species assemblages. 
              This work will be conducted in aquatic microcosms containing an assemblage of
              protozoans in which the pair-wise and multispecies interactions are known.  Two
              alternative hypotheses will be tested:  (1) Increased subdivision always
              decreases the persistence of all species, with the poorest dispersers becoming
              extinct soonest, and (2) Subdivision promotes the persistence of some or all
              species, at least up to some intermediate degree of subdivision; this would
              imply that interactions between species are important.  These hypotheses will
              be tested by measuring the persistence of a variety of species combinations in
              microcosms with different degrees of subdivision.  Dispersal rates will also be
              measured, so that the sequence in which species go extinct can be recorded. 
              The experiments will show whether the response of assemblages to habitat
              subdivision can be predicted from the dynamics of the particular species
              involved, versus the type and details of between-species interactions.  This
              study will demonstrate whether habitat fragmentation (subdivision) promotes
              biodiversity.  In particular, the experiments will test the parts of ecological
              theory that are most directly relevant to predicting the response of endangered
              species living in patchy habitats  to varying degrees of fragmentation.
