Title       : Drainage Complexity, Nekton Populations and Production Transfers Across a Marsh
               Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  2000   
File        : a9629621

Award Number: 9629621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720169             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald T. Kneib   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Kneib  9629621  Mechanisms by which materials are exchanged across boundaries
              within landscapes are crucial to ecosystem functioning, yet are not well
              understood. Flowing water is a powerful force that can shape spatial patterns
              within landscapes and provides a medium for the transport of material across
              the boundary between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Flooding events, which
              temporarily blur this boundary, enhance material fluxes not only through the
              hydraulic movement of passive particles but also via the active migrations of
              fishes and other aquatic organisms (nekton). Spatial patterns, such as those
              defined by the complexity of drainage channels that direct the flow of water
              through a landscape, may have profound effects on ecological processes that
              link components of the environment. Drainages of freshwater rivers and tidal
              marshes are similar in appearance, but marshes differ from freshwater lotic
              systems in that their drainage channels experience a bidirectional flow of
              tidal water and flood their banks more frequently -- as much as twice daily.
              These features of the marsh environment make it an attractive arena in which to
              explore the role of nekton in the movement of production between landscape
              elements, and to determine if these fluxes are affected by complexity in the
              structure of the landscape. The proposed research will show whether drainage
              patterns within a marsh landscape influence the transfer of intertidal
              production to the subtidal estuary via nekton populations. This will be
              accomplished by comparing species- and size-specific nekton densities, growth,
              movements, diets and tidal dynamics across a series of marsh sites representing
              a range of drainage patterns from simple to complex. The research is guided by
              a conceptual model that links spatial patterns in the landscape and temporal
              patterns of tidal dynamics with nekton life histories, movements and trophic
              interactions across a range of temporal and spatial scales. Findings will
              contribute needed empirical data to  the area of landscape ecology that deals
              with how spatial patterns affect ecological interactions across boundaries
              within landscapes. The research directly addresses a long-standing issue
              regarding the functional role of salt marshes in trophic support of adjacent
              estuarine and coastal ocean ecosystems. It also is directly applicable to
              questions involving the success or failure of current efforts to create or
              restore valued functions of coastal marshes that have been degraded or
              destroyed. Because marsh mitigation efforts frequently involve the alteration
              of tidal drainage patterns, an understanding of how drainage complexity relates
              to the role of marshes in providing trophic support for fisheries species is
              needed to insure success in recovering some of the lost functional value of
              these critical estuarine nurseries.
