Title       : WEAVE: Climatic Controls of Tropical Rainforest Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9629245

Award Number: 9629245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524572             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven F. Oberbauer oberbaue@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629245  Oberbauer  Tropical rain forests (IRF), the worlds most productive
              terrestrial ecosystems, are a major component  of the global carbon budget. The
              lack of a comprehensive understanding of the relation between climate and TRF
              productivity is a major impediment for realistically modeling the role of TRF
              in global carbon budgets under current and possible future climate scenarios.
              Recent results from fie1d work in Costa Rica, supported by other modeling
              studies, show that tree growth in TRF varies significantly on a year-to-year
              basis. This variation is not related to simple annual averages of climatic
              variables, and is therefore hypothesized to result from the interaction of
              these variables on a sub-annual scale. To determine the basis for this major
              ecosystem response will require a combination of controlled observations and
              modeling at physiologically relevant time scales, which is the goal of this
              project.  This research will address four central hypotheses:  1) Forest-level
              productivity in TRF varies substantially among years.  2) Variation in annual
              aboveground production is driven by the combined effects of subannual variation
              in radiation and temperature, with episodic soil moisture limitation.  3)
              Stand-level production in TRF varies significantly along within-forest edaphic
              gradients.  4) TRF productivity is significantly affected by variation in
              speeies composition.  To assess forest-level productivity and its relation to
              climate, annual production of tree biomass, fine litter, fine roots, and coarse
              wood debris will be measured. The study-plots will be replicated across the
              main topographic and edaphic gradients present in the old-growth TRF at the La
              Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. In parallel with the plots, tree
              functional responses to climatic factors will be determined at short and medium
              time scales for species of trees from different functional groups. Short-term
              studies will be used to assess the relation between whole-tree performance and
              local microclimate. Th e response functions developed from this work will be
              further tested and calibrated on a series of individuals measured monthly.
              These functional responses will then be used to parameterize a top down model
              of forest productivity, based on the relationship between canopy carbon gain
              and intercepted radiation.  Results of both the empirical studies of forest
              productivity and the forest-level process model, will potentially have wide
              applicability for understanding regional variations in TRF productivity,
              predicting responses to global climatic change, and for managing
              human-influenced tropical ecosystems.
