Title       : Physics of Two-Dimensional Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9629851

Award Number: 9629851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir J. Goldman goldman@insti.physics.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc    9629851 
              Goldman  This  experimental research project is concerned  with  the  most 
              fundamental  quantum  mechanical properties of  condensed  matter  probed in an
              elegant fashion at low temperature and high magnetic  field.  The  results  to 
              be obtained  are  of  interest  in  the  formulation and confirmation of
              advanced theory, which itself may  apply    to    other   phenomena   such   as
                high   temperature  superconductivity,   which   remain   poorly  
              understood.   More  specifically, the properties of the collective ground 
              states  of  two-dimensional and size-quantized systems of few   and  strongly 
              correlated  electrons will be studied. Particular topics  include  integer and
              fractional quantum Hall effects, the associated  one-  dimensional edge states,
              Wigner crystallization and single-charge  carrier   tunneling  phenomena. 
              Experimental   methods   include  magnetotransport,  thermal activation,
              nonlinear  transport,  and  resonant   and  single-particle  tunneling, 
              performed   at   low  temperature and high magnetic field.  %%%  This 
              experimental research project is concerned  with  the  most  fundamental 
              quantum  mechanical properties of  condensed  matter  probed in an elegant
              fashion at low temperature and high magnetic  field.  The  results  to  be
              obtained  are  of  interest  in  the  formulation and confirmation of advanced
              theory, which itself may  apply    to    other   phenomena   such   as   high  
              temperature  superconductivity,   which   remain   poorly   understood.   More 
              specifically, the properties of the collective ground  states  of 
              two-dimensional and size-quantized systems of few   and  strongly  correlated 
              electrons will be studied. Particular topics  include  integer and fractional
              quantum Hall effects, the associated  one-  dimensional edge states, Wigner
              crystallization and single-charge  carrier   tunneling  phenomena. 
              Experimental   methods   include  magnetotransport,  therm al activation,
              nonlinear  transport,  and  resonant   and  single-particle  tunneling, 
              performed   at   low  temperature and high magnetic field.  ***
