Title       : CAA: RNA Virus Molecular Evolution: Fitness, Competition, and Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9629440

Award Number: 9629440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn S. Smith m-smith@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Med Center
	      3901 Rainbow Boulevard
	      Kansas City, KS  66160    913/588-5238

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9222,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629440  Smith       Virus Molecular Evolution:  Fitness, Competition, and
              Recombination     In a natural infection of an animal by an RNA virus, the
              virus consists of a 'swarm' of virus with a distribution of related, but not
              identical genetic material.  A major cause of diversity in these viruses is
              that the mechanism for copying their genetic material is prone to copying
              errors.  In the special case of retroviruses, which contain two copies of their
              genetic material, a high rate of recombination during the copying of the RNA
              genome into DNA allows it to have some advantages proposed to be important for
              sexually reproducing organisms:  removing damage to the genetic material;
              increasing the rate of incorporation of new mutation into the population; and
              increasing variability by allowing new combinations of  mutations.   The goal
              of this proposal is to measure precisely several aspects of virus growth; to
              use these results to predict the ability of mutants to compete with each other
              in the presence or absence of a novel environment (specific chemical
              selection); and to examine recombination between viral genomes at these
              mutation sites.   A member of this group, HIV-1, possesses unique
              qualifications as a model system to study the molecular evolution of a RNA
              virus:  it is available as a clone for which the entire nucleotide sequence has
              been determined, and chemically-resistant mutants are known for which the exact
              mutation has been identified.  This allows the mutant and its isogenic
              wild-type strain, with exactly the same sequence except for the mutation in
              question, to be compared.  Likewise, competition of completely isogenic strains
              in the presence or absence of specific selection can be carried out.  The rate
              of evolution of this virus in nature is approximately 100,000 to one million
              time higher than that estimated for genes of higher organisms.  In addition,
              the half-life of this virus in nature is on the order of  2 days, such that
              large numbers of generations may be studied in a rela tively short time.  This
              model system therefore provides a unique opportunity to study questions in
              population biology that heretofore have been modeled theoretically, or in which
              sufficient data are difficult to obtain due to long generation times.
