Title       : Electronic Nonadiabaticity in Chemical Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1996  
File        : a9629385

Award Number: 9629385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Millard H. Alexander mha@mha-ibm4.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Millard H. Alexander of The University of Maryland at College Park and   Paul J.
              Dagdigian of Johns Hopkins University are supported by the   Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to continue their collaborative   studies of the
              dynamics of nonreactive collisions involving diatomic free   radicals, with an
              emphasis on electronically nonadiabatic processes.    They will study weakly
              bound complexes of the radicals and the   predissociation of these complexes in
              order to gain further information   on the underlying potential energy
              surfaces.  The theoretical effort   involves development and application of new
              methods for elucidating the   mechanism of molecular collisions and
              photodissociation, ab initio   calculation of the potential energy surfaces and
              nonadiabatic coupling   matrix elements, and full quantum calculations of cross
              sections and rate   constants and the determination of bend-stretch levels of
              weakly-bound   complexes.  The experimental effort involves the determination
              of   state-to-state inelastic cross sections for energy transfer processes and 
               the spectroscopy and dynamics of rare gas-diatomic van der Waals   complexes. 
                The dominant theme of their research is the influence of electronic   angular
              momentum and/or spin on inelastic energy transfer and   photodissociation. 
              During a collision, or during the breakup of a   molecule, the internal
              electronic angular momenta will couple with the   motion of the nuclei and
              hence influence product branching ratios and   inelastic propensities. 
              Therefore, a thorough understanding of this   coupling mechanism should
              ultimately lead to a better understanding of   how to optimize the desired
              products in chemical reactions.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
