Title       : RPG: Mapping Critical Determinants of AUF1-ARE Protein-RNA Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9629732

Award Number: 9629732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Belinda J. Wagner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9629732  Wagner  This proposal will study the RNA-protein interactions that are
              involved in mRNA turnover.  A+U-rich elements (ARE) in some mRNAs have been
              identified as markers for rapid degradation in cell-free systems.  A protein,
              AUF1, has been found to interact specifically with ARE regions.  The goal of
              this proposal is to identify polypeptide motifs within the AUF1 protein that
              are important for ARE-binding activity.  To identify polypeptide motifs that
              are critical for AUF1-ARE interaction, a powerful combination of mutagenesis
              and in vitro genetic selection will be employed.  First, linker insertion will
              be used to create a pool of AUF1 mutant coding sequences containing a
              substitution of 2-4 amino acids at numerous positions within the wild-type
              context.  Second, phage display will be used to select AUF1 polypeptides in
              vitro for their ability to bind ARE sequences.  Clones encoding non-binding
              mutants present in the input pool will be absent from pools selected for
              ARE-binding activity.  Regions critical for ARE-binding will be mapped by
              comparing the positions of linker insertions in the binding versus non-binding
              phage pools.  DNA isolated from input and selected phage pools can be
              efficiently screened because the inserted linker will contain a unique KpnI
              restriction site.  DNA samples will be subjected to unidirectional PCR using a
              radiolabeled primer that hybridizes to a vector-insert junction at the 5' or 3'
              end of  the insert.  Digestion of the resulting double-stranded DNA with KpnI
              followed by denaturing gel electrophoresis and autoradiography will yield a
              ladder of fragments whose length indicates the position of linker insertion. 
              Gaps in the ladder(s) of selected phage DNA will indicate positions where
              linker insertion affects ARE-binding activity.  The relative affinities of 
              selected vs. non-selected clones for ARE sequences will then be measured by
              bacterial expression, affinity purification of recombinant protein over Ni
              2+-agarose columns and gel shift assays.  The su ccessful completion of these
              experiments will map critical determinants of AUF1-ARE interaction.  Further,
              this study will establish a mutagenesis strategy that, when combined with phage
              display, can be of general use in the study of RNA binding protein-RNA
              interactions.  %%%  Degradation of mRNA is one mechanism of gene regulation. 
              An A+U-rich element (ARE) in certain mRNA species has been identified as one
              marker for mRNA degradation.  A protein that interacts with the ARE sequence
              (AUF1) has been cloned and characterized.  The goal of this proposal is to
              identify polypeptide motifs (domains of proteins) that are important for
              ARE-binding activity.  Experimental strategies will include mutagenesis
              experiments in which different amino acids will be substituted at different
              positions in the normal protein to identify relevant stretches of the protein,
              and phage display methods to select AUF1 polypeptides (fragments of the AUF1
              protein) for their ability to bind ARE sequences.  These methods in combination
              with other state-of-the-art approaches make it highly likely that important
              structural information on the determinants of AUF1-ARE interaction will be
              obtained.  ***
