Title       : Dissertation Research: Investigationn of Basalt Exploitation and Craft
               Production at Tres Zapotes, Mexico During the Formative Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9629727

Award Number: 9629727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Mark Kruszczynski will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in
              the Tres Zapotes region of Mexico, an area which lies in the heartland of
              prehistoric Olmec culture. The Olmec are best known for the production of
              massive stone heads - several tons in weight -sculpted from basalt boulders.
              Fieldwork in the region by Mr. Kruszczynski and others has also demonstrated
              the presence of many other basalt objects such as manos and metates used to
              grind food. Several potential raw material source areas and workshops have also
              been located. In his research, Mr. Kruszczynski will reconstruct the
              organization of the basalt production industry. He will address four questions:
              1. Was there substantial craft specialization in the production of both
              utilitarian and other basalt items? 2. How was the production organized? 3 Did
              this production serve to meet purely local needs, regional demand or
              pan-regional purposes? 4. If there was such craft specialization and regional
              export, what role did elites play in this production and export and how was
              this activity related to the overall development of Tres Zapotes? To accomplish
              these goals, Mr. Kruszczynski and colleagues will conduct a regional survey to
              locate both basalt outcrops and workshop areas.  In areas with dense remains
              both surface and subsurface samples will be collected and three workshop areas
              will be extensively excavated. Typological analysis of basalt objects as well
              as other cultural remains will be conducted and basalts will be examined by
              thin section to relate objects to source outcrop.  The Olmec civilization was
              the first of a series which arose in prehistoric Middle America and because of
              its early date represents a `pristine` or independent development. Therefore
              archaeologists have focused considerable attention on it. Researchers wish to
              learn what is responsible for the development of this society in a relatively
              inhospitable Mexican coastline region and several have hypothesized that it is
              related to the exploitation of local basalt resources. Manos and metates formed
              an essential subsistence item in Middle American since they were used to grind
              vegetable foods. However the scale and organization of Olmec basalt manufacture
              is still not understood and Mr. Kruszczynski's research should provide insight
              into this.  This work is important for several reasons. It will provide data on
              one of the New World's best known civilizations and this will be of interest to
              both scientists and the lay public. It will contribute to understanding the
              processes which lead to the growth of cultural complexity and assist in the
              training of a promising young scientist.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
