Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and
               Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9629222

Award Number: 9629222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kremer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1076,1187,9178,9296,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to Dr. Michael Kremer under the National Science
              Foundation's Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and Engineers
              Program (PECASE) formerly called the Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF)
              Program.  These programs were established at the request of the President of
              the United States to recognize and support the scholarly activities of some of
              the Nation's most outstanding science and engineering faculty members early in
              their careers.  Awards are intended to allow the scientists to undertake
              self-designed, innovative research and teaching projects, to establish research
              and teaching programs, and to pursue other academic related activities.  This
              award will allow the investigator to pursue his research interests in the
              analysis of economic growth and economic development.  He examines the factors
              that explain divergent growth rates among industrial economies, as well as the
              forces that determine standards of living and economic growth rates in
              developing nations.  He has developed highly creative and insightful models to
              describe the growth process, and done path-breaking work on the role of
              education and health policy in developing nations.  During the five year grant,
              he will continue study of both long-run economic growth and social policy in
              developing countries through various studies looking at production processes,
              the determinants of technological progress, the effects of educational inputs,
              and the effects of health policies on economic growth.  In the area of teaching
              and education, Dr. Kremer is revitalizing the field of development economics. 
              He will be designing new classes and reorganizing the coursework for students
              majoring in economics.  He is also developing new advanced undergraduate
              courses designed for students not majoring in economics who are interested in
              the politics, sociology, and the economic growth process in both industrial and
              developing nations.  Dr. Kremer is redefining the field of economic development
              and building bridges between academic work and applications in developing
              countries.  His research promises to continue to produce important insights
              into issues in labor economics, health economics, and the economics of
              education and development.  Also, this five year award will provide an
              opportunity for him to train undergraduate and graduate students in the
              important field of development economics.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
