Title       : CAA: Synthetic Signal Peptides: Probes of Molecular Interactions During
               Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9629740

Award Number: 9629740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42778              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra A. Kendall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9629740  Kendall    This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
              Engineers.  This project concerns how proteins are targeted to and transported
              across cell membranes.  In most cases, whether the membrane in question is the
              bacterial membrane, the eukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum, or the mitochondrial
              or chloroplast membrane, a unifying feature of such protein transport systems
              is the involvement of an amino-terminus signal peptide on the protein to be
              transported.  In the case of transport across the eukaryotic endoplasmic
              reticulum, the signal peptide interacts with a signal recognition particle
              (SRP) prior to the initiation of transport.   The proposed studies are aimed at
              elucidating the interaction between the signal peptide of a bacterial secreted
              protein and P48 (also called Ffh), the Escherischia coli homologue of the 54 kD
              protein of the mammalian signal recognition particle (SRP).  Like its mammalian
              counterpart, there is growing evidence that P48 plays a vital role in the
              initial stages of protein secretion through recognition of the signal peptide
              region of export-competent proteins.  This interaction will be investigated
              using a series of model synthetic signal peptides which vary systematically in
              their degree of hydrophobicity and which represent different levels of
              secretion competence in vivo.  These peptides will be chemically synthesized,
              purified, and characterized to verify their physical properties, including
              secondary structure.  A binding assay will be developed based on displacement
              of a radiolabeled peptide.  A Scatchard analysis will be used to determine the
              dissociation constant for the signal peptide-P48 pair under different
              conditions, including the association of 4.5S RNA and the present of various
              forms of guanine nucleotides.  Subsequently,, a chemical crosslinking approach
              will be used to map the location on P48 involved in the signal peptide
              interaction.  These studies will help in our understanding of early events in
              protein secretion in E. coli  and in the several other systems which have been
              found to have an SRP homologue.    ***
