Title       : Collaborative Research: Mammalian Phylogeography in Regional Warm Deserts of
               North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9629787

Award Number: 9629787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett R. Riddle riddle@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629787  RIDDLE  The recent appearance of extensive regions of aridlands in
              southwestern North America has led many to assume that pattersn of
              relationships among the plants and animals adapted to these regions are also
              recent.  Yet many of the species are ancient, having persisted in scattered dry
              sites for many millions of years.  In collaborative investigations, Brett R.
              Riddle and David J. Hafner, together with their collaborators, will investigate
              the possibility of ancient structure among the regional deserts and reconstruct
              the sequence of divergence of these deserts.  They will examine, by means of
              sequence divergences in mitochondrial DNA, the genetic relationships among four
              groups of rodents.  These rodents are currently restricted to regional warm
              deserts and neighboring chaparral or thornscrub habitats, and have fossil
              records that indicate their presence in the study area during the early
              development of the regional deserts, up to 5.5 million years ago. 
              Relationships among these rodents will serve as indicators of relationships
              among other animals and plants in the deserts.    Dr. RiddleOs portion of the
              collaboration will involve examination of the mitochondrial DNA of the groups
              of rodents, which include white-footed and pocket mice, antelope ground
              squirrels, and kangaroo rats.  These animals will be collected during field
              work in the Chihuahuan, Great Basin, San Joaquin, Sonoran, and Peninsular
              deserts of the southwestern United States and northern Mexico, as well as the
              neighboring California chaparral and Sinaloan thornscrub regions, and six
              islands off Baja California.  The island samples are expected to provide
              estimates of the geographic distribution of the rodents on the Baja California
              peninsular mainland ca. 5,000 years ago, when the islands were separated from
              the peninsula.  Gene sequences isolated from the mitochondrial DNAs will be
              sequenced, and the sequences used to construct phylogenetic trees that will
              test the degree of relationships among the animals.  The re search is expected
              to contribute to human understanding of how species, and the distribution of
              species, change over time, and especially how such changes in species may be
              influenced by changes in the topology and climate of the regions in which the
              species live.
