Title       : Cost-Benefits Tradeoffs Associated with Dimorphism in a Dioecious Plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9629774

Award Number: 9629774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynda F. Delph ldelph@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet L. Gehring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629774  Delph  Some flowering plant species have separate male and female
              individuals and are termed dioecious.  In addition to differing in their
              primary function (males produce pollen, whereas females produce seeds), males
              and females often exhibit sexual dimorphism in other traits (e.g., petal or
              leaf size, frequency of reproduction, and physiological traits).  As a
              consequence of producing fruit, females of most dioecious species invest more
              biomass in reproduction than do males.  This higher reproductive effort by
              females should mean that females will invest less in other structures than do
              males.  Consequently, they should have a higher "cost of reproduction" than
              males; i.e., females often exhibit relatively slower rates of growth and/or
              higher rates of mortality.    The investigators plan to study the dioecious
              plant, Silene latifolia, which does not appear to fit the pattern of females
              having a higher cost of reproduction.  In this species, males grow less
              vegetatively and die at a younger age than females, even though females of this
              species do invest relatively more biomass in reproductive structures.  In
              addition, in this species males produce 10 to 15 times more flowers than
              females, and male flowers are relatively small.  The investigators will test
              the hypothesis that production of many, small flowers imposes a high cost of
              reproduction for the males, and that this cost can not be predicted simply by
              measuring biomass (i.e., carbon) invested in reproductive structures, because
              physiological differences between the sexes may also exist.  The investigators
              will test this hypothesis in two ways: 1) by growing plants of known parentage
              in a common garden and greenhouse to observe whether variation in morphological
              and physiological traits is genetically based and correlated with flower
              number, and to observe relative longevity, and 2) by conducting an artificial
              selection experiment to reduce the magnitude of differences in flower size and
              number that exist between the sexes and obse rve whether certain physiological
              traits thought to be responsible for the cost of reproduction (such as
              respiration rate) also change with the change in the morphological traits.   
              This will be the first test in plants of a phenomenon that has been reported
              for some animals: that sexual selection (selection for obtaining many mates)
              imposes a survival cost on males.  Furthermore, the proposed research will
              contribute to our understanding of the evolution of sexual dimorphism in
              plants.
