Title       : Development and Selection in the Correlated Evolution of Breeding System, Life
               History, and Physiology in Clarkia xantiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1999  
File        : a9629086

Award Number: 9629086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica A. Geber mag9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629086   Geber  A very common evolutionary occurrence in flowering plants is
              the evolution of a self-pollinating breeding system from an outcrossing
              breeding system.  Unlike its outcrossing ancestor, the self-pollinating
              species, subspecies or variety does not depend on pollinator visitation for
              successful seed set.    This project addresses two questions.  First, what
              changes in the development of structures (such as flowers and leaves) and of
              whole plants have been responsible for the differences in  morphology and
              flowering time between a selfing taxon and its related outcrossing ancestor? 
              In particular, is small flower size and early flowering in the selfing taxon
              achieved by means of an accelerated rate development or a shorter duration of
              development. The second question is whether early maturation of structures and
              whole plants is adaptive in the marginal environments occupied by the selfing
              taxon.  Early maturation is postulated to be advantageous because environmental
              stress is often associated with a shorter growing season.   The proposed study
              focuses on a comparison of the outcrossing and self-pollinating subspecies of
              Clarkia xantiana (Onagraceae), a winter annual in which the selfing subspecies
              occurs in arid environments at the margin of the outcrosser's range.  Floral
              and vegetative plant development in the two subspecies will be examined. 
              Natural selection on developmental and morphological characters in experimental
              gardens will be measured along a rainfall gradient that spans a portion of the
              geographic range of the two subspecies.  Physiological differences between the
              subspecies and selection on physiology will also be examined, because
              physiology is an important determinant of plant growth under stress.  The
              significance of the project is that it addresses a little-studied aspect of a
              major evolutionary transition in plants, including the origin of new species. 
              In addition, by analyzing the roles of development and selection in the
              evolution of suites of characters, the  project addresses a fundamental issue
              in evolutionary biology:  why do traits evolve together?  Lastly, the project
              also addresses the nature of evolution in stressful environments, a topic that
              has acquired particular significance as habitats are facing the impacts of
              anthropogenic stresses and climate change.
