Title       : Career Advancement Award: Physiological Regulation of Sulfate Homeostasis:
               Development of Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9629470

Award Number: 9629470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn E. Morris memorris@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Dr. Morris's long-term research goal is to understand the regulation of
              sulfate homeostasis.  Inorganic sulfate is a physiological ion necessary for
              biosynthetic reactions especially important in growth and development, and for
              the biologic activity and detoxification of various compounds produced in the
              body.  Sulfated proteoglycans are components of mammalian cell membranes and
              tissues, and are part of the cell-recognition system necessary for cell
              differentiation.  Serum concentrations of sulfate increase in pregnancy and are
              higher in fetuses and young children than in adults, consistent with an
              increased physiological requirement for this anion during growth and
              development.  Capacity-limited renal reabsorption is of primary importance in
              the regulation of plasma concentrations of inorganic sulfate.  The mechanism(s)
              underlying these alterations in renal transport is not known.  However, the
              antibodies necessary to evaluate protein expression of the two renal
              sulfate-transport proteins are not available.  As well, no available cell line
              exhibits sulfate transport with characteristics similar to those observed in
              isolated kidney-cortex preparations.  Both of these tools are essential in
              order to evaluate the physiological regulation of sulfate reabsorption. 
              Therefore, Dr. Morris will (1) develop methods to quantitate mRNA for the
              sulfate anion-exchange protein (sat-1), (2) produce antibodies to determine
              protein expression for the renal brush-border membrane sodium-dependent
              cotransport protein (NaSi-1) and the renal basolateral membrane anion-exchange
              transport protein (sat-1) and to characterize the specificity of these
              antibodies, and (3) develop a primary cell-culture system of guinea-pig
              proximal-tubule cells and to characterize the uptake of sulfate and other
              endogenous substrates in these cultured cells.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
