Title       : Effects of Exotic Eradication on Ecosystem Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9629473

Award Number: 9629473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland A. Knapp knapp@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Orlando Sarnelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In alpine lakes of the Sierra Nevada, the widespread stocking of non-native
              trout has been implicated in the decline of amphibians and invertebrates.   The
              objectives of this project are to determine natural rates of recovery of these
              species after the eradication of exotic trout and the effect of trout
              introduction on the functioning of the lake ecosystem.  Recovery of frogs and
              invertebrates after trout removal will be studied by performing whole-lake
              experiments in which lakes from which trout are removed are compared to lakes
              with trout.  The investigators will also perform a broad-scale survey of Sierra
              lakes that vary in the length of time since trout populations have died out
              naturally.   Changes in ecosystem function will be estimated by measuring the
              relative contributions to overall lake productivity of algae found in the water
              column versus algae on substrate.      The introduction of exotic species has
              caused extinctions of native species and large changes in the functioning of
              ecosystems. Although the effects of exotic species introduction have been
              studied widely, quantitative studies of ecosystem recovery after exotic species
              eradication are exceedingly rare.  Such studies are essential to determine
              whether ecosystems typically return to their natural condition after the
              species are removed, and how long such recovery takes.  In addition, much can
              be learned about the natural process of community assembly from experimental
              study of exotic eradication.
