Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows Program (PFF/PECASE): Role of Electrostatic Forces
               in Protein Stability and Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9629047

Award Number: 9629047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn Gunner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1076,1187,9183,9296,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9629047  Gunner  Protein structures are determined by the protein's environment
              as well as its primary sequence.  Protein function often demands protein
              movement.  This can involve small, delocalized changes or may require several
              distinct, low energy protein states.  The relative energy of separable protein
              states is often determined by the concentration of ligand.  Binding the ligand
              can induce a change in binding affinity (e.g. hemoglobin (( O2), catalysis rate
              (e.g. cell surface receptors ( bound ligand), inter-protein association       
              (e.g. calmodulin ( Ca+2), or proton binding (photosynthetic reaction centers (
              electron transfer).  The objective of the research is to determine how binding
              of ligand or ion can modify the free energy of different structures, focusing
              on the binding of charged effectors such as phosphate, calcium, protons, and
              electrons.  The goal will then be to analyze the mechanism that controls
              vectorial proton transfer in three proteins whose structures have been solved
              to atomic resolution:  the cytochrome oxidase, the bc1 complex, and the proton
              ATPase.    Proteins are the group of biological molecules that carry out
              chemical reactions to transform our food to useful energy.  This energy is then
              used by different proteins in the organism to carry out work, such as building
              new molecules for cell growth.  The shape of the protein determines what it can
              do.  By changing the shape, a process can be turned on or off.  While proteins
              are far too complex to be analyzed completely with the basic laws of physics,
              computer modeling of proteins can be used to ask what forces in nature are the
              most important for making the structure that is seen.  In many proteins, when a
              small group is bound, it's structure changes between two distinct shapes.  The
              goal of this work is to explore how binding a charged group changes the
              structure.
