Title       : Dissertation Research: The Reconstruction and Revitalization of Tahitian Healing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9629981

Award Number: 9629981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11463              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn F. Sargent csargent@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the dissertation research of a cultural anthropologist from
              Southern Methodist University, studying how people in the developing world
              select medical treatments.  Most developing societies afford two ranges of
              choices for health services, traditional healing and biomedical treatment.  The
              project will observe and interview people in two Tahitian locations, Papeete
              (an urban center) and a rural village.  Using ethnographic techniques of
              participant observation and intensive interviews, as well as a census-sample of
              100 households in each area, and a `morbidity survey` of 30 households in each
              location who will be visited every 3 weeks to record cases of illness and
              treatment, the project will make a `cultural model` of how people select
              medical treatments for various illnesses; describe the Tahitian traditional
              healing system as it is evolving to incorporate modern biomedicine.  The
              student will test hypotheses that neither socioeconomic status nor urban-rural
              location govern medical treatment choice, but that religiosity and nationalist
              cultural feelings will predispose people towards traditional medicine.    This
              research is important because it will advance our understanding of a system of
              traditional medical treatment and explain its persistence and adaptation in the
              face of the alternative biomedical system.  Such tension between alternative
              medical systems is a fact of life in most countries of the world, and increases
              in our understanding of how and why people choose each for specific illness
              episodes will be valuable for health planners.  In addition this research
              increases or society's expertise about this important region of the world.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
