Title       : Research Planning Grant: Regulation of Corticostriatal Afferent Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9629466

Award Number: 9629466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura K. Nisenbaum nisenbaum@oracle.pnb.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The brains's basal ganglia are involved in the control of motor and cognitive
              functions.  The striatum, their primary input structure, receives excitatory,
              glutamatergic input from virtually the entire cortex.  The striatum is composed
              of two histochemically and connectionally distinct compartments, the patch (or
              striosome) and matrix regions.  In the adult rat, the cortical inputs to the
              striatum are segregated such that deep-layer cortical cells, particularly those
              from the pre-limbic areas, project primarily to the patch neurons, and
              superficial-layer cortical cells, particularly those from the agranular motor
              regions, project primarily to the matrix neurons.  The mechanisms by which
              different inputs from the cortex segregate into the patch and matrix
              compartments are not known.  The goal of this research planning grant is to
              provide a foundation for studying the mechanisms underlying the segregation of
              cortical afferents to the patch and matrix compartments within the mouse
              striatum.  To accomplish this goal, the developmental time course of the
              cortical inputs to the mouse striatum will be determined.  It is hypothesized
              that axons from mouse cortical neurons of the deep and superficial layers first
              project homogeneously throughout the striatum and only later restrict
              themselves to the patch and matrix compartments.  This hypothesis will be
              tested by using a fluorescent carbocyanine dye to trace cortical axons to the
              patch and matrix regions of the striatum in the developing and adult mouse. 
              The mouse will be used in these experiments to facilitate future studies
              employing genetic manipulation of the glutamate system.  These results will lay
              the foundation for a series of experiments investigating the overall hypothesis
              that glutamate, acting through NMDA receptors, influences the segregation of
              corticostriatal innervation into the patch and matrix compartments.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
