Title       : Theory of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9629987

Award Number: 9629987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Robert Schrieffer schrieff@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9629987  Schrieffer  Research will be conducted on the theory of strongly 
              correlated electron systems.  The field of strongly  correlated electrons has
              attracted a great deal of attention  from the physics and materials community
              since the discovery  in 1986 of  superconductivity at elevated temperatures. 
              Prior to this time, related phenomena were studied in  transition metal, rare
              earth and actinide compounds as well  as in magnetic alloys.  In contrast to
              the traditional  electronic band structure approach to solids, these  materials
              require one to include interelectronic  correlations in a fundamental manner. 
              In essence, these  systems involve the interplay of many coupled phase 
              transitions: metal-insulator, paramagnetic-  antiferromagnetic,
              normal-superconductor and various lattice  distortions.  This research involves
              an ongoing program  addressing how a microscopic theory of such materials can
              be  constructed which directly relates to experiment.    In particular, what is
              the nature of the ground state and  excitations, both spin and charge, in
              strongly correlated  materials?  In terms of these excitations, or more
              generally  spectral distributions, what is the effective pairing  potential
              which leads to superconductivity?  Why is the  pairing order parameter so
              anisotropic in these materials  compared to low temperature superconductors? 
              There has been  much debate whether spin and charge degrees of freedom are 
              separate excitations in two-dimensional systems, as they are  in one-dimension.
               These and related questions will be  studied using a variety of methods
              including the coherent  state spin functional integral approach, quantum Monte
              Carlo  and exact diagonalization of clusters.  With close contact  to
              experiment we hope to make significant progress in  understanding these novel
              and technologically important  materials.  In addition, we will study the
              dynamics of  electrons moving in space-and time-dependent magnetic  fields,
              both to enlarge the range of experiments on  material s curretly carried out in
              uniform static magnetic  fields and to develop methods to treat time-dependent 
              magnetic alloy problems encountered in the coherent state  spin functional
              integral method and its counterparts.  %%%  Theoretical research will be
              conducted on a variety of  materials problems involving electrons which
              strongly  interact.  These types of problems are relevant to many  materials of
              current technological interest such as the high  temperature superconductors. 
              Unfortunately, conventional  concepts and theoretical methods are not directly 
              applicable.  Thus, new concepts and methods need to be  developed to understand
              these materials.  The present grant  will focus on the development of new
              techniques and the  application of new concepts to this important class of 
              problems.  ***
