Title       : Taxonomic Monographic Study of Podostemum (Podostemaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9629767

Award Number: 9629767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179982             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Thomas Philbrick Philbirck@wcsu.ctstateu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western CT State Col
	      181 White Street
	      Danbury, CT  068106845    203/797-4000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629767  Philbrick   Among some of the poorest known groups of tropical plants
              are the "riverweeds" of the New and Old World, some 19 or so genera of the
              family Podostemaceae. Many of these flowering plants grow attached to rocks in
              swift-flowing streams and rapids in tropical regions, and can be locally
              abundant. They harbor invertebrates, larval fish, amphibians, algae, and
              aquatic mosses, and are likely important in tropical river ecosystem function.
              With their stereotyped, ribbon-leaf morphology and infrequent flowering and
              fruiting, they provide few characters upon which to construct a reliable
              classification. Problems with species identification thus hinder ecological
              research; analysis of biogeography and migration pathways is hampered by lack
              of knowledge of phylogeny. Dr. C. Thomas Philbrick of Western Connecticut State
              University with colleague Dr. Donald Les of the University of Connecticut will
              be collecting and studying riverweeds in Mexico and South America, with
              additional work in India on Old World taxa. The goal is to collect new material
              for critical taxonomic study of vegetative and reproductive features, and to
              supplement these with new molecular information from DNA sequencing. Another
              component of the project is a series of common-aquarium growth experiments, to
              factor environmental and genetic effects on morphology.   The inventory and
              documentation of tropical biodiversity remain priorities among taxonomists and
              evolutionists. The peculiar riverweeds of the angiosperm family Podostemaceae
              are the focus of modern monographic and phylogenetic research by Dr. Philbrick
              and Dr. Les, in collaboration with foreign colleagues in Mexico, South America,
              and India. An improved classification of these plants, with reliable means of
              species identification and a robust estimate of phylogenetic relationships,
              will advance understanding of their ecological roles and evolutionary
              histories.
