Title       : CAA: Cellular Imaging of Gap Junction Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9629285

Award Number: 9629285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gina E. Sosinsky gsosinsky@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9629285  Sosinsky    This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
              Engineers.  The project concerns gap junctions, which are gated membrane
              channels between paired cells in multicellular animals which allow for
              intercellular communication and exchange of small metabolites and ions.  The
              channels consist of two paired hexamers of the protein, connexin, with one
              hemichannel contributed from each cell of the pair.  The connexins are a family
              of related proteins with a common folding motif.  Different connexins can be
              found in the same tissue, and different connexins can be localized to the same
              gap junctional plaques (patches of membrane with abundant junctions). 
              Sometimes connexons composed of different connexins can dock together,
              presumably due to conservation of the extracellular domains of the proteins. 
              However, not all connexins can pair with other connexins, giving rise to
              selectivity between different connexins.  Gap junctions can be considered an
              example of a naturally occurring two dimensional quasi-crystal.  The packing
              and numbers of channels that pack in gap junctions are important factors in
              communication between two neighboring cells of a tissue.  The overall goal of
              this project is to image gap junction assemblies within whole cells. 
              Specifically, the aim is to spatially map the size, location and packing of gap
              junctions within cells.  This will involve immunocytochemical techniques,
              confocal microscopy and tomography, as well as advanced image analysis of the
              three-dimensional reconstructions to determine models of packing and
              organization.  The model system to be employed is the liver, because there is a
              great deal of background information available for connexin32 gap junctions in
              liver.  In addition, these techniques will be applied to patterns of expression
              of Cx26 in liver.  Subsequently, the methods and results developed with the
              liver tissue system will be applied to other tissue systems, such as heart
              tissue and Schwann cells.  ***
