Title       : Research Planning Grant: Lipid Transport During Embryonic Development: The Role
               of Apolipoproteins AI and E
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9629785

Award Number: 9629785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harshini V. de Silva hvdesilv@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The movement and redistribution of lipids among cells and tissues are
              essential for normal growth and development.  However, little information
              exists regarding lipid transport during mammalian embryogenesis where dynamic
              remodeling of tissues and systems occurs.  Post-birth, lipoproteins, abundant
              in interstitial fluid, blood, lymph and cerebrospinal fluid, transport
              water-insoluble lipids throughout the body for utilization and storage. 
              Apolipoproteins, the protein components of lipoproteins, are suited uniquely to
              the reorganization and transport of lipids.  Expression of several
              apolipoproteins, including apolipoprotein (apo) AI and apoE, has been observed
              during isolated stages of development.  However, their function(s) in
              embryogenesis have not been investigated.  Dr. de Silva will undertake two
              complementary approaches to investigate the role of apoE and apoAI in lipid
              transport and redistribution in the developing embryo.  A mouse model will be
              used because of well-characterized developmental stages and readily available
              apolipoprotein null mutants.  First, Dr. de Silva will describe and quantitate
              the apoE and apoAI mRNA expression by in-situ hybridization in staged embryos
              and compare these results to the protein distribution pattern obtained by
              immunocytochemistry.  She will also examine and quantitate the lipid-protein
              complexes secreted by staged mouse embryos.  The second approach is to evaluate
              the compensatory mechanisms that occur in double-knockout mice generated by
              homologous recombination that lack functional apoE and apoAI genes. Dr. de
              Silva will quantitate the lipids and proteins present in lipid-protein
              complexes in these null mutants to understand the role of other apolipoproteins
              (and proteins) in early lipid transport.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
