Title       : Research Planning Grant: Function and Structure of Brain Oxytocin Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9629667

Award Number: 9629667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Loretta M. Flanagan-Cato flanagan@psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The ovarian steroid hormones estradiol and progesterone are known to exert
              genomic effects on the hypothalamic ventromedial nucleus (VMN), which in turn
              promotes the display of sexually receptive behavior.  Oxytocin receptor (OTR)
              binding activity and transcripts are induced by estradiol in the VMN.  Central
              administration of exogenous OT facilitates female sexual behavior, but only in
              animals pretreated with both estradiol and progesterone.  Central antagonism of
              OTRs, however, blunts this behavior in animals given both estradiol and
              progesterone, without impairing the sexual behavior shown by animals primed
              with estradiol alone.  Thus, while estradiol is important for inducing OTRs,
              the effect of estradiol on sexual behavior appears to be independent of OT.  On
              the other hand, the effects of progesterone on sexual behavior seem to involve
              OT.  To further elucidate the biological basis for these steroid-hormone
              effects on behavior, it would be useful to examine the cellular functions of
              hypothalamic OTRs.  For example, the issue of whether or not increases in OTR
              binding activity are associated with concomitant increases in second-messenger
              production remains to be examined.  This is especially interesting, given that
              estradiol-induced OTRs appear to have little behavioral significance in the
              absence of progesterone.  In this regard, it would also be important to examine
              the post-receptor mechanisms associated with brain OTRs, and whether or not
              they too are regulated by gonadal steroid hormones.  Under this Research
              Planning Grant, methods will be established to investigate OT-induced
              second-messenger production in rat-brain membranes.  These preliminary studies
              will set the stage for future experiments designed to investigate the
              post-receptor consequences of steroid regulation of OTRs in the hypothalamus.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
