Title       : Collaborative: Mammalian Phylogeography in Regional Warm Deserts of North
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9629840

Award Number: 9629840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Hafner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Museum of Nat His Fdn
	      P. O. Box 7010
	      Albuquerque, NM  871047010    505/841-2889

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629840  HAFNER  The recent appearance of extensive regions of aridlands in
              southwestern North America has led many to assume that pattersn of
              relationships among the plants and animals adapted to these regions are also
              recent.  Yet many of the species are ancient, having persisted in scattered dry
              sites for many millions of years.  In collaborative investigations, David J.
              Hafner and Brett R. Riddle, together with their collaborators, will investigate
              the possibility of ancient structure among the regional deserts and reconstruct
              the sequence of divergence of these deserts.  They will examine, by means of
              sequence divergences in mitochondrial DNA, the genetic relationships among four
              groups of rodents.  These rodents are currently restricted to regional warm
              deserts and neighboring chaparral or thornscrub habitats, and have fossil
              records that indicate their presence in the study area during the early
              development of the regional deserts, up to 5.5 million years ago. 
              Relationships among these rodents will serve as indicators of relationships
              among other animals and plants in the deserts.    Dr. HafnerOs portion of the
              collaboration will involve collection and identification of the groups of
              rodents, which include white-footed and pocket mice, antelope ground squirrels,
              and kangaroo rats, targeted for examination of their mitochondrial DNA. 
              Expeditions will be made to up to 33 sites in the Chihuahuan, Great Basin, San
              Joaquin, Sonoran, and Peninsular deserts of the southwestern United States and
              northern Mexico, as well as the neighboring California chaparral and Sinaloan
              thornscrub regions, and six islands off Baja California.  The island samples
              are expected to provide estimates of the geographic distribution of the rodents
              on the Baja California peninsular mainland ca. 5,000 years ago, when the
              islands were separated from the peninsula.  Participants include Dr. Riddle and
              colleagues at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico and the Centro de
              Investigaciones Biologicas de Baja Californi a Sur.  The research is expected
              to contribute to human understanding of how species, and the distribution of
              species, change over time, and especially how such changes in species may be
              influenced by changes in the topology and climate of the regions in which the
              species live.
