Title       : (CAREER) Metals Transport in Transition Wetlands: Research and Education
               Development Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9629259

Award Number: 9629259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heidi M. Nepf hmnepf@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1325,1579,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9629259  Nept    The limnology and wetland research communities have recently
              selected metals transport as an area for priority research  (In The Freshwater
              Imperative,  Naiman et al. 1995).  This treaties calls attention to the need
              for transport models that can predict the short-and long-term fate of metals
              contamination in freshwater ecosystems.  Wetlands, an intrinsic part of most
              freshwater systems, have been observed to trap and store particulate metals,
              and thus can influence metals flux.  However, the specific factors which
              control this trapping and potential re-release are not yet fully understood. 
              In particular, the following questions still need to be clarified    What
              factors control the short-and long-term trapping of metals in wetland?  How
              does vegetation influence the trapping and shortage of metals?  How and when
              are major release or re-suspension events triggered?           The proposed
              project will address these questions through complementary field observation
              and modeling programs.  The results will strengthen the knowledge base needed
              to design and manage wetlands in order to alleviate the impact of metals
              contamination on freshwater systems.    The educational goals of this project
              emphasize the incorporation of environmental engineering case studies and
              current academic research into the undergraduate curriculum.  The first goal is
              to create case study instruction based on actual engineering problems drawn
              from the case files of local engineering firms.  The case study approach
              exposes student to the complexity of real systems, and demonstrates the
              relevance of the course material.  The second educational goal is to provide
              undergraduates with more opportunities to assist with and/or conduct their own
              field research.  Four field projects are proposed that can be conducted
              annually as an extension to existing undergraduate courses.  These hands-on
              research experiences will build physical intuition and creativity, as well as
              provide a forum for developing team-work skill s.  The field projects are
              designed to dovetail with the proposed academic research so that the
              undergraduates can draw from a larger research scheme to supplement their own
              observations.    The research and educational goals both emphasize the study
              and protection of freshwater systems.  The research program will focus on
              improving the prediction of metals transport and the remediation of metals
              contamination.  the teaching program will introduce undergraduates to the
              complex and interdisciplinary nature of wetland field study and environmental
              engineering design projects.
