Title       : Solid-State Reactions of Molecular Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9629994

Award Number: 9629994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Foxman foxman1@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9629994          Foxman        This research is focussed on the
              investigation of a broad range of solid-state reactants. First,  metal salts of
              unsaturated carboxylic acids will be exposed to ionizing radiation. By using 
              criteria established in previous studies, it will be possible to discover new
              types of  oligomerization and polymerization reactions. Crystallographic
              studies of reactants will aid in  the understanding of the geometrical and
              chemical mechanism associated with each process.  Parallel studies of the
              structures and thermal solid-state reactivity of amine:carboxylic acid 
              cocrystals will enhance understanding of chemospecific Michael addition
              reactions. A  proposed X-ray structural and topographic investigation of
              radiation-induced phase transitions  in copper carboxylate complexes will
              elucidate the role of strain and dislocations as a  twinned triclinic phase
              transforms to a monoclinic single crystal. Second, a series of  molecular
              solids ranging from cinnamic acids to acrylamide to metal acrylates will be 
              irradiated in the low-energy "tail" of the absorption band of the corresponding
              chromophore.  Based upon preliminary experiments, this research promises to
              produce single crystals of  dimers, oligomers and polymers. Similarly,
              solid-state condensation reactions in A:B  cocrystals, where A = an
              aminopyridine or hydroxypyridine and B = a substituted benzoyl  chloride, will
              provide valuable information on thermal reactions where an evolved gas (HCl) 
              is trapped, for example, by a pyridine acceptor. Such a process is expected to
              lead to a  solid-state reaction with a negligible change in unit-cell volume.
              Both of these processes will  provide the necessary guidelines for the
              production of highly ordered crystalline polymers.  Third, experiments, using
              synchrotron X-rays, in which solid metal salts are irradiated at  specific
              wavelengths near the absorption edge for the metal, promise to provide
              definitive  information about the detailed role of the metal in the radiat
              ion-induced oligomerization of  metal propynoates. The phenomenon of
              isomorphous substitution, where metals can be  substituted without changing the
              structure of the material, will be used in propynoate salts to  tailor their
              sensitivity to ionizing radiation, allowing the radiation sensitivity to be
              varied  over a wide range. Metal propynoates are thus excellent prospects for
              new applications  involving radiation dosimetry; experiments will be conducted
              to establish the useful  dosimetric ranges of these materials.   %%% 
              Solid-state reactions offer exceptional opportunities for chemospecific and
              stereospecific  synthesis, the production of single crystals of oligomers and
              polymers, and the discovery of  novel applications for new materials. In
              optimal cases, irradiation or thermolysis of crystals  can lead to unusual
              stereospecific intermolecular reactions that cannot be accomplished in 
              solution. The challenge lies in discovering new classes of materials capable of
              solid-state  reactivity, and in determining the principles which govern their
              behavior. A proper set of  objectives for a research program in this area must
              involve (a) the design, discovery and  characterization of new solid-state
              reactions, (b) the study and exploitation of new  phenomena discovered in the
              course of the research, (c) the design of new experiments which  will help to
              identify geometrical criteria and/or pathways for the reactivity of solids, and
              the  chemical and physical factors responsible for that reactivity, and (d) a
              search for applications  for either the reactants or the products associated
              with a solid-state reaction and/or phase  transition. In the past, this
              research has concentrated on the discovery of new solid-state  reactions to
              increase both the quality of the materials and the understanding of how basic 
              processes occur. Critical experiments are now designed to investigate a broad
              range of  solid-state reactants, and to firmly establish new applications for
              the new materials.
