Title       : Research Planning Grant: Comparative Actions of Somato- lactin, Prolactin, and
               Growth Hormone on Reproductive Function in Fundulus heteroclitus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9629665

Award Number: 9629665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stacia A. Sower                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Safford PI phone ext. 3512                      Safford@LU.Lincoln.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lincoln University
	      1570 Baltimore Pike
	      Lincoln University, PA  19352    215/932-8300

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Results from several studies suggest that somatolactin (SL), prolactin (PRL),
              and growth hormone (GH), structurally related proteins, are involved in some
              aspects of sexual maturation in fishes.  To investigate the physiological roles
              of SL, a model fish species is needed which has been extensively studied and
              can provide numerous animals and eggs for study.  The mummichog, Fundulus
              heteroclitus, is such a species, and Dr. Safford's preliminary research is
              designed to begin to develop it as a model for comparing the actions of SL,
              PRL, and GH.  The objectives of the preliminary project are (1) to determine if
              proteins of the appropriate molecular weights from F. heteroclitus pituitary
              extracts bind to antibodies against SL, PRL, and GH; (2) to determine if these
              immunoreactive proteins are found in the appropriate areas within the F.
              heteroclitus pituitary, and (3) to determine if the F. heteroclitus genome has
              gene sequences corresponding to conserved regions of fish SL.  The experiments
              for the follow-up project will focus on comparative actions of SL, PRL, and GH
              on reproductive function in F. heteroclitus, as more studies on SL focus on
              reproduction than on other processes and there is evidence from the literature
              that PRL and GH also have reproductive functions.  If these three hormones are
              shown to have some functions in F. heteroclitus, then SL, PRL, and GH will be
              cloned so that recombinant F. heteroclitus hormones.will be available for more
              detailed studies in a homologous system.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
