Title       : Density-Dependent Host Acceptance Behavior as a Possible Contributing Factor to
               the Population Dynamics of Insect Herbivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9629776

Award Number: 9629776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth F. Raffa raffa@entomology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629776  Raffa  Host plants can strongly affect insect population dynamics. 
              Eruptive species undergo order-of-magnitude changes, exhibit qualitatively
              different phases, and impact sustainable resource management.  This project
              will investigate interactions between population density and host acceptance
              behavior as a contributing factor to insect outbreaks.  Specifically,
              population density and behavior may exert mutually positive feedback.  This
              hypothesis will be tested using bark beetles, which are major mortality agents
              to conifers.  Local populations are usually limited to stressed trees, but
              under some conditions, they can kill almost all host trees regardless of prior
              vigor.  Underlying mechanisms by which bark beetles convert from endemic to
              outbreak densities are not well understood.  Several aspects of their plant
              relations suggest a link between density-mediated host selection behavior and
              numerical change:  1) Beetles locate stressed trees using chemical and other
              cues; 2) Once entered, their likelihood of success is affected by both host
              resistance and the number of beetles responding to pheromones:  Rapid
              concentration can collectively deplete host defense; 3) Field observations
              suggest different categories of trees may be selected during endemic and
              eruptive phases.  To test whether changes in host selection behavior influence
              population dynamics, one must first understand whether individual behavior
              changes with density.  This project will test three nonexclusive hypotheses:   
                 1) Individuals become less discriminating as they age or deplete energy; 2)
              Actions of other beetles, e.g. pheromones, raise repellent thresholds; 3)
              Selective pressures vary with population density.  These questions will be
              addressed using one eruptive and one non-eruptive species, the spruce beetle
              and pine engraver, respectively.  A common laboratory assay will evaluate the
              effects of age, repeated rejection, flight and lipid depletion, synthetic
              pheromones and the presence of other beetles, and popu lation phase and
              response to selection.  Bark beetles are responsible for severe economic damage
              to various conifer species.  Understanding sources of variability in bark
              beetle host acceptance behavior will improve the ability to manage sustainable
              forest ecosystems.
