Title       : RPG: Exploring the Evolutionary Consequences of Spatial Variation in Marine
               Plant-Herbivore Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9629714

Award Number: 9629714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary H. Ruckelshaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0312000   Population                              
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ruckelshaus  9629714    Marine organisms and communities are characterized by
              strong species interactions, and the intensity and character of these
              interactions can vary geographically, even when the same species are involved. 
              This research investigates the evolutionary consequences of spatially-varying
              species interactions, with the ultimate goal of quantifying the likelihood that
              coevolution has occurred between a marine plant and its herbivores.  The plant,
              Fucus distichus, inhabits rocky intertidal habitats and is widely  distributed
              geographically, extending from Alaska to southern California in the western
              part of its range.  Throughout this range, a number of herbivore species occur,
              including a number of littorine snails, an isopod, and possibly a small crab
              species.  In order to quantify spatial variation in herbivore intensity, the
              occurrence of the herbivores and the damage each species imposes on the plant
              will be quantified throughout the geographic range of F. distichus.  Next, the
              potential for the plant to respond to the selection pressures exerted by the
              herbivores will be quantified by estimating the size of an interbreeding
              population of plants using genetic markers.  If F. distichus individuals are
              interconnected by dispersal throughout much of their geographic range, then
              within-population spatial variation in herbivore intensity is not expected to
              result in local variation in response to herbivory on the part of the plant. 
              On the other hand, if F. distichus occurs in small, isolated populations,
              spatial variation in the presence of herbivores and the amount of damage they
              inflict may result in spatially heterogeneous responses of the plant and
              genetic divergence among populations.   Results from this research will begin
              to address the question of whether well-known spatial variation in marine
              species has evolutionary consequences.  Does spatial variation in species
              interactions observed in the sea result in a significantly heterogeneous
              selective environment?  Do long ran ge dispersal capabilities of marine
              organisms result in large interbreeding populations which "swamp out" the
              effects of local variation in species interactions?  Answers to these questions
              also will provide valuable data for conservation biologists, whose recent focus
              on conserving whole ecosystems requires data on the nature of species
              interactions in natural habitats.
