Title       : Systematic and Biological Studies of Balansieae (Ascomycetes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9629728

Award Number: 9629728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146583             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. White jwhite@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brandon S. Gaut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629728  White   A novel set of ecological interactions between grasses and the
              fungi that live inside them (endophytic fungi or endophytes) has been revealed
              over the last few years. In many cases the fungi appear to confer enhanced
              drought tolerance on their grass hosts. But the fungi also produce metabolites
              that may be toxic to grazing animals like cattle and others, which may lead to
              commercial losses. While ecological research continues on this interaction,
              taxonomic studies are also needed to improve understanding of the range and
              diversity of fungal species involved. Dr. James White at Rutgers University
              with local and foreign colleagues is studying the systematics and phylogeny of
              a major group of these fungal endophytes, placed in the tribe Balansieae of the
              ascomycete family Clavicipitaceae (the ergot group of fungi). Building on his
              previous work, he employs a broad array of methods to gather data on
              morphology, life history, mating compatibility, chromosome number, and
              gene-sequence diversity for samples of fungi collected in North and South
              America and Europe. One major complication, and challenge, in devising a
              reliable classification of these fungi is the widespread occurrence of asexual
              forms that persist for many generations, forms that have been given their own
              species and genus names. In a growing number of cases, because of research by
              Dr. White and others, these forms can now be linked with the sexually
              reproducing species from which they have been derived phylogenetically.
              Although traditional morphological and life-history studies have facilitated
              these kinds of linkages, new molecular data from mitochondrial and nuclear gene
              sequences are providing some of the strongest evidence on which robust
              classifications can be based.   New data from morphological studies, tests of
              mating compatibility under laboratory growth conditions, and DNA sequences of
              nuclear ribosomal genes will be integrated in analyses of biological diversity
              of the fungi that inhabit grass plants and oth er taxa, as "endophytes."
              Improved taxonomic understanding of these fungi will advance knowledge about
              their evolution and ecology.
