Title       : A Multi-Agent Approach to Feeder Reconfiguration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1997   
File        : a9629273

Award Number: 9629273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: VC Ramesh vcr@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Shahidehpour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9629273  Ramesh          As competition in the power industry intensifies, 
              distribution automation is sure to become increasingly attractive  both from
              the economic and from the security point of view.   Feeder reconfiguration for
              transformer and feeder load balancing  is an effective control action both for
              avoiding outages and for  faster restoration.  Load balancing is particularly
              important  today since many of these devices (transformers and feeders) have 
              been in service for many decades, in most cases.  Replacement  or even
              reinforcement of these aging facilities is difficult due  to the emphasis on
              cost reduction due to competition.  Load  balancing will help minimize failures
              of these devices thereby  preventing outages.          Feeder reconfiguration
              is a combinatorial optimization  problem with multiple conflicting objectives
              and nonlinear  constraints.  Not surprisingly, it continues to be an active 
              research area since many local optima exist and the aim is to  find the
              globally optimal Pareto surface that reflects the  tradeoff between the
              objectives.  So, we are not just looking for  one global optimum (which itself
              would be difficult to obtain  efficiently), but we are looking for many such
              solutions that  form the Pareto surface. Many solution approaches have been 
              suggested, but none appears to be totally up to the task.   Heuristics are
              inevitable; the question is: which ones?          Our proposed approach is
              based on this observation:  multiple heuristics and algorithms working together
              (in parallel)  might be more effective than any one of them working in 
              isolation.  We call each individual algorithm/heuristic, an  agent.  In this
              context, the term agent refers to the ability of  the individual algorithms to
              "cooperate" with each other,  enabling a synergistic enhancement of their
              isolated  capabilities.  Such an approach has proved useful for other 
              combinatorial optimization problems, including some in the power  systems area,
              and hence, there is reason to believe  that it will  be successful for feeder
              reconfiguration as well.  We propose to  demonstrate that our multi-agent
              approach is able to obtain the  Pareto set of optimal solutions for this
              problem with a  computational effort acceptable for online operational planning
               purposes (if not real-time).  We also propose to develop a  theoretical
              framework, based on Markov chains, for analyzing the  computational behavior of
              our multi-agent approach with a view  towards providing insights into its
              performance, its scalability  to large distribution systems, and its
              applicability to similar  combinatorial problems in power systems.         
              Three results are of particular interest: 1) the  "convergence" of the
              solutions in the memory towards the global  optimum as time progresses; 2) the
              decrease in the value of the  most important objective towards the global
              optimum as agents are  added one by one, 3) the "speedup" (decrease in overall
              execution  time) obtained as more processors are added (we expect a 
              near-linear speedup).          Finding the optimal feeder reconfiguration
              strategy is a  multi-objective combinatorial optimization problem that is 
              difficult to solve in the online environment.  The proposed  multi-agent
              approach has the potential of offering an effective  way of combining, various
              heuristics in a synergistic fashion so  as to obtain the Pareto surface for the
              conflicting objectives.   By improving both the overall solution quality  and
              the  computational time, the approach will significantly advance the 
              state-of-the-art in feeder reconfiguration research and practice.   Further,
              since the approach is inherently parallel, it can take  maximal advantage of
              the distributed computing platforms that are  becoming commonplace in
              distribution control centers.          The applicability of the multi-agent
              approach and of the  Markov chain model extend beyond the feeder
              reconfiguration  problem.  The utility of similar approaches to a couple of
              other  power system problems has been reported in  the literature.  This 
              proposed research will lay the foundations for a theoretical and  an
              experimental framework for answering the important question:  Given that there
              are various algorithms and heuristics for  solving this difficult problem, what
              is the best approach for  combining them such as to extract a better
              performance than any  of them is capable of, in isolation? Answering this
              question  successfully has fundamental value for advancing the practice of 
              solving combinatorial problems in the power industry.  ***
