Title       : CAREER: Molecular Analysis of Avian Breeding Ecology: A Research and Education
               Program in Molecular Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9629422

Award Number: 9629422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Webster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                    PI: 
              Webster  PROPOSAL NUMBER:  9629422    The  recent  application  of  molecular 
              genetic  techniques   to  ecological  studies  has  yielded  important 
              insights  and  some  surprising results.  One example is the recent application
              of DNA  profiling analyses to studies of avian mating systems, that  have 
              shown  that many young are sired by males other than their social  father 
              (i.e., the male in attendance at the nest).  Such  extra-  pair fertilizations
              call into question a basic assumption of many  models in behavioral ecology;
              i.e., reproductive fidelity between  mated  pairs.   Although  several  studies
               have  addressed   the  selective benefits that females might receive by
              copulating  with  extra-pair  males,  relatively few have examined  the 
              ecological  conditions that lead some females, but not others, to  engage  in 
              such  copulations.  At  the core of the career  development  plan  proposed
              here is a four-year research project designed to examine  the  ecological 
              basis of extra-pair copulations  in  a  socially  monogamous  passerine,  the 
              black-throated  blue  warbler.   The  primary  objective  of this research
              project is  to  discriminate  among  four hypotheses to explain female
              reproductive strategies.  This  objective  will  be  achieved by  using 
              molecular  genetic  techniques,   in   combination  with   observations   of  
              marked  individuals and experimental field manipulations, to examine  the 
              ecological and social factors thought to affect female  behavior.  Multilocus
              DNA profiling and PCR-amplification of SSR  loci  will  be  used  to identify
              young sired by extra-pair males  and  their  sires, and experimental field
              manipulations will be used to  test  for  associations among territory quality,
              male genetic  quality,  female  settlement, male behaviors and extra-pair
              fertilizations.  In  addition,  these  data  will also  be  used  to  achieve 
              two  secondary  objectives: (1) the selectiv e benefits  of  extra-pair 
              copulations  to females in this population will be  examined  and  (2) 
              extra-pair  sires  will  be  identified  to  determine  true  reproductive 
              success.   Thus, this study  will  yield  a  better  understanding of the
              ecological causes and consequences of extra-  pair copulations, as well as a
              better understanding of how sexual  selection operates in socially monogamous
              species.        Although  molecular biology techniques have  revolutionized 
              almost  every discipline in biology, only recent have  they  been  applied  to 
              ecological research.  This career  development  plan  proposes an education
              program in molecular exology that will meet  this need in the training of
              graduate and undergraduate students.  The  education  program consists of:  (1)
               a  lecture  course  in  exological  genetics, (2) a lab course in  this 
              subject,  (3)  a  molecular  ecology  journal  club,  (4)  direct  supervision 
               of  students   conducting  research  in  molecular   ecology.    This 
              education  program will be closely integrated with  the  proposed  research
              program.
