Title       : Causes and Consequences of Seasonal Changes in the Transparency of Lakes to
               Ultraviolet Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a9629639

Award Number: 9629639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Carol Johnston                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $719617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Morris dpm2@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Moeller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Hargreaves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig E. Williamson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Morris  9629639    The attenuation of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) within the
              water column of aquatic ecosystems varies strongly as a function of dissolved
              organic compounds that absorb ultraviolet wavelengths. This attenuation allows
              many organisms that are quite sensitive to ultraviolet radiation to persist in
              the plankton community though they may be inhibited in various ways near the
              surface. Among lakes, there is great variability in attenuation of ultraviolet
              radiation, which the investigators have successfully modeled as a simple
              function of dissolved organic carbon concentration. This model does not
              adequately explain large seasonal variations within lakes, however. The primary
              objective of the proposed research is to partition wavelength-specific
              attenuation coefficients into contributions from water, dissolved compounds,
              and particulate matter; and then to model seasonal changes in attenuation from
              changes in these components as driven by the dynamic interaction between
              ultraviolet irradiance and in situ photooxidation of dissolved organic carbon
              (i.e. to less absorptive compounds and to carbon dioxide)- The most significant
              feature of this interaction is a positive feedback operating during late spring
              and early summer, when increasing solar irradiance, decreasing attenuation
              coefficients. and shallow thermal stratification cause high ultraviolet
              exposure of organisms in the epilimnia of clear lakes. The work represents a
              novel season-by-season integration of incident ultraviolet radiation into the
              organic carbon cycling of lakes, including quantitative tests of: (1)
              photooxidation rates as predictors of seasonal changes in ultraviolet
              attenuation, 2) algal excretion and zooplankton grazing as UV-sensitive sources
              of UV-absorbing dissolved organic matter, (3) UVR-catalyzed increase in
              availability of dissolved organic carbon substrates for bacterial growth as a
              mitigation of direct negative effects of UVR on bacteria, and 4) seasonal
              adaptations in the phytoplankton community as mitiga tions to direct UVR
              photoinhibition of primary productivity.  Studies will be performed in small
              lakes on the Pocono Plateau of northeastern Pennsylvania, where differences in
              hydrology and land use have created a wide range of previously characterized
              limnological conditions. All studies are focused on a highly UV-transparent
              lake where the potential for direct biological effects is greatest. Most
              studies will contrast conditions in this lake with those in a slightly humic
              lake, where UVR photooxidation rates -- though high in absolute units -- leave
              enough residual UVR attenuation in midsummer to preclude most direct negative
              effects of ultraviolet radiation. Sampling for attenuation coefficients and
              dissolved and particulate matter will be 1-2 times per month throughout 2 full
              years in three lakes, adding a third slightly humic, eutrophic lake with
              seasonally high algal populations. Less frequent measurements of
              photooxidation, primary productivity, and UVR effects on bacteria and algal
              excretion will utilize quartz bottles exposed to natural solar radiation at the
              lake surface or at depth. Ultraviolet radiation will be measured continuously
              above, and periodically within, the lakes with multi-waveband radiometers in
              order to reconstruct spectral irradiance. Results from the study will
              contribute new and fundamental insights into the role of ultraviolet radiation
              as an ecological regulatory factor that were not attainable until the recent
              commercial availability of these instruments .
