Title       : RUI: Experimental Investigation of Ecological and Genetic Correlates of
               Parthenogenetic and Reproduction in a Fresh Water Snail
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9629287

Award Number: 9629287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Johnson SGJOHNSO@UNO.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629287  Johnson    One of the outstanding problems in biology today is why
              sexual reproduction is so common in many organisms when there appear to be
              considerable costs to sexual reproduction relative to alternatives like
              parthenogenetic reproduction (individuals develop from unfertilized eggs).  Of
              the many hypotheses developed to explain the widespread maintenance of sexual
              reproduction in many organisms, the parasite theory appears to be the most
              plausible and testable.  According to the parasite theory, sexual reproduction
              is favored over parthenogenetic reproduction in hosts under high risk of
              parasitism because sexual offspring may be less susceptible to infection by
              parasites.  Parthenogenesis should be favored when there is minimal risk of
              parasitism.  Parthenogens may, however, suffer high levels of parasitism if
              parasites recolonize parthenogenetic populations with limited genetic
              variation.  Field and laboratory experiments will be undertaken to distinguish
              among the causes of higher levels of parasitic flatworms in parthenogenetic
              population of the North American freshwater snail, Campeloma decisum. 
              Parthenogenesis may be favored due to sperm limitation caused by a trematode
              worm or, alternatively, parthenogens may have had an advantage colonizing lakes
              and rivers after glaciers receded.  High parasitism results from lack of
              genetic variation in asexual populations.  Field and laboratory experiments
              will test the prediction from the parasite theory that sexual individuals
              should experience lower levels of infection and greater variation in infection
              relative to parthenogenetic individuals.    The research outlined above should
              provide important insights into how epidemic diseases spread in organisms with
              limited amounts of genetic variation.  Two important groups of organisms that
              may have limited genetic variation are inbred lines of agricultural crops and
              small populations of endangered plants and animals.
