Title       : Experimental Testing and Modeling Analysis of Regulation in a Host-Parasitoid
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9629316

Award Number: 9629316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Murdoch murdoch@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629316  Murdoch  Control of California red scale, a pest of citrus, by the
              parasitoid wasp, Aphytis, is one of the most spectacularly successful examples
              of biological control.  Scale are kept at very low densities, and populations
              are remarkably constant in abundance and dynamically stable.  The goal of this
              project is to explain the co-occurrence of severe pest suppression and dynamic
              stability, which is contrary to expectations based on simple standard
              mathematical models of such systems.  Prior research has narrowed the potential
              explanations to only a few, using a combination of observations and experiments
              in the field and laboratory to investigate mechanisms, and the development of
              detailed mathematical models that incorporate these mechanisms.  The remaining
              mechanisms include (1) various behavioral responses of Aphytis to individual
              properties of scale and scale density, (2) a density-dependent increase in the
              rate at which Aphytis kill previously-laid parasitoid eggs and (3) small-scale
              spatial heterogeneity in the vulnerability of scale to attack by Aphytis.  The
              primary approach to testing these hypotheses involves a large field experiment.
               Grapefruit trees will be individually caged and the density of scale on the
              trees increased 10-fold in one set of trees, 50-fold in a second set and left
              at ambient density in a third set.  It is expected that, through time, the
              scale densities on higher-density trees will converge to those on
              ambient-density trees.  The hypothesis will be tested by monitoring various
              system responses as this "density convergence" occurs.  Small-scale experiments
              carried out concurrently inside cages will focus on attack responses of
              Aphytis.  The hypotheses will also be tested by comparing the results of
              different versions of a detailed mathematical model of the system that include
              or omit the various mechanisms.  This research has wide-ranging implications
              for ecological theory.  It will also contribute to understanding of biological
              control and to the ability  to use it more broadly and effectively.
