Title       : RUI: Impacts of Sediment Deposition on Wetland Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1998  
File        : a9629363

Award Number: 9629363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37830              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Owen owencr@fpc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin Pierce College
	      
	      Rindge, NH  03461    603/899-5111

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629363  Owen  This project will address the impacts of sediment deposition on
              the functions of non-tidal freshwater wetlands. Non-point source pollution such
              as stormwater runoff is often directed into wetland areas, sometimes resulting
              in changes in water quality and hydrology of the wetland. Although this
              stormwater may contain many types of pollutants, the focus of this stage of
              research is on the physical impacts of sediments in stormwater runoff on
              wetland processes. Sediment from construction sites, parking lots, roads, and
              farms may alter the ecological processes of wetlands. Wetlands are recognized
              for their ability to filter out sediments and improve water quality, however,
              there may be some point at which so much sediment is deposited in the wetland
              that the wetland is degraded, and its ability to perform some or all of its
              ecological functions is diminished. The general hypothesis of this study is
              that sediment deposited in a wetland will alter the wetland soil's natural
              characteristics such as capillarity, porosity and hydraulic conductivity.
              Highly organic soil is often very porous in the top layers, and as a result may
              be open to settling and compaction by sediment deposited in runoff; if the
              results of this sediment deposition is a significant change in soil moisture
              retention, hydraulic conductivity or other soil characteristics, then water
              flow and biological processes in the wetland may be altered. The ultimate goal
              of the study is to identify sustainable loads of sediment for a wetland. Here
              the term sustainable is used to mean the level of sediment that the wetland can
              receive without significantly altering its ability to perform its other
              functions besides sediment filtration, such as providing wildlife habitat,
              biodiversity, flood storage, streamflow maintenance and groundwater recharge or
              discharge.
