Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and
               Engineers (PFF/PECASE): Atomistic-Level Studies of Complex Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9629135

Award Number: 9629135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. De Pablo depablo@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1076,1187,9161,9181,9296,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9629135    In recent years, much progress has been made in theory
              behind molecular simulations; it is important to recognize, however, that
              available methods are still in their infancy and that much more work will be
              necessary before large scale problems can be addresses.  I am currently
              developing further the theory behind molecular simulations and implementing
              novel simulation methods for the study of macromolecules.  I am particularly
              interested in applying such methods to investigate equilibrium structural and
              thermodynamic properties of complex macromolecules in confined geometrics, as
              in porous media, surfaces or as in model biological membranes.  I am also
              applying such methods to study phase equilibria for both concentrated and
              dilute polymer solutions, and to investigate at a microscopic level the
              rheological properties of polymer  melts in simple flows.  These simulations
              have provided a fundamental understanding of these systems at the atomic level,
              thereby leading to improved theoretical models and novel engineering
              applications.    We are currently investigating the mechanisms through which
              complex, articulated molecules diffuse in fluids and in random media.  To this
              end, I have developed strochastic methods that try to mimic the motion of
              flexible molecules through such media.  For several models systems, comparison
              of the results of the stochastic approach to those of non-equilibrium dynamic
              simulations have been favorable.    We have also found that mixtures of
              cryoprotectants can act in a synergetic manner to form improved and unique
              cryoprotectants.  We have developed molecular models that describe
              quantitatively these findings, thereby providing much needed guidelines for the
              selection and design of new cryoprotectant systems.  Our work in this area will
              have an impact not only in the preservation of living systems, but also in that
                of pharmaceutical products.  One of our goals is that of designing
              room-temperature glasses for long-term storage of proteins and  enzymes.  If
              that goal is achieved, it will be possible, for example, to store vaccines at
              room temperature for extended periods of time, thereby facilitating use and
              distribution in underdeveloped areas where refrigeration is a problem.    A
              college education must comprise the following elements:  fundamental
              principles, realistic applications, experimentation, self motivation and
              independent research.  These elements are not unique to engineering
              disciplines; they are essential components of any complete educational program.
               More than ever, with modern technology and communication systems it is
              possible to incorporate all of  these aspects of education into our
              undergraduate and graduate curricula.  I am committed to doing so not only in
              the department of chemical engineering but also at a campus-wide level.
