Title       : Photophysics of Photosynthetic Systems and their Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9629862

Award Number: 9629862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Mauzerall mauzera@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9629862  Mauzerall  The recently developed method of pulsed, wide-band, time 
              resolved photoacoustics will be used to determine the  thermodynamic properties
              of transient species in  photosynthesis and photoinitiated electron transfer 
              reactions.  This method determines the enthalpy and volume  changes in these
              reactions.  Given that the free energy of  many of these reactions are known,
              the entropy can be  calculated.  The charge seperation in the initial 
              photoreactions causes volume changes dominated by  electrostriction, which is
              directly related to the  dielectric response of the system.  This is a critical
               parameter in electron transfer reactions.  The measured  enthalpy also
              provides a direct measure of the thermodynamic  efficiency of the system.  A
              longer term objective is to  determine the enthalpy and volume changes of the
              individual  steps in the cycle of oxygen formation.  %%%  Photosynthesis is an
              efficient system that converts sunlight  into  chemical energy which supports
              life on earth.  The  understanding of this system is a major goal of much 
              research.  To achieve this goal it is necessary to have  detailed knowledge of
              both the kinetics, i.e. how fast do  the steps in the process happen, and the
              thermodynamics,  i.e., what are their energetics or efficiencies.  The past 
              decades have produced major progress in the first area. This  work is aimed at
              producing the required progress in the  energetics area using the new
              photoacoustic methodology.  A  practical application of this research will be
              development  of rapid unambiguous assays  of photosynthetic  efficiency. 
              Calculations of oceanic productivity depend critically on  photosynthetic
              efficiency.  It is also possible that the  photoacoustic methodology could be
              used in the field to  determine photosynthetic efficiency and water content of 
              leaves.  ***
