Title       : Resonant-Cavity Photodetectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9629636

Award Number: 9629636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe Campbell jcc@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9629636  Campbell  The objectives of this research program will be two fold:    
              1) to build on previous work in the avalanche photodiodes (APD)  photodetectors
              to develop a realistic model that can be used as a tool to  facilitate device
              design and optimization and to conduct a systematic  experimental study of the
              critical structural parameters, including the  bandedge discontinuities, the
              widths of the barrier and well regions, and  the composition profile of the
              barrier layers. Tight coupling between the  simulation and experimental work is
              a strength of this program and will  provide the feedback necessary for
              understanding and developing these  technologically important photodetectors.  
               2) It is also the objective of this proposed research to realize new 
              photodetectors that utilize novel resonantcavity structures to achieve 
              enhanced performance relative to conventional photodetectors.  A crucial 
              aspect to achieving these novel photodetectors is a fundamental  understanding
              of the physical effects that determine their performance. For  example, the
              resonantcavity approach has been successfully extended to  avalanche
              photodiodes. However, there are aspects to the impact ionization  process in
              this type of structure that are not well understood.   The  resonant-cavity
              structure can provide several performance advantages, one  of which is that the
              tradeoff between responsivity/bandwidth that is  inherent to conventional PIN
              photodiodes structures can be circumvented.  For the typical normal-incidence
              photodetector, a wide bandwidth  necessitates a thin absorption layer which, in
              turn, results in low quantum  efficiency. The resonant-cavity structure, on the
              other hand, effectively  decouples the responsivity from the transit-time
              component of the bandwidth  because the optical signal makes multiple passes
              across the thin absorbing  layer inside the microcavity. For example, it has
              been demonstrated with  Si-based resonant-cavity photodiodes that a 10x
              increase in bandwidth can  be achieve  without sacrificing quantum efficiency.
              In addition, the narrow  spectral response of these photodetectors may be used
              to advantage for  applications such as wavelength-division multiplexing. For
              example, high Q  cavities can provide an integrated filtering function.  ***
