Title       : Developing Statistical Indicators To Monitor the Condition of Undergraduate
               Mathematics Education: A Feasibility Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9629932

Award Number: 9629932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $626594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Travers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9629932  Travers        This project will carry out a feasibility study to
              produce a national set of statistical indicators for monitoring the condition
              of the first two years of undergraduate mathematics. This work is based on an
              ongoing project, Undergraduate Mathematics Education Indicators (UGMEI), of the
              Grants Board of the American Educational Research Association (AERA) to develop
              a conceptual framework for indicators of undergraduate mathematics. The UGMEI
              Project now under way is being carried out under the guidance of a Steering
              Committee, chaired by the proposer, Travers, and a national panel of
              mathematicians and mathematics educators. It is expected that me indicators
              that are developed by the proposed project will be useful in helping to monitor
              possible effects of various reform initiatives in undergraduate mathematics
              education, including the NSF calculus reform program.    The feasibility study
              will develop a large set (approximately 200) of statistical indicators of
              undergraduate mathematics education, approximately 50 in each of four
              categories: curriculum and instruction; student outcomes and assessment;
              student participation; and institutional/departmental factors. I Development of
              the indicators will take place in the mathematics departments at each of three
              sites: a research university; a comprehensive state university and a community
              college.    Each of the sites will conduct its own data collection, analysis
              and reporting, as well as take part in the cross-institutional data collection
              activities. The overall coordinating unit, directed by the proposer, will
              produce a data dictionary and archive, a technical report on the data
              collection activities, a popularized (glossy) report suitable for publication
              by a professional organization such as the Mathematical Association of America
              (MAA), a handbook for departmental administrators on how to carry out such a
              data collection and analysis activity, as well as 2-3 newsletter articles for
              use by professional organizations.  A continuous update of the progress of the
              project will also be provided at the Project's Web Site, linked with the Home
              Page of the University of Illinois Office for Mathematics, Science and
              Technology Education.
