Title       : PFF/PECASE: Engineering Systems for Integrated Nucleic Acid Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9629038

Award Number: 9629038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Burke dtburke@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1076,1187,9184,9296,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    The research plan will develop novel engineering systems for  genetic
              (DNA) analysis. The work will use silicon microfabrication  technology to
              assemble complex, integrated, DNA biochemical analysis  devices. The silicon
              fabrication resources created for the  microprocessor industry have the
              potential to make DNA analysis systems  that are inexpensive, robust, and
              miniaturized. Examples of a few of  the scientific fields that may benefit from
              these devices include: (i)  multigenic trait analysis, (ii) infectious disease
              diagnostics, (iii)  agricultural genetics, and (iv) the Human Diversity
              Program.    Specific c Aims      The biochemical and electrophoretic
              manipulations for DNA  genotyping and sequencing are well characterized, but
              have not been  assembled into a simple automated processing system. On the
              basis of on  established methods, the proposed effort will develop the 
              electrophoretic, detection, and control components of a fully  integrated
              technology for DNA sequencing. The use of silicon  photolithographic
              fabrication techniques will allow components to be  compatible, readily
              assembled as a single device, and inexpensive to  mass produce. The planned
              work will complement and extend existing  efforts in the lab to construct
              silicon devices for DNA genotyping.    Microfabricated sequencing devices will
              be developed with the following  experimental plan:  1. Construction of a
              miniature high resolution electrophoresis system.  Existing electrophoresis
              technology is able to 
              sizefractionatesequencingreactions800basepairsandgreaterusing gels  50-100 m
              thick and 50 cm long. The lab will duplicate these results  using silicon
              micromachined 5-100 m diameter channels. Beginning with  short (I cm length)
              channels, the channel length and detector  resolution will gradually be
              increased. For longer channels (> 5 cm),  folded columns will be used. The
              necessary gel channels, DNA detectors,  and controllers will be designed,
              fabricated, and tested. 2. Fluidic  and electronic integration of t he
              sequencing system. Template  preparation, biochemical reactions, and
              electrophoresis systems will be  integrated on a single device using silicon
              microfabricated components.  Integration of electronic components (detector,
              heaters, liquid  detectors, and temperature sensors) should allow the
              construction of a  self-contained sequencing system. Interconnections with
              external  fluidics and circuitry will be developed.  3. Elimination of
              sequencing bottlenecks using intelligent systems. The  proposed system of
              integrated fluid-handling, electrophoresis,  detector, and circuitry components
              allows feedback and decision-making  directly within the device.
              Information-based processing will be used  to reduce both the systemic and
              random errors for each sequencing  sample. Sequencing strategies will be tested
              for improved  reproducibility, error-detection, length of readable data, and 
              compatibility with existing sequencing; protocols.    Research description.    
               The initial proposed device will contain several components: liquid  injection
              ports, self-pumping channels based upon surface-force  gradient phenomena,
              thermally-isolated reaction (PCR) chambers,  decision split points, and gel
              electrophoresis channels. Next to, and  underneath, these components are the
              system's electronic detectors and  controlling circuitry. Within the system a
              purified DNA sample is  injected, moved to a specific location, and the
              enzymatic sequencing  reactions are performed. A portion of the sequencing
              product is  isolated and sent to a preliminary electrophoresis gel for
              screening.  Using the preliminary information, sequence data acquisition can be
               optimized by dividing the remaining product between electrophoresis  gels with
              different resolution characteristics.      Increasingly complex devices can be
              assembled from the individual  components and basic functional modules
              described above. The initial  components do not perform any preliminary
              template handling, and  consequently well characterized template must  be used
              as starting  material. The proposed work will start from the basic DNA
              sequencing  reaction and gel electrophoresis system and work "back" through the
               sample processing stream. Since the production of high-quality template  is
              one of the current difficulties in "on-site" DNA sequencing,  development of
              integral template synthesis will be essential.  Eventually, it is anticipated
              that the entire processing stream will be  incorporated onto the device, with
              all steps included within the  silicon-fabricated environment. In the limit,
              this will eliminate  process bottlenecks, since each sample will have its own
              dedicated  series of instruments.      Using silicon micromachining techniques,
              it may be possible to  design and build reaction and separation units that are
              impractical to  build by any other techniques. For example, silicon fabrication
              can  construct an electrophoresis chamber with hundreds of DNA detectors  along
              its length for the same cost as constructing a chamber with only  one sensor.
              The same technology that makes transistors in integrated  circuits inexpensive
              will allow these complicated, integrated systems  to be produced for a fraction
              of larger-scale equivalents. This work  will integrate proven biochemical
              technology with the existing  technology for micromachining and
              microelectronics to produce a  sequencing system that is fast, accurate, and
              cheap. A broad range of  disciplinary knowledge, including nucleic acid
              biochemistry, silicon  fabrication, circuit and sensor design bioseparations,
              and surface  chemistry will be essential to completing the project. Therefore, 
              research will continue to take advantage of established faculty  collaborations
              in Chemical Engineering (Dr. Mark Burns) and Electrical  Engineering (Dr.
              Carlos Mastrangelo), but will occur primarily within  my laboratory group.
