Title       : Multi-Scale Interactions in the Lake Induced Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1998   
File        : a9629343

Award Number: 9629343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes Verlinde verlinde@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene E. Clothiaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9629343  Verlinde        Much of the energy that drives atmospheric circulations
               is obtained through exchanges of heat, moisture, and momentum  with the
              surface.  Lake-effect events, where cold air masses  are rapidly modified over
              the Great Lakes, are excellent  natural laboratories for studying these
              exchanges. The Lake-  Induced Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) is a multiple- 
              Principal Investigator  project which seeks to use this  natural laboratory to
              determine how boundary layer growth  processes are controlled by mesoscale
              boundary layer  convective structures and how the modified boundary layer 
              effects the production of precipitation and the larger scale   meteorological
              conditions         The Principal Investigator will use a variety of in  situ
              and remote measurements to attack the following  objectives:          Determine
              the extent to which mesoscale circulations modulate     the entrainment
              processes at the top of the boundary layer;       Determine if entrainment
              occurs through engulfment associated     with large-eddy circulations n the
              boundary layer or through     small-scale interfacial mixing and determine
              sensitivity of     the processes to large and mesoscale conditions.      
              Determine the impact of entrainment events on the drop size     distribution at
              cloud top.          These objectives will be accomplished by: Compiling a 
              statistical data base of the spatial extent of entrainment  events; The
              identification of cloud-top entrainment processes  through analysis of radar
              derived vertical layer profiles;  Categorizing the statistical data base
              according to large-,  meso- and cloud-scale conditions; Case studies of the 
              microphysical impact of entrainment events.        The final products of the
              study will be a composite  two-dimensional reflectivity and vertical velocity
              structure   of a mesoscale band, with corresponding cloud-scale and 
              cross-inversion turbulence intensity, and several  descriptions of detailed
              case studies.  These will provide a   better quantitativ e physical
              understanding of the interaction  between these different scales of motion. 
              ***
