Title       : Relationships of Nearctic and Palearctic Black Flies (Diptera: Simuliidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9629456

Award Number: 9629456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Adler padler@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629456  ADLER   Black flies (Insecta: Diptera: Simuliidae) are an abundant
              taxon in running water ecosystems, and in recent years they have come to play a
              prominent role in ecological investigations.  Oddly and unfortunately, research
              on black flies has always been conducted separately in the Nearctic and
              Palearctic Regions, resulting in independent descriptions and interpretations
              of faunas and relationships, as well as different classification systems.  This
              research project will address that problem by focusing on a synthesis of  the
              relationships of Nearctic and Palearctic black flies.  Specific objectives are
              to 1) screen Palearctic nominal species of the subgenus Simulium for sibling
              species, 2) test for conspecificity between selected Nearctic and Palearctic
              populations, and 3) develop a phylogeny for Nearctic and Palearctic members of
              the genus Simulium.   These objectives will be accomplished by a combined
              cytogenetic, morphological and ecological analysis of Palearctic black flies
              and comparisons with Nearctic black flies.  Results of this research will
              provide the first comprehensive analysis of  evolutionary relationships of
              black flies between two zoogeographic regions, reveal unrecognized, hidden
              species (sibling species), provide a powerful predictive framework for further
              studies on the biology of the world black flies, and foster international
              cooperation toward understanding a part of the global biota.   This award will
              support the training of a graduate student in the specialized techniques of
              cytogenetic methods of study in which Dr. Adler is a pioneering expert for
              black flies.  Black flies, with their severe and painful bites, are well known
              for their disruptive effects on the use of recreational areas throughout this
              country; they also transmit both human and animal diseases.  Despite these
              negative attributes, their larvae are also important components of food webs in
              aquatic ecosystems and they have been utilized as indicators in studies of
              water quality.  This research  project will clarify relationships between North
              American and European species of black flies as a needed background for studies
              of their biology and advance our knowledge of this aspect of insect
              biodiversity.
