Title       : Rates of DNA Sequence Change on Avian Chromosomes: A Test of the Replicative
               Division Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9629462

Award Number: 9629462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Quinn tquinn@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629462  QUINN  Evidence that DNA or protein sequences change at a steady rate
              through time was presented in the early 1960s, and now comprises the rationale
              for using amounts of sequence divergence to estimate how long ago species pairs
              diverged from each other.  This has become known as the "molecular clock". 
              Just how steady that rate is has been a matter of considerable debate.  In
              particular, there has been recent interest in what the "motor" is that
              determines the rate at which the clock "ticks".  One hypothesis is that DNA
              mutation occurs primarily during replication and that the rate is determined by
              number of rounds of replication encountered by germ line cell lineages per unit
              of time.  This may explain why, for instance, mice evolve more quickly than
              humans at the sequence level.  If this hypothesis is correct, then DNA within
              chromosomes that are passed on primarily through male or primarily through
              female vertebrate lineages should evolve at different rates because females use
              fewer numbers of rounds of replication in the production of gametes than do
              males.  While this trend has been observed in mammals, other interpretations of
              the meaning of this result are possible.  In this study, Thomas W. Quinn will
              compare rates of DNA sequence change within the W, Z and autosomal chromosomes
              in birds.  Molecular techniques will be used to identify and sequence
              comparable DNA sequences found on the W and at least one other chromosome.  The
              rate of change in these sequences will be measured and compared with the
              predicted result, that sequences on the W chromosome will show fewer changes
              than comparable sequences on other chromosomes.  This is an important addition
              to mammalian studies because there is a female-specific chromosome in birds
              rather than a male-specific chromosome as in mammals.  The bird study system
              presents an opportunity to test the hypothesis of the dependence of DNA
              mutation rate on frequency of DNA replication, in a case where rate differences
              between various chromosomes  are predicted to be different in direction and
              magnitude from those found on mammalian chromosomes.
