Title       : MPRF: Effects of Ethnicity on Information Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9629789

Award Number: 9629789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. White paul.white@m.cc.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9283,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9629789   White   Social psychological research on persuasive communications  
              generally shows that message quality determines persuasive   impact when the
              message recipient is both motivated and able   to process message content.  In
              the absence of either   motivation or ability, persuasion is often determined
              by   extra-message factors such as source expertise or source   attractiveness,
              but not typically by message quality.    Recent research has shown that White
              college students who   ordinarily would not be motivated to scrutinize a
              persuasive   message nevertheless engage in deeper processing of message  
              content if the source is described as a Black or Hispanic   person, or if the
              message is about members of those ethnic   groups.  These effects suggest that
              source or target factors   can moderate the likelihood of message elaboration. 
              It is   hypothesized that the observed increase in scrutiny of such   messages
              occurs because most people hold ambivalent   attitudes toward members of
              certain ethnic groups other than   their own.  The proposed research
              investigateq these   effects, focusing on the underlying cognitive processes
              that   produce them and on variables that moderate the effect.  A  
              reaction-time procedure, similar to that used in research on   stereotyping,
              will be developed to better understand how   people respond to questions about
              their attitudes and to   measure the amount of time people spend reading
              specific   parts of a persuasive communication.   %%%   Research in social
              psychology has shown that characteristics   of the source of a persuasive
              communication (such as a   person's attractiveness) can influence the
              persuasive   impact, independently of message quality.  This is most   likely
              to occur when the recipient of a persuasive   communication is either not able
              or not motivated to   scrutinize message content.  Recent research has shown
              that   White college students who ordinarily would not be motivated   to
              scrutinize a persuasive message nevertheless do engag e in   deeper
              consideration if the source of the message is   described as Black or Hispanic,
              or if the message is about   members of those ethnic groups.  It is
              hypothesized that the   observed increase in students' scrutiny of such
              messages   occurs because of ambivalent attitudes held toward members   of
              certain ethnic groups.  The proposed research   investigates these effects,
              focusing on the underlying   cognitive processes that produce them and on
              variables that   increase or decrease the effect.  A reaction-time procedure,  
              similar to that used in research on stereotyping, will be   developed to better
              understand how people respond to   questions about their attitudes and to
              measure the amount of   time people spend reading specific parts of a
              persuasive   communication.  The research has the potential to shed new   light
              on how different ethnic groups respond to each other,   ultimately contributing
              to theory and research on intergroup   relations.   ***
