Title       : Mutational Effects on Quantitative Traits of Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9629457

Award Number: 9629457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth G. Shaw shaw@superb.ecology.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9629457  Shaw  Spontaneous mutation is the ultimate source of genetic variation
              which is the basis for evolutionary divergence due to selection and drift.
              Theory concerning the evolutionary consequences of spontaneous mutation in
              genes affecting quantitative traits of multicellular organisms has been well
              developed over the past 20 years. This work has revealed that inference of the
              evolutionary consequences of mutation depends on detailed information,
              including the rate of introduction of variation due to mutation, per genome
              mutation rates, the distribution of mutational effects, and gene action of
              mutant allele. Mutation rate derived from the occurrence of readily detectable
              effects ('visible mutations') have been documented for many traits. These,
              however, likely underestimate rates of evolutionarily significant mutation
              because they fail to account for mutations of small effect. Empirical studies,
              most focusing on Drosophila melanogaster, have provided evidence concerning
              aspects of mutations affecting quantitative traits, and for some of these
              aspects consensus is gradually emerging. The few available studies on other
              organisms have tended to be limited in scope. In particular, very little
              information is available from plants, though they offer a clear experimental
              advantage for studies of mutation in that seeds representing distinct
              generations can be stored for eventual simultaneous rearing in a common
              environment. The experiments proposed here are designed to estimate the
              properties of mutations affecting quantitative traits in the annual crucifer,
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  This study will employ lines of A. thaliana that have
              previously been advanced from a single founder through 17 generations. The
              proposed experiments will assay variation among lines derived from a common
              founder and also among progenies resulting from formal genetic crosses among
              lines.  The major goals of this study are: (1 ) to infer distributions of
              mutational affects, (2) to assess the mode of inheritance of newly  arising
              mutations, and (3) to infer the parameters of gene action, including dominance,
              epistasis, and pleiotropy.
