Title       : Research Planning Grant: Structure and Function of SignatureWhistles of Adult
               Female Bottlenose Dolphins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9629528

Award Number: 9629528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laela S. Sayigh SAYIGHL@UNCWIL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Bottlenose dolphins produce a variety of sounds, although most research on
              dolphin communication has focused on their individually distinctive signature
              whistles.  Development of these whistles is a complex and variable process that
              involves learning.  The signature whistle usually develops within the first
              year of life, and then appears to remain stable for many years.  However, adult
              females tend to produce whistles with greater bandwidth and frequency
              modulation than do younger animals.  Dr. Sayigh will attempt to document
              quantitatively this apparent occurrence of vocal modification in adult
              bottlenose dolphins.  She also will study the functional role (if any) that
              such modification may play in the natural communication system of these
              animals.  Selection may have favored any modification of the signature whistle
              that facilitates mother-offspring recognition, given the large investment by
              dolphin mothers in their offspring.  To quantify the apparent age difference in
              signature-whistle structure, Dr. Sayigh will utilize a large library of
              whistles recorded from dolphins during temporary-capture-and-release projects
              in Sarasota, Florida.  Whistles will be analyzed using quantitative techniques
              of acoustic and statistical analysis, including the acoustic-feature-extraction
              program ACOUSTAT.  Playback experiments will be conducted in Sarasota to test
              whether or not synthetic whistles with contours similar to those of the
              mothers' whistles but with greater bandwidth and frequency modulation are more
              salient to young dolphins than are the actual whistles of the mothers.  The
              quantitative-analysis techniques that Dr. Sayigh learns during this work will
              be used in future research on whistle development in free-ranging bottlenose
              dolphins.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
