Title       : Career Advancement Award: The Role of Multiple Cellulases in Arabidopsis Plant
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9629760

Award Number: 9629760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elena del Campillo cd84@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The plant cell wall is modified as part of many physiological processes.  One
              of the most important classes of enzymes for cell-wall catabolism is
              cellulases.  Dr. del Campillo will attempt to identify the cellulase genes
              involved in floral-organ abscission (shedding from the parent body) in
              Arabidopsis and to determine their function in the process.  She will test the
              hypothesis that abscission of each floral organ, i.e., petal, sepal and stamen,
              is sequential and coordinated, and that abscission of each organ requires
              several types of enzymes and principally involves two classes of cellulases. 
              One class is up-regulated and involved in the production of intertissue
              signal(s) and/or in the actual cell-cell separation process, and another class
              is down-regulated and involved in cell-wall maintenance.  Dr. del Campillo will
              search for and select up-regulated and down-regulated cellulase genes.  She
              then will analyze the spatial and temporal expression of these genes by in situ
              hybridization experiments to be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Zhongchi
              Liu in the Department of Plant Biology at the University of Maryland, College
              Park.  She also will analyze the pattern of cellulase expression in
              abscission-defective mutants isolated by Dr. Anthony Bleecker in the Botany
              Department of the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Dr. del Campillo will
              attempt to identify Arabidopsis T-DNA insertional mutants with impaired
              expression in the selected cellulase genes.  Once cellulase mutants are
              obtained for both the up- and down-regulated abscission cellulases, crosses
              will be attempted in order to obtain stable double mutants, to determine if
              coordinated gene expression of both cellulases is required for abscission.  All
              abscission experiments will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Bleecker.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
