Title       : SUPERB (Summer Undergraduate Program of Engineering Research at Berkeley): REU
               Proposal in Bioengineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9820375

Award Number: 9820375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vicki B. Booker                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Casey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice M. Agogino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820375
University of California-Berkeley
James Casey

The Department of
              Bioengineering and the Center for Underrepresented Engineering Students (CUES)
              in the College of Engineering at the University of California at Berkeley
              request REU (research Experiences for Undergraduates) support for SUPERB
              (Summer Undergraduate Program of Engineering Research at Berkeley) in the
              research area of Bioengineering.  We are asking for support of nine students
              per year for five years.  The NSF funding will be highly leveraged with campus,
              College, and industry support.  Recruiting will be targeted to underrepresent
              engineering students.  The College of Engineering and the SUPERB program have a
              strong record of undergraduate participation in research and diversity
              projects.  The proposed research focus in Bioengineering was chosen, as it is
              has become increasingly popular with undergraduate students and has become
              strategically important to academia and industry.  SUPERB offers outstanding
              students the opportunity to gain research experience by working with a faculty
              member and graduate student on a research project in their area of interest. 
              By providing students who have had limited or no opportunity to participate in
              stimulating research and faculty and graduate student mentoring, SUPERB
              addresses a critical area that affects their decision to attend graduate
              school.  Each student is carefully matched with a faculty member, who is a
              member of the Bioengineering program and a graduate student mentor.  In
              addition to the research work, weekly academic support meetings are held for
              SUPERB students.  These meetings provide information on graduate school
              admissions and fellowships, time management; research methodology;
              presentations and technical report presentations and other related topics.  The
              program culminates in a daylong forum in which students make oral presentations
              to their faculty and graduate student mentors, and other members of the
              engineering community.  Written reports are required by each student and
              compiled for dissemination.

