Title       : Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Other Probabilistic Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9820885

Award Number: 9820885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sampath Kannan kannan@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9820885
Kannan, S.

This project pursues research in a number of areas
              with the common theme being the design and analysis of probabilistic
              algorithms.

Maximum Likelihood Estimation is a classical and important
              technique in statistics.  Specific versions of this general problem are defined
              by considering specific stochastic processes that generate the sample data. 
              This problem has generally been thought to be computationally intractable for
              most interesting applications.  However, this project seeks to create very
              efficient algorithms that find approximately the most likely solutions. 
              Specifically such algorithms are sought for important problems in computational
              biology such as phylogeny construction and multiple alignment.  The project
              also investigates similar approaches for the problem of inferring Belief Nets,
              a popular stochastic model in artificial intelligence.

The problem of
              contention is concerned with message transmission over an ethernet where
              messages arrive according to a stochastic process such as a Poisson process. 
              Each message uses a protocol whereby it attempts to transmit itself at each
              time instant with some probability.

A central open question is whether there
              is a protocol that ensures that the system is "stable."  The PI proved that the
              answer is "no" for a number of "natural" classes of protocols and is working on
              extending these proofs to all acknowledgement-based protocols.  Finally, the
              project investigate new models and problems in the area of program checking
              which again involves the design of randomized algorithms. 

