Title       : Magnetization Dynamics and Orbital Magnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9820230

Award Number: 9820230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Zangwill andrew.zangwill@physics.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9820230
Zangwill
This award supports education and research on magnetism and
              magnetic moments at surfaces.  Magnetic moments near monoatomic step edges
              experience anisotropy to spin rotation that differs from that of moments in the
              bulk.  This difference is a consequence of the spin-orbit interaction at step
              edges where low site symmetry leads to poor quenching of atomic orbital angular
              momentum.   The proposed theoretical work focuses on two aspects of surface
              magnetism: macroscopic (classical) and microscopic (quantum). 
At the
              classical level, the PI proposes to study the magnetization dynamics of
              spatially inhomogeneous magnetic states that are impressed on an island
              morphology typical of as-grown epitaxial films.   Conjugate gradient and spin
              relaxation numerical methods will be used to simulate an appropriate Heisenberg
              block spin model with magnetostatics, global four-fold anisotropy, and local
              two-fold anisotropy at island edges.  One focus is on the mobility of a Neel
              magnetic domain wall as a function of the step anisotropy strength and the
              complexity of the growth morphology.  A second problem is the formation of and
              dynamics of XY-type vortex states rendered locally stable by the step edge
              anisotropy. 
At the quantum level, the PI will study orbital-magnetism using
              current-density functional theory, which is needed to capture the vestiges of
              Hund's rules that must occur at step edges due to incomplete angular momentum
              quenching.  Simple models will be studied at first, but a long-term goal is to
              develop a practical method for performing calculations on more sophisticated
              and realistic models.  Another aim of this work is to seek a formal basis for
              the phenomenological Maxwell equations for matter. 
%%%
This award is for
              research and education in the theory of magnetism at surfaces of materials. 
              The PI's approach involves the study of surface phenomena involving magnetism
              on long length scales and the development of new computational methods to
              determine how magnetism arises from atoms in microscopic environments with
              lower symmetry than that for an atom in the bulk.  Such environments occur at
              surfaces and these techniques may contribute to the development of future
              nanotechnologies.
***


