Title       : Composite Coatings from Layered Precursors: Material Structure Modeling and
               Thermal Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9820790

Award Number: 9820790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Y. Wong pwong@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charalabos C. Doumanidis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Teiichi Ando  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This research project  introduces and analyzes new technologies for
              deposition of metal-matrix composite (MMC) coatings. The coating methods use
              novel custom precursor materials, made of the matrix metal in sheets and the
              reinforcing phase in powder or fiber form, rolled or twisted in a layered
              sandwich sheet or particulate-cored wire.  Aluminum or nickel aluminide matrix
              is used in combination with alumina and/or silicon carbide reinforcement
              materials.  The precursors are fused on the substrate by a robotically scanned
              laser-beam or plasma-arc welding source, under infrared thermal monitoring and
              feedback regulating the heat and mass deposition variables.  Thus, the desired
              coating structure is obtained by real-time, adaptive control of the temperature
              distribution to reference thermal conditions, obtained experimentally and coded
              in a material database.  
     The advantages of this technology include
              implementation simplicity, elimination of chamber enclosures, coating geometry
              and structure control, better adhesion, high material yield and low cost. 
              Diversified applications in the aerospace, automotive, appliance and
              metalworking industry are explored in cooperation with Honda R&D and Starmet
              Corp.  The collaborative research between Tufts and Northeastern University,
              combining complementary resources and expertise, also extends to educational
              activities, including a new Thermal Manufacturing course and a joint
              Tufts/Northeastern Thermal Material Processing Seminar.

