Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Large Deformation Dynamics and Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9820069

Award Number: 9820069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed A. Shabana shabana@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9820069
Shabana

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              project, in the area of dynamics and control of flexible multibody systems, by
              Dr. Ahmed Shabana, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
              Illinois, Chicago, Illinois and Dr. Said M. Megahed, Department of Mechanical
              Design and Production, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.  The focus of the
              research will be on the non-linear coupling between the small and large
              deformation and the control forces in complex multibody systems by utilizing a
              full finite element representation instead of the usual modal description.  The
              absolute coordinate formulation proposed by Shabana will be used for the motion
              control of flexible systems.  A full finite element representation is obtained
              for the flexible body in terms of global displacement and slope coordinates.
              Using this representation, small and large deformation problems can be easily
              solved, and the phenomena of wave propagation of the control forces in very
              flexible multibody components can be efficiently captured.  Because of the
              nature of the coordinates used in this new procedure, the development of a
              systematic methodology for the control of very flexible structures that undergo
              large rotations becomes feasible.  The coupling between the control forces and
              the large deformation in high-speed very flexible systems will be examined
              analytically and numerically, and the potential of using piezo-electric
              actuators in the control of these structures where inertial effects are
              significant will be explored.  Flexible robotic systems will be used as the
              primary application in this research.
 
Scope:  This award will allow a US
              scientist and a US graduate student to collaborate with Egyptian scientists in
              a project that deals with an important problem.   The US scientist, Dr. Shabana
              will carry out the modeling, while Dr. Megahed will conduct the experimental
              study at Cairo University.  The PIs have an outstanding track record and their
              areas of expertise are well matched.  Dr. Shabana has extensive expertise in
              the study of multi-body dynamical systems, and is an authority in the field of
              dynamics of coupled nonlinear structures.  Dr. Magahed's expertise in robotic
              systems is a definite advantage to the specific system in the study. The impact
              of the study can be extremely significant from the fundamental and applied
              research points of view. The impact will be on the fundamental modeling issues,
              the design issues, and ranges of commercial applications and on the
              collaboration between the two countries. The proposed effort offers the
              possibility of significant improvement in the way flexible bodies are added to
              multi-body dynamics codes. This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
              US-foreign scientific collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.
