Title       : A Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Summer Research Program in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1999  
File        : a9820250

Award Number: 9820250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly D. McConnaughay kdm@bradley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erich K. Stabenau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bradley University has a long-standing commitment to teaching excellence. Close
              faculty-student relationships that stress shared scholarship are central to the
              mission. The Biology Department has exemplified this shared partnership in
              education and research through a vigorous research-rich curriculum.
              Interdisciplinary research experiences run throughout the curriculum, both in
              and out of the classroom, and every faculty member is an active research
              mentor. Also central to the mission is community service; thus this project
              accepts a high proportion of students as transfers from local two-year
              community colleges. These students are at a disadvantage, however, when they
              enter our research-intensive curriculum without substantial prior investigative
              experience. The faculty will implement a 10-week summer research program that
              integrates research opportunities and education in research methodologies. This
              program will be comprehensive, encompassing the culture, theory and practice of
              science, to foster intellectual independence in scientific research, regardless
              of prior research exposure. Individual research projects will encompass a
              variety of lines of biological investigation in different experimental systems,
              providing opportunities for broad interdisciplinary discussions among students
              and faculty mentors. The recruiting will be heavy from institutions with
              limited undergraduate research opportunities, particularly local community
              colleges that supply a high number of transfer students into the curricula.
              Finally, the faculty has developed a recruitment team and strategy to assure
              significant minority participation in the summer research program with the
              expectation that this experience will increase the recruitment and retention of
              minorities in undergraduate science programs.
