Title       : Undergraduate Research Experience in Algebra and Discrete Mathematics at Auburn
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9820425

Award Number: 9820425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51871              (Estimated)
Investigator: Overtoun M. Jenda jendaov@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sophomores, juniors, and seniors from colleges and universities in Alabama and
              nearby states will assemble for eight weeks at Auburn University, in the
              summers of 1999 and 2000, to conduct research in discrete mathematics and
              algebra in the Department of Discrete and Statistical Sciences.

During the
              first week of the session, participants will be given an intensive introduction
              to a selection of specific open problems or problem areas.  During the second
              week, they will be given helpful observations and deeper background on the
              problems.  Participants will be asked to decide on a ``major'' problem or
              problem area for their summer's work at the beginning of the third week. 
              Although anyone may work on anything thereafter, each participant will be
              expected to concentrate on their problem, usually in collaboration with others,
              and to make short presentations of background literature and of progress made
              in daily seminars and problem sessions.  Each problem group will be expected to
              prepare a written summary of their work at the end of the eight weeks and to
              deliver an oral presentation of the summary, with the presentation to be
              apportioned among the group members.  If publishable results are achieved, the
              achievers will decide among themselves how results should be written up, but
              faculty mentors will help out in matters of format, protocol, and getting the
              paper typed.  In case the mentors later achieve publishable results based on
              work of student participants, the students will be duly listed as co-authors of
              any papers resulting.

Communication will be maintained with those
              participants that wish it, for the purpose of conducting further research, for
              recruiting for subsequent programs or graduate study, and for assessing the
              impact of their participation in the project on their lives.  
