Title       : REU: Undergraduate Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9820319

Award Number: 9820319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan G. Kramer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Merrill Leffler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For the past ten years, Maryland Sea Grant has served as a Research Experience
              for Undergraduates site in the Ocean Sciences, pairing sophomores, juniors and
              seniors with science mentors at the University of Maryland Center for
              Environmental Science's Horn Point Laboratory and Chesapeake Biological
              Laboratory and the Academy of Natural Science Estuarine Research Center. The
              primary objective of this continuing effort is to encourage undergraduates to
              pursue education in the marine and estuarine sciences through active
              participation in research, at a time when they are determining their career
              goals. Students will be recruited nationally; and as before, a special effort
              will be made to attract women, minorities and disabled students. Successful
              applicants will become active participants in research focused upon various
              aspects of the biology, ecology, chemistry and physics of Chesapeake
              Bay-fieldwork is an important component of the program. Fellowships will be for
              twelve weeks, and will provide a stipend, nominal living allowance and funds
              for travel and materials. Students will participate in lectures regarding
              ethics in science, attend a mid-summer symposium detailing traditional and
              alternate careers in the marine sciences and will present their research
              accomplishments in a daylong colloquium as well as submit a written report. The
              high quality of summer research projects is reflected in the more than 25
              scientific papers which summer fellows have so far been authors of as well as
              numerous presentations they have given on their research at scientific
              meetings. Through the summer of 1998, 120 have participated in the program and
              of those who have completed their undergraduate education some 70% have gone
              onto graduate school. Maryland Sea Grant maintains contact with many former REU
              fellows, querying them on the influence that their summer research experiences
              had on the paths they have taken so far.


