Title       : Scalable Trigger Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9820839

Award Number: 9820839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric N. Hanson hanson@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Database triggers are rules that monitor a database for interesting changes to
              the data. These rules can take action based on these changes. For example, the
              action can be to notify a person by email or pager, update the database, or run
              a program. This project is developing new techniques for processing database
              triggers that are fast and can support many times more triggers than can be
              handled now. Current database trigger processing systems are synchronous. In
              other words, triggers run inside the same transactions that are updating the
              data. This project is developing scalable trigger processing capability in a
              number of ways, including: (1) testing trigger conditions and running trigger
              actions after database update transactions complete; (2) developing special
              algorithms and data structures for fast trigger condition checking; (3)
              applying parallel processing on shared-memory multiprocessor computers to test
              trigger conditions and run trigger actions more quickly; and (4) developing a
              timer-driven trigger capability that checks trigger conditions periodically
              rather than after each update. This project's vehicle for developing,
              demonstrating, testing and refining new, scalable trigger processing
              architectures and algorithms is the TriggerMan prototype. TriggerMan is being
              implemented as an extension module to a commercial, object-relational database
              management system, a driver program, and an application programming interface
              library. The high-performance, scalable trigger processing capability being
              developed by this research will give people more timely notification of
              important new information in databases. This is more important than ever given
              the pervasiveness of corporate databases and networks, and the Internet.
              
http://www.cise.ufl.edu/~hanson/TriggerMan/


