Title       : RUI: Probing Spin and Charge States in Electron-Correlated Materials by Nuclear
               Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9820631

Award Number: 9820631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar O. Bernal obernal@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Bernal
9820631

This is an experimental condensed matter physics project that
              concentrates on the study of intrinsic inhomogeneous structures in
              electron-correlated materials. The project will characterize both static and
              dynamic properties of local magnetic-field and electric-field-gradient
              distributions by means of magnetic- and quadrupolar-resonance techniques.
              Electron-correlated materials (systems in which the electrons interact strongly
              with each other resulting in a macroscopic behavior completely different from
              that displayed by more common non-interacting electron systems, such as normal
              metals) display richness in behavior as a response to changes in temperature
              and magnetic field. Examples of such behavior are superconductivity, magnetism,
              antiferromagnetism, small-moment and quadrupolar ordering, non-Fermi-liquid
              behavior, and colossal magnetoresistance. The emphasis of the project is on
              elucidating the role-played by temperature-dependent magnetic inhomogenieties
              on the intrinsic behavior of non-Fermi-liquid materials and heavy-fermion
              antiferromagnets, and in characterizing spin and charge structures (stripes) in
              the lanthanum nickelates. To this end, the project will study stoichiometric
              heavy-fermion compounds and related alloys, and 61Ni-enriched La2-xSrxNiO4+d.
              Through the project, training will be achieved of undergraduate and graduate
              (masters level) students in the techniques of magnetic resonance,
              radio-frequency electronics, cryogenics, and computer interface. The project
              will be carried out in collaboration with The University of California,
              Riverside, The University of Florida, and the Kamerlingh Onnes Lab in the
              Netherlands.
%%%
This is an experimental condensed matter physics project
              that concentrates on the understanding of electron-correlated materials. These
              are systems in which the electrons interact strongly with each other, resulting
              in a behavior completely different from that displayed by the more common
              non-interacting electron systems such as normal metals. Electron-correlated
              materials are currently the subject of great deal of interest for science and
              technology. From the scientific point of view, they are interesting because of
              the richness in behavior they display in response to changes in temperature and
              magnetic field. Technologically, the properties that have been discovered in
              these systems, such as superconductivity, and colossal magnetoresistance, make
              them potential candidates for future applications. The project is a
              contribution to a wider effort of condensed matter research by the scientific
              community at the national and international levels. It will deal with the
              application of nuclear resonance techniques to study the properties of electron
              distributions in compounds containing uranium and cerium such as the so-called
              heavy-fermion systems as well as in the lanthanum nickelates. The emphasis is
              on elucidating the role played by intrinsic inhomogeneous structures that may
              be forming in these materials as the temperature is decreased. Through the
              project, training will be achieved of undergraduate and graduate (masters
              level) students in the techniques of magnetic resonance, radio-frequency
              electronics, cryogenics, and computer interface. The project will be carried
              out in collaboration with The University of California, Riverside, The
              University of Florida, and the Kamerlingh Onnes Lab in the
              Netherlands.
***


