Title       : Cyclic Exchange Neighborhood Search and the Other Very Large Scale Neighborhood
               Search Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a9820998

Award Number: 9820998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275090             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Orlin jorlin@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is mainly concerned with developing a new class of neighborhood
              search algorithms for solving partitioning problems, a large subclass of
              combinatorial optimization problems that find significant applications in
              logistics, manufacturing, telecommunications and scheduling.  These problems
              are notoriously difficult to solve in practice and neighborhood search
              algorithms are often the most effective approaches available for solving them. 
              The investigators plan to use the cyclic exchange neighborhood search, which is
              a general-purpose very large-scale neighborhood search algorithm, to solve
              partitioning problems.  As a proof of concept, this methodology was applied to
              the capacitated minimum spanning tree problem, a fundamental partitioning
              problem arising in telecommunications network design, and obtained highly
              impressive results.  The investigators intend to apply this methodology to
              several other partitioning problems encountered in vehicle routing, parallel
              machine scheduling, location theory, clustering, and graph partitioning. The 
              project offers scope for theoretical, algorithmic, and empirical research. 
              Extensions of this approach to solve several non-partitioning problems will
              also be investigated.  The research also encompasses developing very
              large-scale neighborhood search algorithms to solve logistics problems in the
              airline industry and supply-chain management.
The methodology provides a
              unified approach for solving a variety of partitioning problems. In addition to
              the unified approach, it has the following potential advantages:  (1) The
              algorithms developed can be very effective in solving a wide range of
              partitioning problems, possibly expanding the size of problem instances that
              can be solved to near-optimality. (2) The algorithms can be quite robust and
              flexible and it should be easy to modify the algorithms to incorporate new
              constraints or objectives as needed.  (3) Much of the software developed will
              be reusable and they may be reused to help solve different partitioning
              problems. (4) The approach can enhance decision support systems in interactive
              (person-machine) scheduling by systematically guiding users to improvements in
              a given schedule.
    
