Title       : Randomizationin Graph Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9820978

Award Number: 9820978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270278             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Karger karger@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Graphs model many specific structures, including transportation networks, roads,
              rails, and flight-paths, computer networks, and VLSI circuits.  Although graphs
              are very general, they have a great deal of structure that makes it possible to
              solve graph optimization problems more efficiently than less-constrained
              optimization problems.  Thus, graph optimization has developed as a large
              subfield of mathematical optimization.

Randomization gives several important
              benefits in the design of optimization algorithms for graphs.  Randomized
              algorithms often run faster and give better answers than their deterministic
              counterparts.  Furthermore, since they are often simpler than deterministic
              algorithms, randomized algorithms can be easier to implement and maintain and
              can perform better in practice.

This project investigates the uses of
              randomization in several central optimization problems on graphs.  The maximum
              flow and minimum cut problems, which are perhaps the most widely studied and
              applicable graph optimization problems, can be solved exactly__the major
              objective is designing faster, simpler, and more practical algorithms for
              arriving at the right answer.  Other problems, such as graph coloring and
              bisection, analysis of network reliability, and construction of low-cost
              high-connectivity networks, are extremely hard to solve exactly__the major
              objective is to find efficient algorithms that give answers as close as
              possible to the elusive optimum.
The algorithms developed will be of only
              theoretical interest unless they are actually implemented.  Therefore,
              experimental analysis of the algorithms will be undertaken, comparing their
              performance in practice to that of other algorithms.

