Title       : RUI: Patterns of Prey Capture by Mnemiopsis leidyi and other Lobate Ctenophores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9820172

Award Number: 9820172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155097             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Costello costello@providence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Providence College
	      River Avenue and Eaton Street
	      Providence, RI  02918    401/865-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820172
Costello

Lobate ctenophores are well known as important predators in
              marine planktonic communities.  Based primarily on previous research involving
              members of the lobate genus Mnemiopsis, lobate ctenophores are commonly thought
              to impact marine plankton communities via consumption of late stage (late
              copepodite and adult) copepods.  Quantitative estimates of lobate ctenophore
              impact have relied upon combining the functional relationship between copepod
              density and ctenophore ingestion rate with field densities of ctenophores and
              copepods.  However, late stage copepods may not be the primary prey of most
              lobate ctenophores.  Preliminary evidence suggests that Mnemiopsis utilizes two
              parallel and simultaneous mechanisms for capturing prey.  The first depends
              upon ciliary flow generated by the auricles to entrain slow or inactive prey
              which are sieved through oral tentacles.  The second is an ambush mechanism
              which depends upon collision of rapidly swimming prey such as copepods with the
              ctenophore's outstretched oral lobes.  A very limited group of in-situ data
              supports the contention that the lobate body design is optimized for feeding on
              small and weakly swimming prey and that stronger swimmers such as late stage
              copepods are a secondary nutritional source, both from a numerical and biomass
              perspective.  If the latter is true, then the trophic role of lobate
              ctenophores may be commonly misunderstood and their predatory impact
              substantially underestimated. However, resolution of this issue is not
              currently possible due to the limited information available detailing the
              actual prey capture process and in-situ gut contents of lobate ctenophores.
  
                 This research has two major goals.  First, to develop an appropriately
              detailed description of the mechanical processes underlying prey capture in the
              laboratory for several representative genera of lobate ctenophores.  Second, to
              quantitatively compare this mechanical description with in-situ selection
              patterns and feeding rates of these ctenophores.  Both laboratory and field
              studies need to be integrated to fully understand the role played by these
              predators in marine planktonic communities.


