Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in Structural Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9820484

Award Number: 9820484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vicki B. Booker                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert J. Delatte ndelatte@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold Kincaid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820484
University of Alabama at Birmingham    
Norbert J. Delatte            
                  

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in Structural
              Engineering is proposed 
for the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). 
              This site will invite eight outstanding 
undergraduate students to participate
              in a ten-week research program at UAB.  It is anticipated that no 
more than
              three students will be from UAB.  Other students will be recruited from
              engineering and pre-
engineering programs throughout the nation, with emphasis
              on programs where students do not have 
the opportunity to participate in
              research.  Recruiting will focus on four institutions meeting this 
criterion
              that we have cooperated closely with in the REU program over the past three
              years.  
Agreements have already been made with these four schools, three of
              which are historically black 
universities.  Providing research opportunities
              is important for retaining minority students, a mission of 
UAB, which serves
              a region with a high minority population.  Inviting minority students and those
              early in their engineering curricula to conduct research for a summer at UAB
              will encourage them to stay in school, give them the experience of being at a
              major university, allow them to experience engineering, and allow them to earn
              money to pay for their education.  

Over the past three years, the UAB
              Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering has 
operated a highly
              successful REU Site in Structural Engineering for six students per year, with
              Dr. 
Duane Castaneda as Principal Investigator.  This proposal seeks to build
              further on that foundation.  

The Structural Engineering faculty and UAB
              actively provide research experiences for undergraduate as well as high school
              students.  UAB is the only institution in Alabama rated Research I by the
              Carnegie Foundation.  Also, the Department of Civil and Environmental
              Engineering comprised of eight faculty members is active in funded research as
              evidenced by having $497,000 in research expenditures during the 1997-98 year. 
              The faculty of the department currently has approximately $1.3 million in
              pending grants and contracts.  This REU Site in Structural Engineering will
              provide talented Alabama and Georgia minority students and those in
              pre-engineering programs with a unique opportunity to conduct and experience
              engineering research.  As well as these immediate benefits to these students,
              relationships between the participating colleges and UAB will be
              strengthened.

