Title       : Due-Time Performance in Production Systems with Finished Good Buffers: A Systems
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a9820580

Award Number: 9820580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Semyon M. Meerkov smm@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   In production systems with unreliable machines, the number of parts
              produced during a fixed interval of time is a random variable.  Its
              distribution characterizes both the production volume and the
              production
variability.  The production volume has been analyzed in many
              publications.  In contrast, the production variability has been studied in just
              a few recent articles where mostly production variance has been addressed. 
              Although a useful measure of performance, it offers only a general, theoretical
              characterization of the production variability. Indeed, knowledge of the
              variance does not yet specify the probability with which
a fixed shipping
              schedule is satisfied. Recently, a new variability  measure, referred to as the
              Due-Time Performance (DTP) and defined as the probability to satisfy a shipping
              schedule, has been introduced.  The goal of this project is to develop methods
              for analysis and design of production systems from the point of DTP and to
              apply these methods in the automotive industry.  Specifically, the following
              analysis problem will be
addressed:  Given a production system, develop a
              constructive, analytical technique for DTP evaluation. Two design problems will
              be investigated.  Direct problem:  Given the reliability characteristics of the
              machines and the customer requirements on the shipping interval and shipment
              size, design a product delivery system so that DTP requirements are satisfied. 
              Inverse problem:  Given the customer requirements and the product delivery
              system, determine reliability characteristics of the machines required to
              satisfy a given DTP.
     If successful, this project will provide rigorous
              engineering tools for analysis and design of production systems in lean
              manufacturing environment operating in the pull regime.  Their implementation
              will lead
to a possibility of "calculating" a product delivery system rather
              than selecting it on the basis of ad hoc techniques in use today. 

