Title       : Workshop on Nonlinear PDE and Applications to Materials: A Proposal for Graduate
               Student Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9820046

Award Number: 9820046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert O. Gulliver gulliver@ima.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando Reitich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The award will fund graduate student participation in a workshop 
on "Nonlinear
              Partial Differential Equations and Applications to 
Materials", to be held
              April 30 -- May 2, 1999 at the University of
Minnesota.  The speakers invited
              to the workshop will include modelers, 
mathematical analysts, numerical
              analysts and materials scientists. 
Specific topics which may be expected to
              come under discussion include 
microstructure, multiple time scales, widely
              varying length scales, 
viscosity methods and nonlinear homogenization.  All
              of these topics 
have proved to be of value in mathematical models of
              materials.  

This will be a thoroughly interdisciplinary workshop, in which
              
experts from rather different scientific disciplines (materials 
science,
              computer science, solid-state physics and mathematics) 
will be brought
              together to discuss problems they have encountered 
separately, but may have
              approached using only the tools which are 
familiar to their specialized
              scientific group.  In this way, the 
power (and limitations) of these tools
              will be made clear to other 
experts and to the graduate students present. 
              Mathematicians need 
to be well informed about the insights which have emerged
              from the 
study of materials, and materials scientists need to learn about
              
the best techniques which have emerged from mathematical investigations. 
              
Talented graduate students from across the country who are planning 
to work
              in areas related to the workshop will be encouraged to apply 
for support so
              they may attend.  The graduate students of today, who 
will become the
              research leaders of tomorrow, will benefit deeply from 
observing at first
              hand this interaction of mathematical theory 
with an important area of
              application.

