Title       : Regulation of Population Dynamics of Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus Ecotypes
               in Diverse Oceanoic Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9820035

Award Number: 9820035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $780001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sallie W. Chisholm chisholm@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin F. Polz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Chisholm

The marine cyanobacteria Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus are
              dominant primary producers in the world's open oceans. The spatial and seasonal
              dynamics of the two genera have distinct features in different oceans,-often
              characterized by alternating dominance in time and space. There is growing
              evidence that there exists within each of these genera distinct
              "ecotypes"-closely related strains that are physiologically and genetically
              distinct from one another-which differ in light harvesting ability and are thus
              adapted for optimal growth under different light regimes. This study will
              examine the hypothesis that  they might differ in other significant traits such
              as nitrogen preferences and assimilation efficiencies, dark survival, and
              tolerance of fluctuating light intensities. It is known  that in
              Prochlorococcus the established physiological differences between ecotypes
              correspond with differences in molecular phylogenies constructed with the 16S
              ribosomal RNA gene (16S rDNA). This opens the possibility of studying the
              dynamics of ecotypes in field populations using molecular probes, and studying
              how their relative abundances change in response to changing availability of
              light, nutrients, and other environmental variables. To this end, this project
              will entail a series of laboratory and field studies:
Genetic Diversity in
              Cultured Ecotypes: Researchers will sequence the 23S rDNA gene of the
              Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus isolates they have in culture, to identify
              closely related clusters of genotypes which correspond to known and
              hypothesized physiological ecotypes. These sequences will allow them to develop
              probes specific for cells belonging to these clusters for use in studying the
              distributions and relative abundance of ecotypes in field populations.
              
Physiological Diversity in Cultured Ecotypes: Using batch cultures and
              N-limited cyclostat cultures maintained at high and low light intensities,
              researchers will study whether or not nutrient availability influences the
              competitive advantages between Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus and between
              the high- and low-light adapted ecotypes within each genus. They will also
              examine whether the genera and ecotypes respond differently to fluctuating
              light and prolonged dark exposure, which will help to better understand their
              relative abundance in deep mixed layers. 
Seasonal and Spatial Dvnamics of
              Ecotypes in Field Populations: The researchers have chosen three sites for the
              field studies-the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT), the Bermuda Atlantic Time
              Series (BATS) station, and the Gulf of Aqaba in the Red Sea-where
              Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus display distinctly different seasonal
              patterns and depth distributions. In samples collected from each of these sites
              they will first qualitatively describe the molecular diversity of 23S rDNA
              sequences by cloning PCR products and analyzing the clones using RFLP analysis
              and partial sequencing. This will allow them to see how representative our
              cultured isolates are of the genotypes present in the field. Then, using the
              ecotype-specific probes developed and any unique sequences found in the cloning
              studies, they will use quantitative and in situ hybridization to analyze the
              seasonal and spatial dynamics of the different ecotypes at the study sites.
              They will use the ancillary physical and chemical data that will be available
              for each of these sites at the time of our sample collection, along with our
              physiological studies from laboratory cultures, to unravel the forcing
              functions responsible for the changing relative abundances of the ecotypes in
              the field. 
	The hypothesis is that the presence of different "ecotypes "
              within the Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus populations play a critical role
              in determining the dynamics between the two groups, and contribute to the
              collective stability of these populations in the world's oceans. The presence
              of multiple ecotypes in a given environment allows Prochlorococcus and
              Synechococcus to thrive over a much broader range of environments than would be
              possible for a physiologically and genetically homogeneous population. The
              results of these studies will not only provide insights into what regulates the
              dynamics of these populations in the oceans, but will also inform issues that
              are critica1 to understanding microbial diversity in general. 


