Title       : Structural Engineering Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9820506

Award Number: 9820506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley J. Dyke sdyke@seas.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Z. Truman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820506
Washington University in St. Louis                          
Dr.
              Shirley J. Dyke                      

The Structural Engineering division of
              the Department of Civil Engineering at Washington University proposes the
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program.  This five-year program
              is designed to invite eight exceptional students to spend ten weeks during the
              summer at Washington University.  The primary goals of the REU program are to
              introduce undergraduate participants to research and develop their research
              skills.  The undergraduate research assistants will select independent research
              projects that contribute to ongoing programs within the department, and are
              suitable for the level of the participants.  Participants will be recruited
              nationwide from both universities and four-year colleges.  To achieve high
              participation from underrepresented groups, application materials will be
              widely distributed by directly contacting directors of minority and disabled
              student services offices at various institutions, and distribution through
              professional societies associated with underrepresented groups in engineering. 
              Moreover, the PI and other faculty advisors will actively distribute
              information on the program through colleagues at other institutions.

A
              variety of activities are planned to enhance the communication skills of the
              participants and introduce them to common ethical issues one might experience
              in the workplace.  Faculty-supervised meetings will be held weekly throughout
              the summer and each participant will be required to make a (videotaped)
              presentation of his/her individual project.  Periodic status reports will be
              required of the REUs.  Further technical tours and site visits are planned to
              give the REUs an opportunity to interact with industry.  Additionally, ethics
              discussions will be held in which a prominent local practitioner will be
              invited to discuss an ethics issue in a case-study format.  The summer will
              culminate with the Washington University Undergraduate Research Colloquium,
              which is devoted to providing a forum for the REU participants to present the
              results of their research.  Further, participants will be strongly encouraged
              to publish their results, and present their research experience at an
              undergraduate conference.  A complete evaluation plan is discussed herein,
              which includes both formative and summative evaluation, and uses several tools
              to provide information on the efficacy of the program.  Social activities
              (e.g., lunches picnics) are planned throughout the summer to create a
              comfortable atmosphere and promote interaction within the group.

