Title       : Efficient Randomized Algorithms for Multivariate Algebraic Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9820778

Award Number: 9820778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Deh Huang huang@cs.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Multivariate computation arises naturally in the contexts of computational 
              algebra, computational algebraic geometry, and computational number theory.  It
              also arises in a variety of domains including robotics, computer vision, solid
              modeling, automatic geometric theorem proving, and coding theory.  The
              confluence of interest from these research areas has made it all the more
              important to investigate efficient methods for multivariate algebraic
              computation.

The works on effective Hilbert irreducibility theorem in the
              1980's paved the way for designing provably efficient randomized algorithms for
              the fundamental problems of multivariate factorization and GCD.  The theorem
              also laid the foundation for the novel black-box approach due to Kaltofen and
              Trager, as well as a related approach using straight-line programs.  The
              geometric ideas inherent in the Hilbert irreducibility theorem and the related
              theory are yet to be fully exploited from an algorithmic point of view beyond
              their applications to multivariate factorization and GCD.  The goal of this
              research is to utilize these ideas as the basis of efficient randomized
              algorithms for more general multivariate computational problems.  On the one
              hand, effective Hilbert irreducibility will be extended as the basis of
              randomized reductions in a more general geometric setting.  On the other hand,
              the black-box approach will be explored as a general paradigm for the
              construction of efficient algorithms for multivariate computations.  The
              objectives are:  (1) To design randomized algorithms that are substantially
              more efficient than the existing algorithms, and (2) To apply the results to
              computational number theory and computational algebraic geometry, with further
              application to cryptography and coding theory, and other areas as well.  The
              investigation will initially center around a set of problems that involve
              multivariate polynomial systems including:  solving a system of multivariate
              polynomials; decomposing an algebraic set defined by a system of multivariate
              polynomials into irreducible components; computing the degree of each component
              of an algebraic set; sampling
random points on a component of an algebraic
              set; deciding if a polynomial vanishes on a algebraic set; and determining the
              local dimension at a point of an algebraic set.  These problems provide a
              fertile ground for the investigation and they have many interesting
              applications which will also be explored in this project.

This research will
              likely impact the theory and practice of multivariate computations and lead to
              a deeper understanding of the usefulness of randomization in the context of
              algebraic and geometric computations.

