Title       : REU Site for Industrial Projects in Manufacturing Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9820395

Award Number: 9820395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustapha Fofana msfofana@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Rencis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820395
Worcester Polytechnic Institute                                 
              
Mustapha S. Fofana                      


This REU Site focuses on
              industrial projects in manufacturing engineering.  The site is for three years
              and each year a different group of nine talented junior/senior undergraduate
              students will carry out research on the Worcester Polytechnic Institute campus
              and local industrial sites for a nine-week summer internship period.  The
              faculty and industrial mentorship teams assembled for each project group will
              include three interns who will carry out ongoing research in the focus area. 
              Each research topic is short, self-contained and considers cutting-edge
              problems that will challenge each group.  Each topic has been carefully
              selected so that a positive, successful experience will encourage a student in
              selecting a career in manufacturing engineering.  The common theme of
              manufacturing engineering provides considerable interaction between the three
              project groups.  All interns will have access to several WPI state-of-the-art
              mechanical engineering laboratories and computational facilities and local
              industrial sites.  Recruitment of summer interns will be from the following
              four groups: 1) WPI programs; 2) minority institutions; 3) women, and 4)
              undergraduates from four year schools that have a small or nonexistent research
              base.  Selection of the interns will be based upon their career objectives,
              academic qualifications and past work experiences.  Each student will be
              contacted by the faculty and industrial mentors prior to the summer internship
              so that they have a clear understanding of the project and what role they will
              play in the project group.  Each project group will present their findings at
              the interim and the internship will conclude with a presentation session.  A
              final group report will be required at the end of the internship.  Students
              will be encouraged to present their findings at a conference and possibly
              publish a journal paper.

This summer research experience will provide
              students with a glimpse of the way that manufacturing engineering is used in
              the real world through the utilization of CAD/CAM, finite element analysis,
              axiomatic theory, hardware development, etc.  Furthermore, this experience will
              provide an opportunity for participants to apply theoretical topics
              traditionally found in undergraduate programs to industrial and research
              applications.

