Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Archaeological Investigations of Settlement and Emerging
               Complexity in the Middle Senegal Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9820919

Award Number: 9820919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. McIntosh skmci@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Mr. Alioune Deme will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological survey and
              excavation in the Middle Senegal Valley in Senegal. This research builds on
              prior survey conducted in the same region by Mr. Deme, his thesis advisor and
              colleagues. This work has revealed the presence of numerous settlements, most
              of a small and relatively ephemeral nature, the earliest of which dates to ca.
              two thousand years ago. Decades of research in the Niger Valley, an
              environmentally similar region in West Africa indicates the rise of a uniquely
              African style of complex society during the first millennium AD but in the
              Middle Niger, a comparable level of organization appears lacking. It is only
              after 1,000 AD that evidence clearly indicates similar complexity. However is
              yet uncertain whether this difference exists in fact or rather is an artifact
              of very limited survey and excavation. Mr. Deme believes that several large
              early sites are present and that no survey has been conducted in the valley
              environments most likely to contain such entities. With National Science
              Foundation support he will survey of one such promising zone and collect data
              on the timing and intensity of occupation and the size of sites occupied. His
              two additional excavations will focus on early first millennium stratified
              mound sites. Although upper layers were bulldozed away during construction
              projects, the lowest levels are available for study and these should reveal
              insight into the early settlement of the Valley.

In recent years
              archaeologists interested in the rise of civilization have paid increasing
              attention to West Africa because the models developed in Egypt, the Near East,
              China and portions of the New World appear not to apply. Although some
              hallmarks of complex society such as craft specialization, trade, population
              heterogeneity and urban growth are evident, social stratification and
              effectively centralized power appear to be lacking. Mr. Deme's research in the
              Middle Senegal Valley will provide a valuable comparison to the well known
              Niger sequence and determine the extent to which the pattern observed there is
              generalizable to other parts of West Africa. The research will also assist in
              training a promising young scientist.

