Title       : Environmental Signal Transduction: An Interdisciplinary Research Experience for
               Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9820454

Award Number: 9820454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Stapleton susan.stapleton@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Malcolm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site will be established in the
              Center for Research into Environmental Signal Transduction (CREST) at Western
              Michigan University. CREST will take an interdisciplinary approach to providing
              research experiences that will encourage and motivate undergradu-ate students
              to pursue careers in scientific research. Participants will be recruited
              regionally throughout the Great Lakes area from colleges where research
              opportunities are limited and nationally from HBCUs. Applications will be
              encouraged from individuals under-represented in scientific research: women,
              minori-ties, and persons with disabilities. A 10-week summer program will (A)
              provide an independent research experience, (B) offer a discussion series on
              the process of science, (C) foster discussions on scientific ethics and
              integrity, (D) create opportunities for interaction, dissemination, and
              development, and (E) allow for evaluation. Intensive mentored research
              encounters will model what life is like as a complete re-searcher. The ethics
              component will be conducted over an electronic conferencing system outside of
              the students' laboratory research time by a faculty member whose dual doctoral
              degrees in philosophy and microbiology present unique qualifications for these
              activities. REU participants will be encouraged to attend weekly research
              symposia during the middle period of the program and will give a brief talk on
              work being conducted in the laboratory at the concluding symposium. Students
              will prepare a research paper toward the end of the period and submit it for
              review to a mock scientific journal in which the final papers will be published
              and disseminated. Students also will be encouraged to prepare abstracts for
              presenta-tion at undergraduate research conferences and at seminars at their
              home institutions with their faculty mentors. Western Michigan University's
              outstanding laboratories and instrumentation will be further enhanced by
              construction of a new science complex to be phased in during 1998 and 1999. The
              University's libraries, computing services, recreation center, residence halls,
              and nationally recognized dining facilities offer excellent accommodations for
              participating students. WMU will contribute the stipend and support costs for
              one of the ten students to participate each year and five percent of the time
              and effort of the project co-directors and two REU team members during the
              academic year.

