Title       : GOALI: Data Mining Tools for Geospatial Databases--Enabling Technologies for the
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9820841

Award Number: 9820841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret H. Dunham mhd@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg Jernigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1504,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project develops data mining algorithms, both association rules and
              prediction, targeted to geospatial data. This GOALI research is performed in
              collaboration with the SIVAM project underway at Raytheon Systems Company.
              Raytheon Systems Company, Garland Division, has the responsibility for the
              hardware and software development of SIVAM (System for the Vigilance of the
              Amazon). SIVAM's objective is to implement a surveillance and analysis
              infrastructure, including a very large (multi terabyte) geospatial database and
              associated visualization tools that will provide the Brazilian Government with
              the necessary information for the protection and sustainable development of the
              Amazon region. This research focuses on an important aspect of the overall
              problem: development of new algorithms for a specific target application. The
              developed algorithms scale to the massive amounts of data present as well as
              adapt to the available amount of main memory. In the SIVAM project, data is
              obtained on an ongoing basis (as time advances). The prediction algorithms are
              used to predict environmental catastrophes (such as flooding or deforestation)
              and are incremental in nature. State information is kept which "remembers"
              previous environmental data collected. As new data arrives, the state is
              advanced based on the data found. In addition, these structures used to save
              this state information are modified as learning takes place. The results of
              this research will advance the field of data mining and provide enabling
              technologies for the environment research and
              management.
http://www.seas.smu.edu/~mhd/dm.html


