Title       : Subfactors from Coset Conformal Field Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9820935

Award Number: 9820935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66258              (Estimated)
Investigator: Feng Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9820935
Principal Investigator: Feng Xu

Abstract: Xu's
              research deals with subfactor theory, a branch of the field of operator
              algebras that has had an enormous impact on various areas of mathematics, above
              all on low-dimensional topology. By using the representation theory of affine
              Kac-Moody algebras and ideas from algebraic quantum field theory, a class of
              subfactors known as Jones-Wassermann subfactors can be constructed. These
              subfactors have close relations to two-dimensional conformal field theories
              that have attracted great attention. The aim of this project is to study
              Jones-Wassermann subfactors related to coset theories, which conjecturally
              exhaust a large class of conformal field theories. Solutions to the problems
              proposed for investigation, though focused on subfactors, are expected to lead
              to answers to open questions arising in conjunction with both the
              representation theory of infinite dimensional algebras and low-dimensional
              topology. 

Quantum mechanics, which revolutionized our understanding of the
              physical world  when it arrived on the scene early in this century, raised a
              number of significant mathematical (not to mention philosophical) questions.
              The theory of operator algebras was introduced by John von Neumann in order to
              provide a proper mathematical framework in which to deal with such questions.
              Subfactor theory is a branch of the subject of operator algebras that studies
              the "positions" a smaller algebra might occupy within a larger one. It turns
              out that, because of the intricate nature of the algebras in question, the
              possible positions are under rather rigid control, allowable configurations
              often reflecting symmetries of the quantum mechanical systems to which the
              algebras correspond. Symmetries, especially the hidden symmetries that
              subfactor theory helps to uncover, play a fundamental role in science, for they
              usually provide the key to reducing the complexity of the questions under study
              by bringing the number of free parameters that must be accounted for into a
              mathematically mangeable range. The search for hidden symmetries has thus
              become a focal point for the activities of many physical scientists. Subfactor
              theory provides researchers with a precise tool for understanding symmetries in
              a host of mathematical and physical settings. The aim of this project is to
              shed new light on some of the important mathematical issues that surface in
              this context.

