Title       : REU: Research Experiences in Psychological Science and Its Applications for
               African-American Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a9820338

Award Number: 9820338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278181             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eddie M. Clark clarkem@slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Korn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
              Site in Psychology at Saint Louis University.  The program is intended to
              benefit selected African-American undergraduate students in five participating
              institutions by providing them with experiences that will increase the
              likelihood that they will apply to graduate programs in psychology.  Four
              Atlanta University Center institutions (Clark-Atlanta University, Morehouse,
              Morris Brown, and Spelman) have agreed to collaborate with Saint Louise
              University to achieve the objectives of the program.  The program involves
              identification of students in the sophomore year, preparation of research plans
              during the junior year, and intensive research experience during the following
              summer, and completion of program activities in the senior year.  Research will
              be supervised electronically and through faculty exchanges.  In addition to
              involvement in research during the summer, students also will take an ethics
              course, present their research at a local conference, and participate in two
              workshops, one on the GRE and the other on careers in psychological science. 
              In the senior year, projects will be submitted for presentation and
              publication, and students will be assisted with their graduate school
              applications.

This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts
              to attract talented students into careers in science through active
              undergraduate research experiences.


