Title       : Undergraduate Research Using Cellular and Molecular Approaches to Biological
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9820485

Award Number: 9820485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132104             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Doctor doctor@duq3.cc.duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Alleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biological Sciences at Duquesne University will establish a
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site involving ten students per
              summer for three years. Through their participation in research and other
              activities, our undergraduate researchers will gain an understanding of the
              process of science, the activities and duties of scientists, and the importance
              of cellular and molecular approaches in addressing questions across broad areas
              in the biological sciences. Mentors for the participants are an enthusiastic
              and qualified team of faculty who have the resources and facilities necessary
              for outstanding research in cellular and molecular biology. They are all
              committed to working directly with students, and all have a proven record of
              mentoring undergraduate researchers. Because of this experience with
              undergraduate research, our faculty mentors have designed a number of projects
              that will take students with little or no research experience to a point where
              they may become independent. In our recruiting, we will target a diverse pool
              of potential participants, early in their undergraduate education, and mainly
              from small regional colleges and universities. Special efforts will be made to
              continue our success in recruiting underrepresented minority students and women
              to our summer research program. Weekly meetings will take place during the
              ten-week program to exchange ideas about scientific, philosophical, and
              practical aspects of research and careers in research. The program will
              culminate in a Summer Research Symposium modeled after scientific meetings, and
              attended by students and faculty from Duquesne University and other regional
              institutions. By providing a rigorous and rewarding experience for our summer
              research students, our program will have a positive impact by encouraging them
              to continue toward careers in biological research. The effectiveness of the
              program will be assessed by student participant and faculty evaluations and
              through the long-term monitoring of the students' careers.
