Title       : Research in Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9820824

Award Number: 9820824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Robert Dorfman jrd@glue.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to continue the work of the Principal Investigator and
              collaborators on the connections between non-equilibrium statistical mechanics
              and dynamical systems theory.  The central idea of this work is to relate
              transport and other nonequilibrium properties, such as entropy production, of
              fluid systems to the underlying chaotic dynamics of the constituent particles
              of the fluid.  Work by the PI and collaborators over the past few years has
              shown that Boltzmann equation techniques and related methods of nonequilibrium
              statistical mechanics can be fruitfully applied to calculate not only transport
              properties of fluids but their chaotic properties as well.  This unified
              approach allows one to make the connections between transport and chaotic
              properties especially clear.  Work on model systems has led to the development
              of advanced methods which allow detailed analytic calculations of the chaotic
              properties of more realistic systems where all of the particles can move.  It
              has been possible, for example, to compute the Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy of a
              dilute gas of hard disks or of hard spheres.  These systems are still quite
              complicated mathematically, and many interesting features of their chaotic
              behavior are related to the semi-dispersive nature of the particle collisions.
              It is proposed here: (a) to continue the work on analytic methods to compute
              the chaotic properties, of dense Lorentz gas systems; (b) to carry out similar
              calculations for more realistic  systems, namely, for dilute and moderately
              dense gases of particles interacting with short ranged forces; (c) to continue
              the work of the PI and collaborators on the connection between the irreversible
              entropy production of irreversible thermodynamics and seemingly closely related
              quantities that appear naturally in the dynamical systems theory approach to
              transport; and (d) to extend these methods and results to the quantum case. 
              The latter point is of major importance since: (a) nature is fundamentally
              quantum mechanical rather than classical, (b) many deep and basic questions
              need to be answered before one has any clear understanding of how classical
              chaos emerges from quantum systems, and (c) quantum systems such as quantum
              dots and quantum anti-dots are of great physical and practical interest.
