Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Electrical Engineering Focused Around
               the CSU-CHILL National Radar Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9820210

Award Number: 9820210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207765             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Chandrasekar chandra@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820210
Colorado State University                                              
                     
V. Chandrasekar


Colorado State University hosts and operates the
              CSU-CHILL radar facility for the NSF through a cooperative agreement.  The
              CSU-CHILL radar is an advanced 10-cm wavelength polarimetric Doppler radar
              designed for remote sensing.  This facility is designed to serve as a focal
              point for advanced research and education in radar engineering and radar
              meteorology.  A new state-of-the-art data acquisition and (control system has
              been added to the radar.  The power and flexibility of this new system will
              make it convenient for undergraduate students to learn radar operations, data
              collection, product display, and generation of new products.  Hence, students
              will have the opportunity for hands-on experience on an advanced radar system. 
              This radar system incorporates virtually every aspect of the Electrical
              Engineering discipline.  Consequently, there is a wealth of opportunity for
              significant educational activities at the undergraduate level.  This proposal
              requests fund for setting up a REU site focussed around the CSU-CHILL radar
              facility.  The mode of operation is to provide summer research experience for
              students following the junior year at the CHILL radar.  Extensive support in
              terms of radar experiments, data, computer link, will be provided for the
              students to continue their work at their home institutions as part of their
              senior projects if desired.  At the end of the program, students are required
              to write a formal report and present their results in a seminar series.  The
              participation of many faculties and the CSU-CHILL staff will enable the
              students to acquire a strong theoretical and experimental background while
              participating in team-oriented or individual research projects.

