Title       : JASMINE, The Joint Air-Sea Monsoon Interaction Experiment: Upper Ocean Survey
               During the Summer Monsoon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9820531

Award Number: 9820531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Hacker hacker@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Firing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Lukas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed experiment is a collaborative two-year study of the air-sea fluxes,
              air-sea interaction, convection and the upper ocean response to the variations
              of the summer monsoon as it oscillates between active and the lulls in between
              (break periods). A pilot study, the joint air-sea monsoon interaction
              experiment (JASMINE) will conduct an oceanographic and meteorological survey of
              the Bay of Bengal region. Air-sea fluxes, the state of the atmosphere and
              convection within the atmosphere will be determined in a region that has been
              observed to be a centroid of intraseasonal variability in the summer monsoon.
              JASMINE is a collaborative project of the University of Washington, University
              of Hawaii, and the University of Colorado.

This  component of the
              collaboration will examine the surface energy balance and the upper ocean heat
              balance, the hydrological cycle and the freshwater budget of the upper ocean,
              and the ocean barrier layer. 

The warm pool of the Indian Ocean appears
              different from the tropical western Pacific Ocean in that meridional heat
              transports are an important part of the heat balance. Scientific questions
              regarding the nature of heat partitioning, net heat flux into the Indian Ocean
              and its annual cycle, and heat balance and surface energy budget variation over
              intraseasonal cycles, will be addressed. The Bay of Bengal sector differs form
              the Pacific Ocean in that there is a large input of freshwater from river
              sources as well as precipitation. Scientific questions regarding the annual
              cycle and geographic distribution of this freshwater input, role of freshwater
              input in modifying the mixed-layer and barrier layer structure and the
              predictability of SST, and freshwater balance and how it varies on
              intraseasonal through interannual cycles,  will be addressed. The barrier layer
              (the higher saline layer between the surface layer and the thermocline) plays a
              critical role in determining the nature of the western Pacific Ocean.
              Scientific questions regarding the possible existence and role of a barrier
              layer in the Indian Ocean will be addressed. 

The study is important since
              gathering and subsequent analysis of a comprehensive set of data, will yield
              insights into the air-sea interactions during break and active periods of  the 
              monsoon. The accurate prediction of monsoon onset and monsoon rainfall is a
              scientific challenge that also has enormous economic consequences.




