Title       : ANN for Identification and Analysis of Continuous-Time Models in Energy
               Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9820977

Award Number: 9820977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198593             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aleksandar M. Stankovic astankov@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9820977
Stankovic

The main goal of this research project is to develop a
              comprehensive framework for reduced-order dynamical modeling in energy
              processing systems.  Control-oriented applications of the proposed method are
              envisioned in power systems (for derivation of load models, for reduction of
              conventional models in transient stability studies, and for controller design),
              electric drives (drives with elastic shafts), and motion control systems
              (multiple drives coupled through the mechanical subsystem).
Our hypothesis is
              that the physical phenomena under investigation often have significantly lower
              dimensions than the agglomeration of ambient coordinate systems in which
              component models originate.  We propose a methodology that combines features of
              analytical and physics-based approaches with artificial neural networks (ANNs),
              and aims to identify continuous-time differential/algebraic (DAE) models of
              energy processing systems.
The proposed research program combines mathematical
              analysis and practical insight from energy engineering.  Our reduced-order
              models ("dynamic equivalents") are formulated in continuous time, which is
              consistent with component models derived from physical principles.  There
              exists a number of important differences between standard discrete and
              continuous dynamical systems.  Models based on discrete-time ANNs may predict
              spurious transients and have attractors that are impossible for continuous-time
              systems.  Our dynamic equivalent comprises differential and algebraic
              relationships, which is widely accepted as the most accurate representation of
              energy processing systems.  The procedures that will be developed in this
              program are uniquely suited for identification of systems that exhibit multiple
              time scales (singularly perturbed systems) which are very common in energy
              processing.  Resulting ANN models are based on measurements, or on (possibly
              multiple) simulations of detailed models that are to be simplified.  We
              describe initial results along these directions in two examples from power
              systems and electric machines.
This project will develop ANN architectures and
              training methods that are specific for the modeling tasks in energy processing
              systems.  In particular, new connections and comparisons between standard
              (physics-based) models and ANN structures will be explored in the domain of 
              "gray-box"  models which combine the two classes.  New developments will be
              evaluated within three modeling approaches: (i) time-domain, (ii) standard
              phasor, and (iii) dynamic phasor framework.



