Title       : Foundations of Microfabricated Interfaces for Bioseparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9820829

Award Number: 9820829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tejal A. Desai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820829
Desai
The proposed research project focuses on the characterization of
              microfabricated membranes with attention to material/structural optimization
              and the functionality of the membranes as biological filters. The technologies
              of surface and bulk micromachining are used to create membranes with a
              multitude of pore configurations and arrangements, capable of high densities
              and uniform pore sizes. By using a combination of photolithography and
              deposition/selective removal of sacrificial layers, well- controlled pore sizes
              (less than a 5% variation) in the tens of nanometers on silicon substrates are
              achieved. Several issues related to processing and material selection will be
              examined to render the membranes more compatible with bioseparation
              applications. By investigating different perm-selectivity criteria such as
              structural materials, geometry, and surface chemistries, it is expected that
              the physical foundations of fabricating membranes for bioseparation will be
              better understood. Aim 1 is "Filter design and functionality" and includes: a)
              Investigating defects inherent in the current process, b) Improving flow rates
              by alterations in structural layer thicknesses and hole density; and c)
              Evaluating the mechanical properties of the membrane using different top
              structural layer materials. Aim 2 ("Interactions with Biological Systems")
              will] consist of: a)Examining biocompatibility and thrombogenicity for
              membranes of different microfabricated structural materials; b) Implementing
              Anti-fouling and surface modification strategies for microfabricated membranes
              using solution and vapor phase deposition techniques; and c) Investigating the
              diffusion and exclusion of biological proteins and molecules through
              microfabricated filters. Finally, Aim 3, "Integrated Filtration Systems"
              includes a) integrating charge-based separation capabilities to microfabricated
              membranes to create "functional" interfaces and b) Characterizing Integrated
              Filters via Bead and Protein Separation Studies.

Through this project, it is
              hoped that the use microfabrication technology will be explored to not only
              create controlled interfaces, but also understand fundamental processing
              advances which will facilitate integration of microfabrication technology with
              biology. It represents an important step in the merging of disciplines to
              answer critical questions at the interface of biology and engineering, and
              paves the way for the development of membranes uniquely suited for biomedical
              applications in viral filtration and immunoisolation.
***

