Title       : REU Site: An Insider
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9820031

Award Number: 9820031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Foley mfoley@skidmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh J. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidmore College
	      815 North Broadway
	      Saratoga Springs, NY  12866    518/580-5000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
              Site in Psychology at Skidmore College.  The long-term goal is to support the
              educational development of the students, increasing their relative independence
              as young researchers.  Twelve student interns will spend eight weeks working
              with faculty mentors.  Experiences will include designing studies, testing
              individuals, and analyzing data.  In addition, they will attend workshops
              focusing on a variety of topics including "life after college" as a science
              major, getting into graduate school, making the most of technological
              resources, and conducting statistical analyses.  The projects providing the
              focus for the research experience will include such topics as children's memory
              for collaborative activities, mechanisms mediating closure processes, the
              specialized role of the right hemisphere in attentional processing,
              preschoolers' understanding of individual identify, and personality
              characteristics associated with personal goals and well-being.  Research
              interns' capstone experiences will include a mini-conference at which they will
              present the outcomes of their summer research and a research proposal intended
              as a draft for work they might continue in the coming academic year.

This
              award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented
              students into careers in science through active undergraduate research
              experiences.

