Title       : REU Site for Microelectronics Research at Boise State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2001   
File        : a9820448

Award Number: 9820448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Burkett SBURKETT@boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Lusth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820448
Boise State University
Susan L. Burkett


Boise State University
              (BSU) is in a unique position to offer research experience in the
              microelectronics area to undergraduates from across the nation.  The presence
              of local microelectronics industry was one of the primary motivations for the
              formation of the College of Engineering at BSU in 1996.  Faculty members from
              the newly formed College plan to team with faculty in Computer Science and
              Chemistry who are already actively involved in a variety of different aspects
              related to the microelectronics area.  The specific objectives of the proposed
              REU program include: training of undergraduates in microelectronics research,
              development of skills appropriate for undergraduates that will offer them
              increased opportunities in the future, raising student interest and awareness
              in graduate studies, and making future contacts for students with fellow REU
              students and participating faculty advisors at BSU.  The opportunity to perform
              research in the area of microelectronics will be extended to undergraduates
              with an emphasis on highly qualified students from groups, that is
              underrepresented in engineering and the sciences.

Research projects will
              include a variety of topics and involve training in state-of-the art
              instrumentation and techniques.  Topics to be researched include: environmental
              aspects of alternative wafer cleaning techniques, simulation of IC processes,
              computer modeling, characterization of high-frequency devices, reliability of
              magnetic field sensors, microelectronic switching devices, and polymer
              processing.  Facilities include well-equipped laboratories and advanced
              computing capabilities.  The majority of the REU students will be performing
              research in a newly constructed Class 1000 cleanroom that was made possible by
              acquisition of both local industrial donations and university funds.  This lab
              includes a variety of processing, metrology, and device characterization
              equipment.  The proposed REU site at BSU will enhance the quality of
              undergraduate education by providing research opportunities with faculty
              members working in the area of microelectronics.

