Title       : A System for Long-Term Monitoring of an Advanced Polymer Composite Bridge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1998  
File        : a9820868

Award Number: 9820868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Shenton, III shenton@ce.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis R. Mertz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Gillespie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Chajes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9820868 
Shenton,III 
A team of researchers at the University of
              Delaware, in collaboration with the Delaware Department of Transportation
              (DelDOT) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) will complete a Small
              Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project focused on design and performance
              of a Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) bridge.  The study includes consideration
              of design methods, establishment of a material property database for
              accelerated aging tests, and full-scale lab testing of subcomponents.  The
              result will be the design and installation of a long-term structural health
              monitoring system for the bridge that will allow for the long-term assessment
              of its performance under actual service conditions.  The research will produce
              a stand-alone, automatic system for continuous monitoring and evaluation of a
              novel bridge. 

The long-term monitoring system will utilize traditional and
              novel nondestructive sensors (i.e., fiber optics) and will automatically record
              and store data at specified time intervals and also when heavy vehicles cross
              the bridge.  Using this information, the effects of sustained load,
              temperature, and environmental conditions, as well as the bridge's performance
              under live loads, can be assessed.  The system will be fully automatic, require
              little operator intervention, and be remotely accessible via modem or other
              wireless communication link.  A controlled load test will be performed at the
              start of the project to verify that the system is working properly and to
              investigate the way in which long-term data can be best used to predict the
              long-term performance of composite structures.   
***
