Title       : Collaborative Research: In Situ-Time Series Experiments Defining the Thermal and
               Compositional Variability in Tidally Perturbed Submarine Hydrothermal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9820105

Award Number: 9820105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $972145             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Delaney jdelaney@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin D. Lilley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Wilcock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1319,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our program will explore the interactive physical-chemical processes at play in
              gradient driven submarine environments by focusing on three key questions
              within a hydrothermal system on the Endeavour Segment of the Juan de Fuca
              Ridge.  These questions include:  1) What are the physical and chemical
              consequences of phase separation in black smokers; 2) What is the origin of
              low-temperature diffusely venting fluids that are associated with
              high-temperature fields, but which also occur far-field, and 3) How can tidal
              perturbations be used to explore subsurface chemical and microbiological
              processes within a single hydrothermal field.  Investigation of these questions
              is important in that phase separation (e.g. boiling), diffuse venting, and
              tidal forcing operate in many, if not all, ridge crest hydrothermal
              environments; all of these processes are accessible for direct study in the
              four hydrothermal fields on the Endeavour. Using a range of in situ physical
              and chemical sensors and a new strategy for sustained fluid sampling, we will
              document the effects of tidal perturbations in fluid temperature, pressure,
              composition, and flow rate in areas of both high- and low-temperature flow. 
              Our goal is to develop a series of interdisciplinary models linking the
              processes that produce these changes.  In addition, observed tidal effects will
              provide insights into the responses of the entire system to identifiable
              perturbations and may allow us to develop models of subseafloor flow patterns
              and permeability structure.

