Title       : Structure and Reactivity of Metal, Inorganic, and Organic Monolayers on
               Electrode Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9820828

Award Number: 9820828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Gewirth agewirth@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor Andrew Gewirth at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is
              examining the structure and reactivity of several electrode reactions, using a
              variety of electrochemical and scanning probe microscopic methods.  With the
              support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, he is considering the
              electroreduction of oxygen, peroxide, and nitrate on underpotential deposition
              modified surfaces.  He is also investigating the structure of small molecule
              adsorbates, including specifically polyoxometallates,  on electrode surfaces
              and correlating that with the structure and function of the monolayer.  Studies
              of the structure of solvents on electrode surfaces using UHV methods are also
              underway.  A detailed understanding of the connection between structure and
              reactivity of modified electrode surfaces is important for the understanding
              and subsequent design of electrochemical catalysts, fuel cell electrodes, and
              electrochemical sensors.  

In order to develop improved electrodes for fuel
              cell and sensor applications, a detailed understanding of the structure of the
              electrode surface must be obtained.  When coupled with measures of the
              reactivity of these modified surfaces, design criteria can be developed.  This
              research project focusses on obtaining this structure-function correlation for
              a number of important electrochemical processes, including electroreduction,
              solvent interactions, and surface modification by inorganic overlayers.  This
              information will be useful for the design of improved sensors and
              electrocatalysts.

