Title       : Studies in Proof Complexity and Circuit Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a9820831

Award Number: 9820831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71170              (Estimated)
Investigator: Toniann Pitassi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9820831
Pitassi

The central problem in complexity theory is to
              understand which problems can be solved efficiently. The central problem in
              propositional proof complexity is to understand which tautologies have
              efficient proofs in standard proof systems. There are many interconnections
              between these two lines of research, and in the last decade exciting new
              results have been obtained by combining and mixing ideas from both fields. The
              overall aim of this research project is to make progress in both of these areas
              (circuit complexity and proof complexity) with emphasis on proving lower bounds
              for propositional proof systems. A focus is the complexity of algebraic proof
              systems: these are natural proof systems derived from the Grobner basis
              algorithm. To illustrate their fundamental nature, there have already been
              several applications of algebraic lower bounds, including lower bounds for
              NP-search problems, lower bounds for bounded depth Frege proofs, and new
              algorithms for satisfiability testing.  Related problems investigated include:
              the complexity of random formulas, the proof-theoretic strength required to
              resolve the P=?NP question, and connections to algebraic circuit lower
              bounds.

A complementary facet of the theoretical work described above is to
              build good algorithms for satisfiability testing. There has been an increasing
              trend to solve many problems, particular in AI domains, with heuristics for
              satisfiability. These algorithms are typically variations of standard proof
              search methods (i.e., randomized versions of resolution) and perform quite well
              empirically. However, almost no analytical results are known as to how, why and
              under which conditions the heuristics work well. A goal of this research is to
              provide analytical results that are meaningful, and to develop new algorithms
              for SAT and SSAT (stochastic SAT) that improve upon existing state-of-the-art
              algorithms. 



