Title       : An Undergraduate Research Experience in Microelectronics and Photonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9820646

Award Number: 9820646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Tuttle gtuttle@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vikram L. Dalal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan P. Constant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Black  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820646
Iowa State University
Gary Tuttle

We are proposing a three-year REU
              program to offer summer-long research experiences in the fields of
              microelectronics and photonics.  Program participants will be upper-level
              students juniors and seniors) majoring in electrical engineering, physics,
              materials science, and chemistry.  The REU program will be operated at the
              Microelectronics Research Center of Iowa State University.  The proposed
              program builds on similar REU programs that have been offered at ISU since
              1990.  Students will be working on research projects in the areas of electronic
              materials characterization, deposition and growth techniques, semiconductor
              device design and fabrication, photonic band gap structures, photovoltaic
              devices, microwave devices, and simulation techniques.  The research projects
              will be guided by the five faculty investigators.  Each of the REU students
              will work closely with their faculty mentors and give periodic seminars on
              their research progress.  As part of the research experience, the participants
              will take a summer-long course on semiconductor microfabrication methods.  This
              course teaches fundamental knowledge and skills needed for successful
              completion of the research projects.  The REU students will be recruited from
              ISU, schools with accredited engineering programs in the Midwest, Midwestern
              liberal arts colleges with physics and chemistry programs, and schools that
              have traditionally had large African-American and Hispanic enrollments.  We
              expect that a significant fraction of the REU participants will eventually
              enroll in graduate school, at ISU or elsewhere.

