Title       : Undergraduate Research Experiences in Conservation Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9820294

Award Number: 9820294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Robichaux robichau@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl W. Flessa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl L. Craddock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This three-year project will encourage and support undergraduate research in
              conservation biology. Students will be awarded conservation
              internships--partnerships between the University of Arizona and community
              conservation organizations--focusing on scientific and educational issues
              judged to be critical to understanding and preserving the Sonoran Desert
              region's biotic richness. Two mentors will guide each student intern, one from
              the University of Arizona, the other from the community organization. Grant
              funds will support student stipends and modest research expenses. Students will
              report the results of their internships at a University of Arizona/Community
              Symposium on Conservation Biology and at campus forums for student
              research.
This project will provide students with valuable educational and
              practical experience, conservation organizations with valuable expertise and
              energy, and both the University of Arizona and community mentors with the basis
              for ongoing collaborations. Forging partnerships between these two groups also
              generates an ideal training and testing ground for a new generation of
              conservation biologists-scientists who can bridge the gap between pure and
              applied research.

