Title       : Estimation and Control with Bounded Data Uncertainties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9820765

Award Number: 9820765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali H. Sayed sayed@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with the development of estimation and control strategies for
              input-output and state-space models with bounded data uncertainties.  The new
              methods will be referred to as BDU estimation and BDU control methods for
              brevity.  They are based on new constrained game-type formulations that allow
              the designer to explicitly incorporate into the problem statement a-priori
              information about bounds on the sizes of the uncertainties in the models.  In
              this way, the effect of uncertainties will not be unnecessarily over-emphasized
              beyound what is implied by the a-priori bounds; consequently, overly
              conservative designs, as well as overly sensitive designs, will be
              avoided.

A Key feature of the BDU formulations is that geometric insights
              (such as orthogonality conditions and projections) and recursive (adaptive or
              online) techniques, which are widely known and appreciated for classical
              quadratic-cost designs, can be pursued in this new framework.  Also, algorithms
              for computing optimal solutions with the same computational effort as standard
              least-squares solutions exist, thus making the new formulations attractive for
              practical use.

A major theme in this work will be the emphasis on geometric
              constructions, on state-space formulations, and on design for models with
              parametric uncertainties.  Applications accross several disciplines, including
              image processing, communications, adaptive systems, estimation, and control,
              will be pursued.  Despite the interesting preliminary results, several issues
              remain open and indicate potential future developments.
