Title       : Logical Studies in the Complexity of Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9820899

Award Number: 9820899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Weinstein weinstein@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is a logical approach to the study of computational complexity. 
              This approach will enlist one of the main traditions which has emerged in
              mathematical logic since the 1930's namely, model theory.  Model theory studies
              the relation between logical languages and their interpretations and has
              developed powerful techniques to answer questions about the expressive power of
              a variety of logical languages.
 
A significant feature of this work is that
              it forgoes, to a large extent, the use of machine models of computation in the
              study of complexity.  Much valuable work in complexity theory has involved
              careful analysis of the resource requirements of various algorithms on
              specified abstract machines.  It may be possible to obtain new insights into
              the complexity of combinatorial problems by analyzing these problems in
              machine-independent, logical terms.  Some of the problems that will be
              considered, such as the separation of fixed-point definability from first-order
              definability over certain classes of graphs, have direct implications for the
              separation of complexity classes.  Though these implications are certainly
              significant, the focus of this research is to achieve a deeper understanding of
              the problems themselves by the use of logical techniques.

In addition to
              offering a machine-independent approach to the study of the complexity of
              combinatorial problems, logic deals directly with questions concerning
              representing and reasoning about information.
Such questions are of evident
              significance across the breadth of computer science.  This work will bear on
              some such questions, particularly as they arise within the context of database
              theory. 

