Title       : U.S.-Belize Cooperative Research: Muds and Pollution in Belize Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a9820607

Award Number: 9820607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19070              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Gibbs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820607
Gibbs

This Americas Program award will fund a two year cooperative
              research project between Dr. Ronald Gibbs, University of Delaware, Dr. Carlos
              Guerra, University of Belize, and  Ismael Fabro, Chief Environmental and
              Hydrology Officer, Belmopan, Belize.  The project will include two US graduate
              students from the University of Delaware as well as students from the
              University in Belize.  The research will focus on harbor sediments and
              pollution,   that pose a potential threat to the magnificent barrier coral reef
              off the Belize coast.  This is the second longest in the world, and one of the
              most pristine, but its decline has begun because of increasing human contact,
              overfishing and sedimentation from coastal rivers.  The most deleterious factor
              has been determined to be phosphorous in nature, which causes algal and
              planktonic blooms to cloud the water and prevent photosynthesis, causing the
              mortality of the hard coral.. 

The proposed study will investigate why the
              muds and toxic metals associated with them accumulate in the harbor. 
              Measurements of  river area salinity, temperature, dissolved oxygen, and both
              the turbidity and the velocity of the water will be taken by the US and
              Belizean collaborators.  These profiles will provide sufficient  data to
              calculate a box model which will indicate transport and deposition of the muds
              and pollutants.  A comparative study will allow the determination of the amount
              of pollution entering the river and estuarine environment and their possible
              source areas. The results of this project will benefit, not only Belize, but
              also could contribute to saving other coral reefs which are also facing
              disappearance. 

