Title       : Wetting Transitions in Liquid and Solid Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9820169

Award Number: 9820169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Wynblatt pw01@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9820169
Wynblatt

This research consists of two principal thrusts.  The first
              thrust focuses on the study of wetting transitions in liquid alloys.  This is a
              natural extension of work performed under a previous NSF grant on two-phase
              liquid Ga-Pb alloys in which complete wetting of the Ga-rich phase by the
              Pb-rich phase was demonstrated.  The approaches to be used in this study
              include measurement of liquid alloy surface energies by means of the sessile
              drop technique, coupled with direct measurements of adsorption at the liquid
              surfaces by Auger electron spectroscopy (AES).  In addition, the gravitational
              thinning of the (denser) Pb-rich liquid layer at the surface of the (less
              dense) Ga-rich liquid phase is investigated in binary Ga-Pb alloys.  This is
              accomplished by AES measurements of the thickness of the Pb layer as a function
              of liquid drop height.  The second thrust of the research addresses wetting
              transitions in solid two-phase alloys.  No previous work on wetting transitions
              has been reported in solid binary alloys.  The Au-Ni system is identified as
              one in which a transition in wetting of the Ni-rich phase by the Au-rich phase
              is likely to take place.  The wetting transition is investigated by studying
              the associated Au adsorption (segregation) phenomena at the surface of the
              Ni-rich phase.  The adsorption of Au at the surfaces of single-phase Ni-rich
              alloys is studied as samples are cooled towards the miscibility gap, where
              Au-rich and Ni-rich phases coexist.  The adsorption behavior of Au is expected
              to be quite different at temperatures above and below the wetting
              temperature.
%%%
Whereas a great deal of research has been performed over the
              past several years to develop improved fundamental understanding of wetting
              transitions, most of this work has focused on wetting transitions in liquid
              organic mixtures, or in adsorbed noble gases.  In contrast, little research has
              been devoted to the nature of these phenomena in metallic alloys, where the
              interactions are quite different.  Thus this research has a potential for
              leading to exciting new science.  In addition, the selected alloys represent a
              large class of technologically interesting materials.  For instance, the study
              of wetting phenomena is clearly important in developing better fundamental
              understanding of solid and liquid phase sintering, of liquid metal joining
              processes, of metal refining, and of liquid metal embrittlement.
***

