Title       : Inverse Acoustic Problems in Shallow Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9820813

Award Number: 9820813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Gilbert gilbert@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop methods for the direct scattering
              problem in the case of a non-homogeneous ocean with a non-homogeneous,
              poro-elastic seabed.  With regard to acoustic inverse problems in a shallow
              ocean, the researchers will investigate the undetermined object problem and the
              unknown parameters problem.  Such research is of importance in investigating
              estuaries, harbors and coastal waters for the nature of the seabed and the
              existence of inhomogeneities.  The nature of the seabed is of interest to
              fisheries because it determines the spawning grounds of certain fish species;
              whereas, inhomogeneities may be caused by sunken wreckage, mines and mineral
              deposits buried in the seabed.  In both inverse problems, an incident acoustic
              wave is scattered off an object or the sea-floor in order to determine the
              shape of an object or the physical coefficients of the seabed.  Prior work by
              the investigators have been limited to the case of a homogeneous ocean with a
              totally reflective seabed.  They now have the theory and numerical algorithms
              in place to extend this procedure to the case of oceans with elastic and/or
              poro-elastic seabeds.  This work will be completed by developing good
              computational procedures for the ocean with variable index of refraction and
              elastic and/or poro-elastic seabeds.  The PI's development of the mathematical
              techniques and the software to solve the fully three-dimensional, direct
              problem for a homogeneous, poro-elastic seabed and a stratified ocean will
              permit extension of the methodology for solving the unidentified object problem
              to the case of non-homogeneous oceans with interactive seabeds.  
