Title       : Cooperative International Research Project with Russia: Blaschke Inductive
               Limits of Disc Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9820775

Award Number: 9820775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas V. Tonev ma_tt@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9820775	
Principal Investigator: Thomas Tonev

Abstract: This
              project focuses on a circle of problems arising from the interaction between
              complex function theory, commutative Banach algebras, and inductive and
              projective limits of spaces. Classical and modern techniques of complex
              analysis will be applied to inductive limits of disk algebras generated by
              Blaschke products and inner functions, a special case of which is the algebra
              of generalized analytic functions, i.e., of functions on a compact abelian
              group with ordered dual that are analytic in a particular sense. Relationships
              between inductive limit algebras generated by one inner function and complex
              dynamical systems will be investigated. It appears that the ideas involved have
              great potential for further developments in the analysis on compact groups with
              ordered duals and for a host of topics: Wiener-Hopf operators, invariant
              subspaces of some function spaces, dynamical systems, commutative Banach
              algebra theory, analytic function theory, corona type problems, Bourgain
              algebras and Hankel type operators, stability under small
              perturbations.

This international cooperative research project is jointly
              funded by NSF's Division of Mathematical Sciences and Division of International
              Programs. Its objectives will be achieved through direct cooperative research
              between Thomas Tonev of the University of Montana in the U.S. and Dr. Suren
              Grigoryan of Kazan State University in Tatarstan, Russia. Work on the project
              will serve to internationalize an ongoing domestic research effort in the area
              of abstract harmonic analysis by linking it with a similar project and other
              related research activities in Russia. The research will draw on the
              intellectual resources of both sides, and the direct contacts will allow the
              project to proceed at an optimal rate. It is the theory of dynamical systems,
              through its connections to abstract harmonic analysis, that lies at the root of
              the proposed research. This area, which is developing very rapidly at present,
              has important applications to many physical problems. It is well-known, for
              instance, that most processes in the physical world have an almost-periodic
              rather than strictly periodic behavior. One of the triumphs in the theory of
              dynamical systems has been the creation of mathematical tools for studying
              almost-periodic phenomena. This explains the great interest in almost-periodic
              functions and their close relatives, generalized analytic functions, which are
              among the principal objects of investigation in this cooperative endeavor. A
              successful completion of this project would lead to new discoveries of at first
              primarily mathematical interest but with great future potential for
              application.

