Title       : Research Scholars in Electrical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9820496

Award Number: 9820496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Magnusson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa A. Maldonado  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820496
The University of Texas@Arlington
Theresa A. Maldonado and Robert
              Magnusson

Since 1985, UT Arlington's Department of Electrical Engineering
              has conducted a program involving undergraduate scholars in research projects. 
              In 1991, UTA became an NSF REU site.  Consequently, the program was greatly
              strengthened by increasing the funding, raising the number of students involved
              and providing research opportunities during the summer.  This proposal is a
              request to continue the UTA NSF REU site for 5 additional years.  The program
              objective will continue to be the participation of undergraduate scholars in
              research projects with significant interaction between faculty and students. 
              An academic year component, open to all qualified scholars, and a summer
              component, designed to emphasize the participation of underrepresented
              minorities, are proposed.  The scholars will be expected to exhibit qualities
              such as creativity, productivity, effective communication, and independence
              upon completion of their training in the program.  Students will participate in
              the complete research process.  They will select a research topic with their
              faculty mentor, write a research proposal, conduct the research, analyze data,
              write progress and final reports, present the work orally, perform an ethics
              study, and evaluate the REU experience.  Summer students will also participate
              in visits to local high technology industries and laboratories.  The REU
              scholars are encouraged to participate in a number of research competitions. 
              UT Arlington has promoted undergraduate research over the years and hosts an
              annual campus-wide Symposium on Undergraduate Research and Creative Activity in
              which the REU scholars are required to participate.  Principal program impact
              is development of motivated and capable research students with two-thirds of
              past participants pursuing graduate education.

