Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Oklahoma Weather Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9820587

Award Number: 9820587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelvin K. Droegemeier kkd@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark H. Palmer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Shannon Stevenson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daphne Zaras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program, the Principal
              Investigator and collaborators will bring 30 undergraduate students to Norman,
              Oklahoma during the late Spring and Summers of 1999 and 2000 to participate in
              the Oklahoma Weather Center (OWC) REU program.  Each year, ten students will be
              selected from across the United States to participate in the program.  REU
              students will conduct research on an atmospheric science topic, under the
              supervision of mentors at the Weather Center.  In addition to research, the
              student will participate in field programs, tours of Weather Center facilities,
              workshops, field trips, and lectures.  These activities are designed to produce
              a well-rounded summer learning experience.  Student participants will also
              prepare and present a paper reporting the results of their research to members
              of the Oklahoma Weather Center Community.  

Housing, transportation and a
              modest stipend will be provided to make the program accessible to economically
              disadvantaged students who must work during summers to support their continuing
              education.  Special efforts will be made to recruit members of underrepresented
              groups in science and mathematics (Native Americans, African Americans,
              Hispanic Americans, and women).  This will be done by actively recruiting
              students at conferences such as the American Indian Science and Engineering
              conference and scheduling recruiting visits to some Historically Black Colleges
              and Universities, and Tribal Colleges and Universities.   Notification of the
              REU program will be given to Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
              Tribal Colleges and Universities, and Hispanic Association of Colleges and
              Universities through fliers, brochures, and electronic mail. 

The objectives
              of the proposed Oklahoma Weather Center REU are:

1. Recruit and acquire a
              diverse pool of applications from qualified American undergraduate students who
              attend colleges and universities across the country
2. Select a diverse,
              qualified group of undergraduate students to participate in the program
3.
              Provide a World-class educational research experience for undergraduates under
              the supervision of dedicated mentors, with access to cutting edge research
              facilities at the Oklahoma Weather Center
4. Match students with significant
              research projects that can be completed within a 10 week time frame
5.
              Evaluate the REU program through the use of student questionnaires, interviews
              with mentors and comparisons with past OWC REU programs
6. Track student
              participants for a total of 5 to 10 years after the program


