Title       : Effectiveness of Safety Regulations: A Study of U. S. Coast Guard Inspections,
               Detection of Violations, and Occurrence of Casualties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9820269

Award Number: 9820269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69607              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kishore Gawande gawande@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alok K. Bohara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      Although regulatory agencies are charged with a wide variety of
              important oversight responsibilities, little empirical work has been done on
              the actual performance of these agencies in carrying out their day-to-day
              monitoring activities.  A variety of different models have been proposed to
              analyze relations between a regulator or auditor, and those regulated or
              audited, but tests of the theoretical models are rare.  The proposed research
              examines regulatory performance by studying the safety regulation activities of
              the U. S. Coast Guard (USCG).  Since many of the USCG's safety-related
              activities are in the nature of inspections and monitoring, this provides a
              rich and relevant context in which to examine some general implications from
              the theoretical literature.  The research plan involves use of new empirical
              methods and tests designed to be tightly connected to the underlying theory.  A
              major goal of the research is to use the results of these tests to evaluate the
              predictions of existing models, and thus provide guidance for the direction in
              which these models should be extended, or new models should be built. While the
              data to be analyzed are from a single government entity, the theoretical,
              empirical and public policy problems addressed apply to a wide variety of
              enforcement agencies, and also to agencies confronting problems such as the
              effective control of health spending.		
        A further goal of the proposed
              research involves specific analysis of USCG operations, with a view to
              assessing their effectiveness in reducing the expected number of casualties on
              U.S. flag vessels.  These estimations will serve as a scientific basis for
              guiding allocation of inspection budgets among different inspection offices
              across the U.S., or among different types of vessels.  Because the analysis
              will produce measures of the effectiveness of additional money spent on
              inspections, it will also allow the researchers to assess how constrained the
              USCG inspection budget is.  Finally, the researchers will be able to ask how
              the government can facilitate and make USCG activities more efficient by
              computing the optimal (as opposed to the existing) amount of penalties that
              would enable a socially optimal safety result.

