Title       : Multiphase Flow and Stability in Single, Branching and Flexible Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9820967

Award Number: 9820967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Grotberg grotberg@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820967
Grotberg
This proposal addresses the formation, propagation, rupture
              and prevention of liquid boluses in tubes with applications to human airways
              and multi-phase industrial flows.  Two projects are outlined involving
              interfacial fluid mechanics related to the pulmonary system: Project I -
              perturbed capillary-elastic instabilities which are fundamental to the
              stability of small airways as they close and re-open; Project II - liquid plug
              propagation in a flexible tube, a fundamental mechanism of airway reopening and
              also of liquid bolus delivery of surfactants and medications into the lung;
              Both projects include theoretical studies and bench-top experiments which are
              designed to investigate the underlying fluid and interfacial dynamics with an
              eye toward applications to biomedicine and technology.  

In Project I, the
              stability of the thin liquid lining which coats the airways is examined. 
              Instabilities in this lining may cause closing off of the small airways by
              capillary-elastic interactions which form a liquid bolus or plug.  The closure
              and subsequent reopening of these airways contributes to the shape of the
              pressure-volume curve in cycled lungs and measuring the occurrence of airway
              closure is one component of a standard pulmonary function test.  Certain
              disease states, e.g. hyaline membrane disease, in newborns who lack sufficient
              surfactant lead to pathological airway closure, thus impairing gas exchange. 
              The proposed research in Project I addresses the nature of airway closure and
              subsequent bolus formation as it is affected by cyclic perturbations from
              respiratory motion, including oscillation of the radial wall boundary and
              oscillation of fluid shear stress (from tidal air flow) at the air-liquid
              interface.  We have preliminary results which indicate, for example, that
              oscillatory shear on the air-liquid interface can prevent the capillary
              instability from leading to closure.  Examining the parameter ranges over which
              this preventive perturbation may hold will be one of the important specific
              goals for research.

A current technique for the treatment of hyaline
              membrane disease (surfactant deficiency in neonates) is to deliver surfactant
              into the lung by instilling it directly into the neonatal trachea.  Other
              clinical situations which involve instillation of liquids into the lung are
              liquid ventilation, delivery of genetic material for gene-therapy treatment and
              drug delivery during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.  The instilled surfactants
              and liquids spread by surface and gravity forces and by convection with the
              airflow if they form a bolus or plug in the airway.  The proposed research in
              Project II addresses the fluid mechanics and transport of a liquid bolus in a
              flexible tube to advance our knowledge and understanding of how the plug
              delivers its liquid and potential solutes to the airways and alveoli. 
              Experiments on bolus flow through a tube (airway) bifurcation is introduced
              with symmetric and non-symmetric conditions, the latter stemming from either
              gravity effects or the presence of a bolus in one of the bifurcation branches
              prior to delivery of a new bolus upstream.  

In addition to the pulmonary
              application discussed above, this research addresses issues which are basic to
              other engineering fields.  As a technologically related counterpart to airway
              closure, the stability of similar free surfaces is important in  annular
              extrusion methods for manufacturing small hollow fibers. These may be materials
              processed for a number of applications.  Also, there are methods of
              co-extrusion manufacturing (e.g. optical fibers) in which there is an inner
              plug core of liquid and an outer annulus of a different liquid extruded
              simultaneously, one around the other.   Understanding the coupled behavior of
              our biomedical problem will shed light on these materials processing examples,
              since the approaches will have many similarities and the stability behavior is
              likely to overlap in certain parameter ranges where, for example, one surface
              is more unstable than the other.  In addition, the formation of liquid plugs in
              two-phase flows through porous media follow similar behavior to airway closure
              phenomena and arise in important applications of oil recovery.

