Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: CMS Forward Calorimetry at LHC/CERN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9820258

Award Number: 9820258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33634              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasar Onel yasar-onel@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5940,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820258
Onel

Description:  This award supports a collaborative research
              project between a US team, headed by Professor Yasar Onel, Department of
              Physics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, and a Turkish team headed by
              Professor Mehmet Zeyrek, Department of Physics, Middle East Technical
              University, Ankara, Turkey.  These scientists plan to work on the development
              of special calorimeters capable of operating in very high radiation
              environments.  Such calorimeters are important in the field of experimental
              particle physics, and will be used in a subsystem (the Very Forward Calorimeter
              HF) of the high-energy physics experiment, Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) at the
              Large Hadron Collider (LHC).  The two teams will study the detailed scheme of
              the calorimeter configuration and assembly scenario, test the performance of
              appropriate engineering solutions of some critical components of the quartz
              fiber (QF) calorimeter which has been selected for the HF environment, and
              perform the relevant simulation of expected calorimeter performance and give a
              recommendation for design optimization.
  
Scope:  This project will support
              collaboration between two scientific teams with complementary qualifications
              and institutional facilities.  The US scientist has been quite active in
              experimental particle physics with funding from the University of Iowa and the
              Department of Energy.  He will include with him in this effort from his
              university two professors and several graduate students.  The Turkish team
              includes several professors and graduate students from M.E.T.U. and from
              Cukurova University in Adana, Turkey.  Both universities have been active in
              high-energy physics research in collaboration with CERN.  The Turkish science
              agency (TUBITAK) is contributing SFr. 1.0M to the CMS-HF construction project,
              indicating a strong commitment to this research.  The project fits well within
              the objectives of the Division of International Programs for support of
              mutually beneficial collaborative research.

