Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates: Experimental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9820356

Award Number: 9820356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arri Eisen aeisen@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Quinones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award will allow 15 undergraduates to participate in the SURE program at
              Emory University. This program meets for 10 weeks (June-August) and offers
              hands-on research opportunities. The SURE program receives funds from various
              sources; participants will be working in all areas of biology as well as
              psychology, anthropology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics.  Students will
              participate in research in the areas of developmental biology, cell biology and
              molecular modeling, under the direct supervision of Emory researchers. 
              Participants will be recruited from Atlanta-area institutions and small
              college's nation-wide, with an emphasis in offering research opportunities to
              women and minorities.

Awardees will work with a mentor in a research area
              selected by the student. The student will spend ten weeks as a part of the
              research team and will participate in laboratory activities such as seminars
              and lab meetings. The student will also attend SURE activities that relate to
              science careers and ethics in science. The program has a strong ethics
              component, which includes weekly meetings and presentations by guest ethicists.
              Participants will complete research projects they will then present to the
              Emory community during a poster session at the end of the program. Students
              will also be invited to write a popular science piece on their research. Awards
              will be made for the best posters and articles during the closing banquet.
              Participants will be eligible for travel aid should they present their summer
              research at a scientific meeting.

