Title       : Broadband Indoor Wireless Access Using Infrared
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9820604

Award Number: 9820604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohsen Kavehrad mkavehrad@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1517,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820604
Kavehrad

The need for high-speed portable multimedia workstations is
              expected to accelerate the use of broadband wireless local access. Portable
              radio head devices require low power consumption, small size and weight. The
              demand for inexpensive, high-speed transmission links satisfying these
              requirements has motivated the research on indoor wireless access. Future
              portable multimedia workstations need wide bandwidth connections to cabled
              backbone LANs in order to transfer high data rates in the order of 150 Mb/s or
              more in multimedia communications. There are major technological challenges for
              broadband wireless local access and this is an important research area. Both IR
              and Radio Frequency (RF) technologies are being examined for this application.
              However, indoor wireless IR offers a great number of advantages over indoor RF
              as will be explained in the next section.

The proposed research is focused
              on a novel design of a jointly optimized transceiver optical antenna diversity
              system for broadband wireless ATM indoor IR local access. To achieve this, we
              plan to work on a spot-diffusing multiple lines-of-sight approach
              through:

1. Design and fabrication of a computer generated holographic
              beam-splitter, to be used at the transmitter for producing multiple diffusing
              spots;

2. Design and fabrication of a holographic mirror combining,
              concentrating and filtering functions, to be used at the narrow field-of-view
              branches of a composite angle diversity receiver;

3. Joint optimization of
              transmitter and receiver parameters;

4. Prototyped models will serve as
              broadband wireless access means, interfacing an ATM local area network        
              of high-speed multimedia work stations. We will also investigate whether
              Quality-of-Service (QoS) of an end-to-end ATM virtual connection can be
              guaranteed through such a wireless physical medium. 

In comparison with any
              currently available wireless IR optical transmission system, the effort should
              result in a higher transmission rate of about OC-12 and a larger range of
              coverage of about 100 meters diameter. The wireless configuration will be
              capable of handling many-to-one and one-to-many communications without direct
              line-of-sight requirements and will be tolerant to shadowing and blockage.


