Title       : Novel Beam Steering Techniques for Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9820644

Award Number: 9820644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kai Chang chang@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Nevels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820644
Chang

Wireless personal mobile, cellular and satellite
              communications have enjoyed the fastest growth rate in the telecommunication
              industry. By providing directional and steerable beams, smart antennas can
              deliver high gain and interference reduction in these applications. The
              conventional phased array system for beam steering requires many expensive
              phase shifters and beam forming networks. The system is very complicated and
              expensive. Consequently, the use of phased arrays is limited to a few
              sophisticated military and space systems. To overcome these problems, a simple,
              low cost approach for steering an antenna beam is proposed.
The proposed
              approach uses an electronically perturbed/tuned transmission line. A dielectric
              waveguide or image line can be perturbed by the proximity of a movable metal
              plate. The patch antenna array is fed through apertures by the dielectric
              waveguide. A small movement of the metal plate can be accomplished
              electromechanically using a motor or piezoelectric material. A MEMS device can
              also be used to accomplish this small movement. Unlike the gimbal systems, the
              proposed approach uses compact, planar and stationary antennas. Compared with
              conventional phased arrays, the proposed method does not require solid-state or
              ferrite phase shifters and their associated beam forming circuits. The proposed
              technique is less complicated and expensive as compared to the traditional
              methods.
 
Although hybrid mode analysis has been used for the propagation
              constant calculation in our preliminary concept development, a
              three-dimensional full-wave analysis will be developed to analyze the aperture
              coupling and to design the whole array. Method of Moments, Finite Difference
              Time Domain Method and an in house developed wavelet analysis program are
              proposed to analyze the proposed configuration. The analysis will provide
              design information such as impedance matching, aperture sizes, coupling
              coefficients, antenna element mutual coupling, array radiation patterns, and
              scanning angles as a function of various parameters and dimensions.
An
              eight-element linear array and a 4x4 two-dimensional array will be designed and
              demonstrated based on the 3D full-wave analysis. Active devices will be
              directly integrated with the image line to form an active antenna. The use of
              the piezoelectric material or MEMS device to accomplish the required small
              movement/perturbation will be investigated. The full-wave analysis will also be
              used to study the limitation and optimization of the array and steering
              angle.
 The proposed research will create a new class of compact and low cost
              beam steering antennas for wireless communications, radar and sensor
              applications. It should revolutionize the current phased array and beam
              steering technology. The results would have a far-reaching impact on future
              communication and radar systems.
***

