Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Advanced Composites for Aviation
               Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9820583

Award Number: 9820583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333782             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chihdar C. Yang yang@me.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bert L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Tomblin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila O'Connor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820583
Wichita State University
C. Charles Yang

The objectives of this
              project are to:  (1) enhance the technical and educational backgrounds of
              undergraduate students (with a goal of 50% participants in women and minority
              groups) by offering more collaborative research activities, (2) increase the
              number of women and minorities entering graduate school by providing vital
              information and necessary training for their admission to and success in
              graduate school, (3) assist undergraduate students in their development towards
              obtaining employment in high level engineering jobs, and (4) promote the
              interactions, both academic and industry, between minority and non-minority
              students.  Women, minority, and non-minority students in their junior and
              senior years of study will participate in this project.  The minority students
              will be recruited mainly from Wichita State University (WSU).  The ten selected
              students per year will participate in several composites research projects in
              the Composites Laboratory at the National Institute for Aviation Research
              during the academic year and summer.  Besides the faculty advisors specialized
              in advanced composites from both Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
              Departments of WSU, experts from Boeing, Cessna, Raytheon have agreed to serve
              as Industrial Advisory Board Members to direct and advise student research. 
              Parallel with the research component each participant will receive professional
              counseling and instruction necessary for planning to attend graduate school,
              with particular attention given to admissions and funding.  Participants will
              attend quarterly seminars regarding improved technical writing, graduate school
              success for women and minorities, and ethical issues in engineering.  The
              investigators have confidence that the program will be successful in training
              women, minority, and non-minority students and assist them in developing
              research skills needed for their industrial career as well as graduate
              studies.

