Title       : Group Rings and Related Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9820271

Award Number: 9820271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Passman passman@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820271

Donald S. Passman plans to work on three main problems during the
              next few years along with his usual slew of miscellaneous ones.  The main
              problems concern (1) the semiprimitivity of groups rings of finitely generated
              groups, (2) the structure of the lattice of two-sided ideals of a group
              algebra, and (3) the simplicity of Lie algebras of generalized Cartan type. 
              The proposer returned to the study of group rings in 1990 and during the past
              few years, in a long series of papers, he was able to describe the Jacobson
              radicals of group rings of locally finite groups.  In some sense, this solves
              half of the semiprimitivity problem, and he now proposes to work on the other
              half, namely the case of finitely generated groups.  The second problem is
              motivated by the visit of Alex Zalesskii to Madison for the Spring semester of
              1999.  He and the proposer plan to study variations of the question of when
              group algebras have only trivial ideals.  This will hopefully be the start of a
              long term collaboration.  Finally, the proposer has recently taken a ring
              theoretic approach to study the simplicity of Lie algebras of generalized
              Cartan type.  He has already settled the problem for Witt type algebras, is
              presently working with Jeff Bergen on the special algebras, and hopes to deal
              with the Hamiltonian and contact types at some later time.

Historically,
              groups first arose as the set of all symmetries of a geometric object.  Since
              the product (composition) of two symmetries is again a symmetry, we see that a
              group is a collection of elements with a ``nice'' multiplication.  Conversely,
              if we start with an abstract group, then we can better understand it by
              allowing it to ``act'' as symmetries on certain algebraic objects.  The
              appropriate objects to consider here are built out of vectors and are called
              vector spaces.  The action is achieved by forming the group algebra, which is
              an algebraic object determined by the group and having both an addition and a
              multiplication.  The vector spaces of interest are then what are known as the
              irreducible modules for the group algebra, irreducible because we would like
              them to be as small as possible.  As it turns out, there is a fundamental
              obstacle to this procedure, namely the Jacobson radical of the group algebra. 
              Indeed, the procedure works if and only if this radical is trivial, in which
              case we say that the group algebra is semiprimitive.  Thus, it is a natural and
              important problem to decide when group algebras are semiprimitive, and this is
              the goal of proposal (1), described above. Proposal (2) is concerned with
              taking an even closer look at the group algebra, but under more special
              circumstances.

