Title       : Dynamic Forced Performance of Fluid Film Bearings Operating with Air Entrainment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9820845

Award Number: 9820845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. San Andres lsanandres@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9820845
San Andres
Squeeze film dampers (SFDs) are virtually the only means to
              provide structural isolation and vibration energy dissipation in aircraft
              engines and light hydrocarbon centrifugal compressors. These high performance
              rotor-bearing systems operate above the natural frequencies of the flexural
              modes. When the system passes through critical speeds large dynamic loads are
              induces.  This may cause very high amplitude vibrations at the rotor and
              bearing supports. Under these operating conditions, oil lubricated SFDs as well
              as dynamically loaded journal bearings are prone to develop regions where the
              lubricant is foamy, which greatly reduces their dynamic force capacity. This
              pervasive phenomenon is well known in industry but still lacks proper physical
              understanding and sound analytical modeling. 
 
In this study measurements of
              dynamic pressure fields and rotor motions will be performed on a modified
              journal bearing and SFD test rig operating with a foam-like lubricant and under
              dynamic loads exerted from a shaker system. Fundamental understanding of bubbly
              flow fields will be gained through high-speed photography studies and image
              identification techniques which will be used to track the time evolution and
              spatial structure of the air bubbles within the thin film flow. In addition,
              imbalance response measurements in an industrial size rotor supported on SFDs,
              constructed with prior NSF support, will be conducted to identify damping force
              coefficients within an operating region where air entrapment occurs naturally.
              The research products will be valuable to the design of SFDs in critical
              turbomachinery applications, of process fluid film bearings and of seals in
              multiple-phase pump applications.
***


