Title       : REU: UMN REU Site in the Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a9820480

Award Number: 9820480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert L. Pick herbpick@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Bruce Overmier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
              Site in Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences at the University of Minnesota.  The
              ten-week program will emphasize student participation in the research
              activities of faculty affiliated with the Center for Cognitive Sciences. 
              Eleven undergraduates will participate with support from NSF.  The focus on
              recruitment will be under-represented groups and undergraduates from small
              colleges in the upper Midwest with limited research opportunities.  Students
              will: (1) work as a full member of their faculty mentor'' research team; (2)
              complete a research project including a written report and oral presentation to
              peers and participating faculty; (3) participate in a multidisciplinary
              research training seminar for credit; and (4) participate in a special
              non-credit 'Master Student' course.  Seminar activities include presentations
              by program faculty and faculty in related areas campus-wide, laboratory tours,
              and lectures on research tools, design, and ethics.  The fully integrated
              program includes opportunities for the students to learn specific research
              methods, to apply these methods in the context of their own research, and to
              examine broad conceptual and methodological issues relating to the cognitive
              sciences.  Participation in special social and cultural 'team-building' events
              as well as common housing in a University dorm is designed to foster a strong
              community of students.

This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing
              efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through active
              undergraduate research experiences.


