Title       : Approximation Algorithms, with an Emphasis on LP-Duality Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9820896

Award Number: 9820896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay V. Vazirani vazirani@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9820896
Vazirani

This project pursues research in the following
              areas:

1. The metric Steiner tree problem and its generalizations: 
              Developing an algorithm using the bidirected cut relaxation for the metric
              Steiner tree problem and determining the integrality gap of this remarkable
              relaxation - this is widely believed to be the most promising avenue for better
              algorithms for this central problem.  Developing a combinatorial factor 2
              algorithm for the generalized Steiner network problem.

2. Extending the
              scope of the primal-dual schema:  Several problems are identified, that appear
              to be waiting for the "right kind" of primal-dual approach, including a
              facility location problem, metric TSP and integer multicommodity flow in planar
              graphs; besides the problems mentioned in (1) above.  The RV-algorithm extends
              the schema in two ways: for the first time the dual growth process is not
              greedy, and the algorithm does not use the usual mechanism of relaxing
              complementary slackness conditions.

3. Efficient construction of an FPRAS
              using an unbiased estimator:  This research concerns the foundations of
              randomized approximation algorithms and its relationship with parametric
              statistical inference.  Issues of computational efficiency, and a conjecture on
              the degree of improvement provided by a variant on the standard "median"
              method, are studied.

4. Industry targeted implementation of Steiner tree
              algorithms:  None of the currently known Steiner tree algorithms with proven
              guarantee is appropriate as the core algorithmic idea for use in the VLSI
              design industry.  The goal is not just to present experimental evidence, but to
              develop, around sophisticated ideas, a package that competes with commercial
              Steiner tree code.

5. Coding theory:  Coordinate permutation can drastically
              reduce the size of a minimal trellis for a given code.  Recently, the problem
              of finding the optimal permutation was shown to be NP-hard, thus partially
              resolving a long standing open problem.  It is now important to seek good
              approximation algorithms.




