Title       : REU Site: A Faculty-Student Collaborative Research Program in the Biological
               Sciences at Hope College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9820571

Award Number: 9820571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Barney barney@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia M. McDonough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biology at Hope College believes that undergraduate students
              learn biology best by doing biology. The institution has put this belief into
              practice by integrating research and teaching in their courses and by providing
              students with opportunities to become partners with the faculty in professional
              level research. This award will provide research appointments for thirty
              undergraduate students (ten per summer for three years). Half of the students
              will come from Hope College and half will come from other colleges and
              universities throughout the U.S. This REU project will make special efforts to
              recruit and appoint women and members of minority groups underrepresented in
              science. Students will participate in research at all levels of biology, from
              cloning a new receptor for vasopressin to studying seed dispersal in a tropical
              cloud forest.  Interactions among students and faculty will provide each
              participant with knowledge about a wide range of biological problems and ways
              in which those problems are addressed. In addition to the research itself,
              participants will take part in weekly meetings aimed at improving oral and
              written communication skills, exploring ethical issues in biology, and learning
              about graduate school and career opportunities in biology. Students will
              communicate the results of their research in formal talks (at Hope and at
              professional meetings), at a poster symposium, and in a scientific paper. The
              Hope program will have an impact on the student participants' understanding of
              science, impact the sciences as the students present their results to the
              scientific community, and impact society as students move on to graduate
              schools and a variety of careers.
