Title       : Spectroscopic Studies of Ultrathin Biopolymer Films at Metal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1999  
File        : a9820742

Award Number: 9820742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Corn corn@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research project, carried out by Professor Robert Corn at the University of
              Wisconsin-Madison and supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              program, uses surface spectroscopies to characterize ultrathin biopolymer films
              at solid/liquid interfaces.  The biopolymers studied include synthetic
              polypeptides, oligonucleotides with modified bases, polypeptides with
              derivatized individual amino acids, and surface polymerized polypeptide
              multilayers.  Biopolymer thin films on gold surfaces are used as substrates so
              that the surface is conductive, and so that surface plasmon resonance
              spectrometry is used to characterize the thin film on the surface.  Surface
              FTIR, fluorescence measurements, and contact angle and imaging SPR
              spectroscopies are also used to establish the nature of the thin biopolymer
              film.  New attachment strategies (amine and/or thiol coupling methods) are
              explored.  In an exciting potential application,  isolated DNA-based molecules
              on surfaces will be used as a means of encoding information on
              surfaces.

Understanding of the attachment of thin films of biomolecules to
              metal surfaces, and the means to characterize the structures of the thin films,
              underlies much research in biosensors, medical implants, artificial
              biostructures, and basic materials science.  Professor Corn will study central
              issues of this attachment and structural characterization, using complementary
              surface spectroscopies to establish the structure and shape of the natural and
              modified biomolecules attached to surfaces.  In so doing, their mechanisms of
              action will become better understood.   In an exciting potential application, 
              isolated DNA-based molecules on surfaces will be used as a means of encoding
              information on surfaces.
