Title       : Reliability of MEMS Materials and Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9820022

Award Number: 9820022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharat Bhushan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820022
Bhushan
The objective of the proposed research is to conduct a
              detailed performance analysis and microtribological study of the mating
              component surfaces in selected micromotors, microswitches and microgear systems
              as a function of operating time of the devices, thereby identifying the
              mechanisms associated with microdevice and component failure during operation.
              It has been long suspected that failure of MEMS devices occurs due to a drastic
              change or degradation of tribological properties of the mating surfaces in the
              device. The effect of device operation on the important tribological parameters
              associated with mating surfaces such as surface roughness, microscale friction,
              stiction and mechanical integrity will be studied using an AFM/FFM. Tips of
              different radii to simulate asperity contacts of different sizes will be
              developed to study the adhesion and friction of mating surfaces. By using a
              Nanoscale Kelvin Probe to detect precursors of wear, changes in the structure
              of the surfaces prior to wear will be studied in order to identify mechanisms
              associated with degradation of the mating surfaces. Studies to measure device
              parameters such as start-up current. stopping current etc., which are
              indicative of device failure, will be conducted and these will be compared with
              tribological parameters under different operating conditions. This will help to
              understand the effect of tribological parameters on device failure. Another
              objective of the study is to identify new materials, lubricants and ultra-thin
              coatings for use in MEMS devices. Coupons of currently used materials - silicon
              and polysilicon films will be compared to new candidate materials such as SiC
              films and other ceramic films.  The aim here is to look for materials that
              exhibit minimum friction/stiction and superior wear performance. Ultra-thin
              hard amorphous carbon coatings of thicknesses ranging from 10 nm down to 3.5 nm
              and less will be studied in order to identify the thinnest coatings with the
              best scratch/wear resistance. By conducting studies on MEMS components made
              from various potential materials anti coatings, their engineering performance
              will be studied and their reliability evaluated.

The micromotors and other
              MEMS device will be obtained from research collaborators who will fabricate the
              devices. Through this study, reliability of the MEMS devices will be better
              estimated and understanding of failure mechanisms in these devices will be
              significantly advanced. New materials, coatings and lubricants that are well
              suited for MEMS devices will also be identified. This study will therefore be
              of mutual benefit to the fields of both MEMS technology and microtribology
              science.
***

