Title       : Undergraduate Engineering in Medical Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a9820538

Award Number: 9820538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $630191             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Smith wasmith@bme.ri.ccf.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nadine Hinton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland Clinic Fdn
	      9500 Euclid Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  441950001    216/445-6440

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820538
The Cleveland Clinic Foundation     
William A. Smith

This program
              will recruit advanced undergraduate engineering students from colleges and
              universities 
across the United States, to provide the students with
              realistic, hands-on research experiences.  One 
group of eight students per
              year will be recruited for nominally six month employment terms at the 
CCF. 
              Each will select an individual faculty mentor at the CCF, in addition to the
              PI.  They will also 
have a home school faculty sponsor.  Hiring will be
              staggered, so that students will have a three-month 
term as a junior
              engineer, and a term as a senior engineer.  Upon completion, the students will
              return to 
the homes school, and in collaboration with the faculty sponsor,
              recruit two students to complete a two-
quarter senior project growing from
              the CCF experience.  Consequently, the participant will 
consistently advance
              in independence and responsibility through three stages, culminating as a
              project 
leader.  The CCF will loan hardware, instrumentation, software, and
              computer access as necessary, to 
conduct the home research.  The stimulation
              of the research activity will extend into the home colleges 
engineering
              environment.  A total of 114 students will be supported, over the proposed five
              year 
program.  Interactions will be among the CCF-based students, with the
              CCF staff, postdoctoral and 
graduate students, with the home faculty, and
              with home students in and out of the program.  An ethics 
training component
              is included.  An aggressive recruiting program will increase the participation
              of 
under-represented groups in the program.  Similarly, emphasis will be
              placed on recruiting from 
"teaching" rather than "research" oriented
              institutions.  Educational assessment and feedback is also a 
significant
              component.  Because of this effort, the CCF will have technology to
              quantitatively improve 
and extend its work, and the students will have been
              exposed to research in a world class facility.  The 
participants in the
              program will model research activity to other members of the student body at
              the 
home school.

