Title       : Ylide-Fluoroolefin Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2001    
File        : a9820769

Award Number: 9820769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Burton donald-burton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the development of methodology for the preparation
              of fluorinated organic compounds.   First, the project will provide new,
              general methodology for the synthesis of cis- and
              trans-2-substituted-1,2-difluoroethylenes allowing both an experimental and
              calculation approach to the study of the cis-effect in determining
              thermodynamic stability of these alkenes.   Second, new synthons such as (E)-
              and (Z)-R3SnCF=CFSnR3 will be used as reagents for the regio- and/or
              stereospecific incorporation of fluorine into organic compounds.  Third,
              synthetic methods for the preparation of chiral alpha-fluorophosphonates will
              be  developed as a means of preparing important phosphate mimics.

 With this
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Donald J. Burton of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Iowa.  Professor Burton will focus his work on developing
              organofluorine synthetic methodology.   Organofluorine chemistry is a subfield
              of organic chemistry known for its commercial importance and its novelty. 
              Replacement of hydrogens by fluorine in organic compounds results in
              significant differences in physical properties and chemical behavior.  The work
              will contribute to the training of young scientists who in their postgraduate
              years will contribute to the industrial development of new fluorinated
              materials and devices, new fluorinated polymers and new fluorine-containing
              pharmaceutical agents.

