Title       : Fiber Reinforcement for Soils and Stability of Fiber-Reinforced Soil Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9820832

Award Number: 9820832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178794             (Estimated)
Investigator: Radoslaw L. Michalowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

9820832 
PI:  Radoslaw L. Michalowski 
Institution:  Johns
              Hopkins University 
"Fiber Reinforcement for Soils and Stability of
              Fiber-Reinforced Soil Structures" 


Soil reinforcement with short
              inclusions, such as fibers, has been tried recently in geotechnical
              construction.  This technique is not used routinely because of the absence of
              well-documented evidence of its effectiveness, and because of a current lack of
              ability to predict the properties (strength in particular) of fiber-reinforced
              soils.  It is proposed that research toward a better understanding and
              quantitative description of the behavior of such composites be undertaken.  
              

The objectives of this research are to:  (a) develop better understanding
              of fiber reinforcement mechanisms, (b) achieve a reasonable (useful in design)
              quantitative description of such composites (models), (c) collect experimental
              evidence for validation of the modeling effort, and (d) develop rational
              analyses of fiber-reinforced structures.   

The focus in the theoretical
              investigation will be on the micromechanics and homogenization, and laboratory
              testing will be used to validate the models developed.  Micromechanics
              investigation will include soil-fiber interaction and response of a single
              fiber to deformation of the matrix.  The homogenization will include
              description of the macroscopic behavior of the fiber-reinforced soil as a
              result of extending single-fiber cell behavior to a composite system with
              fibers distributed in an arbitrary fashion.   

The significance of this
              research will be in development of rational description of fiber-reinforced
              soils so that reliable methods for design with such composites can be
              developed.  Presenting reasonable methods of analysis of fiber-reinforced soil
              structures is expected to have a direct impact on engineering practice. 

