Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Ultrahigh-Pressure Metamorphic Rocks and the Geodynamics of
               Continental Collision-Subduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9820171

Award Number: 9820171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juhn G. Liou liou@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5983,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820171
Liou

This proposal supports U.S.-Japan collaboration between Dr.
              Juhn G. Liou of the Department of Geological and Environmental Science at the
              Stanford University and Dr. Shige Maruyama, Department of Earth & Planetary
              Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology (TIT), and Dr. Yoshi Ogasawara,
              Institute of Earth Science, Waseda University, Japan.   Dr. Liou will be
              supported for a five months sabbatical stay at TIT in order to continue a well
              established U.S.-Japan cooperative Project entitled "Ultrahigh-Pressure
              Metamorphic Rocks and the Geodynamics Collision-subduction" with Professors
              Shige Maruyama and Yoshi Ogasawara.  Major research goals during Dr. Liou's
              stay in Tokyo Institute of Technology are: (1) data collection on garnet
              peridotites from both China and Kazakhstan; (2) petrotectonic research on the
              Kokchetav Massif, northern Kazkhstan; and (3) Research Book on Blueschists and
              Eclogites. 

Major specific tasks during Dr. Liou's sabbatical stay in Japan
              include the followings:
(1) To complete editing several special issues
              resulted from the International UHP Workshop at Stanford in December 1998.  One
              of them is on "Petrogenesis and Tectonics of the Kokchetav Massif" to be
              published in the Island Arc, the Official Journal of the Geological Society of
              Japan.  (2) To complete a book on Blueschists and Eclogites with Professor
              Maruyama to be published by Kluwer Academic Press. This book will contain
              information with regard to mineralogy, petrology, age data and tectonic
              interpretation of all bluechist and eclogite localities in the world.  (3) To
              collect petrochemical data on garnet peridotites from both China and Kazkhstan
              using the facilities of the /center of Excellence in Japan in order to evaluate
              the nature of the upper mantle associated with continental collision and
              subduction; (4) To be involved in scientific planning and research related to
              the Chinese Continental Scientific Drilling project, and to work on available
              core and surface samples with the Japanese colleagues; (5) To complete a
              research volume with professor Maruyama and Osgaswara on Petrotectonic
              Evolution of the Kokchetav Massif  as many comprehensive petrochemical data
              have been collected through the U.S.-Japan study group;  (6) To help supervise
              students and research associates of both Profs. Maruyama and Ogasawara for
              their data collection and manuscript preparation, and to give lectures and
              seminars in various Japanese universities; and (7) To encourage Japanese
              students to become actively involved in international meetings (e.g., the
              International Geologic Congress in 2000, and the International Eclogite
              Conference in Japan in 2001).  It is expected that the cooperation between
              these researchers should foster further collaborations.


