Title       : Heterojunction Polymer Device Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9820781

Award Number: 9820781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123600             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Braun   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin B. Kingsbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820781
Braun

Semiconducting polymers possess unique attributes that make
              them an excellent venue with which to enhance opto-electronics and
              semiconductor device instruction and to further the state of knowledge in the
              field.

Research Plans

Semiconducting polymers make possible efficient,
              lightweight, thin, large area, flat-panel, and even mechanically flexible
              displays, yet important technical issues must be resolved before using the
              materials in even a prototype computer monitor.  The research plan concentrates
              on increasing device efficiency by using materials design, chemical synthesis,
              and device characterization to improve understanding of charge injection and
              transport in heterojunction devices.  The specific aims are to improve
              electroluminescence efficiency:

                   by improving electron
              injection

                   by using new emissive polymers

             
                   by designing new emissive co-polymers that ease electron injection and
              confine carriers to the                         emissive
              layer


Instructional Innovations

A primary aim of this project is to
              incorporate semiconducting polymers into the undergraduate curriculum.  Devices
              based on semiconducting polymers offer simple and relatively low cost means of
              exposing lower division students to semiconductor device fabrication,
              characterization and operation in preparation for upper division treatments of
              semiconductor physics, electronics, and opto-electronics.  The specific aims
              are to:

Involve students in projects that emphasize interdisciplinary
              research, engineering, and teamwork.

Develop a Chemistry course module to
              teach synthesis and characterization of semiconducting                         
              polymers.

Revise the required Electronic Devices and Electronics
              Manufacturing courses to let students build                 and test polymer
              light-emitting diodes [LEDs] which are opto-electronic components that
              literally                 shed light on semiconductor device
              operation.

Revamp the Solid State Electronics course to incorporate
              opto-electronic device theory and                 experiments based on polymer
              LEDs and photo-detectors.

Mentor Cal Poly students who choose to complete
              senior projects on topics related to semiconducting                polymer
              devices.
***


