Title       : Electoral Participation under Alternative Jurisdictional Structures: A
               Theoretical and Experimental Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9820229

Award Number: 9820229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Levin dlevin@econ.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin M. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to study, using theoretical analysis and laboratory experiments, the
              interaction between two issues in voting and information aggregation in
              environments of incomplete information. The first issue is strategic
              participation by voters. The second is the partitioning of voters into
              jurisdictions. In particular, we are interested in the positive and normative
              implications of alternative electoral partitions when voters have an incentive
              to behave strategically.

Building on earlier theoretical research on voting
              we develop model of electoral participation under two information structures,
              common values and private values. This approach connects our work with the
              literature on competitive bidding and auctions. In our model, voters behave
              strategically and respond to informational environments, costs of voting, and
              the jurisdictional structure. Such dependency allows the investigation of the
              positive and normative aspects of alternative partitions of the electorate into
              different jurisdictional structures. This provides an analytical framework for
              ranking jurisdictional structures based on the underlying informational
              environment. A simple model is presented for motivational and illustrative
              purpose.

All theoretical predictions will be tested with experiments; a
              sketch of the design and treatments is provided. Naturally, for any normative
              conclusions regarding electoral systems to be valid, the predicted behavior
              leading to these conclusions must mirror real behavior. Of particular interest
              is how experimental subjects respond to different incentives. For example,
              parameterizing the direct costs of voting and the informational factors
              referred to above and varying their values across experimental treatments will
              allow inferences about the strengths of these factors relative to those that
              are predicted. The performance of different jurisdictional structures within
              the same environment can also be observed directly in the experimental data
              collected.

The desired impact of this project includes an improved
              perspective on the factors influencing voter participation, and scientifically
              corroborated prescriptions for what kinds of issues should be resolved at a
              highly centralized level of authority and what kinds at a localized level. As
              the federal government turns welfare policy over to the states and debates
              national school curriculum standards, this topic is of particular significance
              to current United States political economy.


