Title       : Differential Geometric Analysis, Geometric Visualization, and Aesthetic
               Rhinoplasty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9820756

Award Number: 9820756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44270              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Krantz sk@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The proposed project will perform a differential geometric analysis of the
              nasal surface of a human being with a view to doing  pre-operative analysis to
              assist the plastic surgeon in formulating a  procedural strategy.  We take
              rhinoplasty (plastic surgery of the  nose) to be a microcosm of many typical
              plastic surgery problems. For  the nose has an interesting and complex
              three-dimensional anatomy, and  it also plays a critical role in the aesthetics
              of the face. The nose  is of interest as a differential geometric object.  Its
              exterior  dermis is a hypersurface in space, and the nature of the nose is 
              determined (i) by its curvatures and (ii) by its deviations as  measured by
              quasiconformal mappings from certain standard geometric  forms.  Clinical
              experience indicates that reforming a convex surface  into another convex
              surface is one of the easiest procedures for a  plastic surgeon to perform. 
              The most difficult surfaces to handle are  surfaces of negative curvature; of
              course the typical nose has such  surfaces on either side, near the nostrils. 
              Preliminary discussions  indicate that quasiconformal mappings may be one way
              to measure  deviation from convexity, or distance from a negatively curved
              dermal  surface to a positively curved one.  The final goal of the project
              create software that will assist the plastic surgeon in developing medical
              procedures.  The software that we propose to create  will take a respected but
              largely non-scientific part of medicine and  endeavor to make it analytical.
              The physician will input either numerical data, taken from measuring the
              patient's organ, or will  scan in data with a suitable digitizing device.  The
              software will  solve an optimization problem and make a procedural
              recommendation.  Of course the final decisions, and the interpretation, will be
              made  by the plastic surgeon.

   Plastic surgery in general, and aesthetic
              rhinoplasty in particular, is a rapidly developing area of medical technique
              and treatment.  Laser surgery, microstitching, tissue transplants,  man-made
              implants, and many other devices are now important (and  quite recently
              developed) tools in the field.  Definitive studies of  aesthetic rhinoplasty
              concentrate on techniques that center around  "aesthetics", "perspective", and
              "balance". In short, technique in aesthetic rhinoplasty, even at a very
              sophisticated level, is a  sort of intuition informed by experience and by an
              artistic sense. To  the extent that technology and mathematics are used in the
              process,  they are used only in the pre-diagnosis stages, and only for 
              descriptive purposes.  Our goal in this project is to use a  mathematical
              analysis of the nasal surface (and, ultimately, of other  organs as well) to
              inform the plastic surgeon as he plans a surgical  procedure.  The specific
              short-term goal is to create a mathematical  model of the nose, formulated in
              the language of the differential  geometry of surfaces. The broader, long-term
              goal is to formulate  questions of plastic surgery procedure as optimization
              problems for  surfaces imbedded in space.  In the final analysis, the questions
               that the plastic surgeon considers are surface design problems.  And  surface
              design has, in the last ten years, entered a new era of  sophistication.  Our
              goal is to examine the hitherto unexplored  subject of local surface design
              problems in plastic surgery using  techniques of analysis and differential
              geometry.  We will create  software for use by the plastic surgeon in assessing
               analytic/geometric data of the nasal and facial surfaces and  formulating an
              operative procedure.          

