Title       : Experimental, Theoretical and Computational Study of Compressed Thin Films
               Diaphragms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9820823

Award Number: 9820823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto M. Cuitino cuitino@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo Gioia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Experimental, Theoretical, and Computational Study of Compressed
Thin-Film
              Diaphragms

Alberto M. Cuitino and Gustavo Gioia 
Department of Mechanical &
              Aerospace Engineering         
Rutgers University                            
              
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8058

Experimental, theoretical, and computational
              research is planned to
study the mechanics of anisotropically compressed thin
              film diaphragms.
The project is motivated by  experimental results which
              indicate  that
the behavior of anisotropically compressed diaphragms  is
              fundamentally 
different from that of isotropically compressed ones. Thus, in
              lieu of
the well-behaved folding patterns which obtain in the isotropic
              case,
the anisotropic case leads to microstructures, i.e. fine
              folding
patterns which lack a length scale associated with the
              boundary
conditions. These microstructures are symptomatic of the
              spinodal
structure of the underlying energetics.

Experimental work will
              yield quantitative information on the range of
stress states for which folding
              microstructures occur, the dependence of
microstructure configurations on such
              factors as stress state history
and diaphragm size, and the regularizing
              effect of bending on folding
refinement. The theoretical work will allow to
              determine the appropriate
energy functionals, characterize the associated 
              minimizing sequences,
and develop the capability to engineer diaphragms with
              folding patterns
suited to specific purposes. Computational tools will be
              developed for
detailed comparison with theoretical results, and for use in
              practical
cases which are not amenable to theoretical treatment.


