Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Agricultural Dependence at NAN Ranch and Old Town During
               the Pithouse to Pueblo Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9820752

Award Number: 9820752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gayle J. Fritz gjfritz@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Gail Fritz, MS Malaina Brown will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will address an important question of
              archaeological development in the United States Southwest and analyze plant
              remains recovered during the excavation of two sites.  In common with many
              other parts of the world, prehistoric populations in this region gradually
              shifted their subsistence base from hunted and gathered foods to those acquired
              through cultivation of domestic plants. Although cause and effect is not well
              understood, this transformation was generally accompanied by a shift from a
              highly mobile to a more sedentary lifestyle. Settlement sizes increased and
              more complex social forms of organization also emerged. In the US Southwest
              this change is referred to as the "Pithouse to Pueblo" transition because
              groups abandoned pithouse structures which, for hundreds of years has served as
              basic house type, and began to construct large above ground multi-room pueblos.
              Archaeologists traditionally believed that this shift also marked increased
              reliance on agriculture. However in recent years this position has been
              questioned with some arguing that pithouse peoples practiced a fully
              agriculturally based economy and other postulating that the degree of
              agricultural dependence gradually increased during the Pithouse
              Period.

While most of the evidence marshaled thus far has been indirect, MS
              Brown proposed to analyze the botanical materials recovered from two sites, the
              NAN Ranch, and Old Town both located in New Mexico. Both contain both pithouses
              and pueblos which span the transition. At both sediments with abundant
              botanical remains have been recovered. MS Brown will use a flotation technique
              to separate these materials from the geological matrix and identify the range
              of species present. She will focus not only on known domesticates but also on
              weedy species which flourish in agricultural contexts and thus provide indirect
              information on the importance of cultivation. She will also determine whether
              less important domestic species such as amaranth are present. The data she
              produces should help to select among competing hypotheses. In conjunction with
              architectural analysis and study of other aspects of material culture it should
              be possible to gain increased insight into the development of cultural
              complexity in the Southwest. The project will also significantly contribute to
              the intellectual and professional development of a young scientist.

