Title       : Studies of Scheduling, Design, and Synthesis of Batch, Semi-Continuous, and
               Continuous Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9820636

Award Number: 9820636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320743             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christodoulos A. Floudas floudas@titan.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of theoretical, algorithmic and
              computational techniques for scheduling, design, and synthesis problems that
              arise in a variety of process operations.  The developed algorithmic approaches
              will provide a systematic framework for the determination of the assignments of
              the tasks to the different process units during the time horizon, the amounts
              of material produced in each task, the timing and duration of each task, and
              the design and capacities of the available process units.  A novel
              continuous-time formulation for the short-term scheduling of continuous and
              batch processes with multiple due date demands will be investigated.  A new
              mathematical modeling and optimization framework for the simultaneous
              synthesis, design and scheduling of batch processes will be studied.  A new
              approach for the design and scheduling of batch processes under uncertainty
              will be developed.

If successful, the results of this research will lead
              into substantial improvements in the operation, design and synthesis of
              chemical and manufacturing processes. The optimization framework which is based
              on the novel continuous time formulation of scheduling, design and synthesis
              problems will allow for production facilities to handle efficiently a wide
              spectrum of products, to address a variety of multiple due dates in the product
              demands, and to account for variations in the product demands as well as
              uncertainties in the processing parameters and costs.  The  theoretical and
              algorithmic developments will be complemented with industrial case studies and
              will lead to the development of computational tools for the scheduling and
              design of manufacturing processes.

