Title       : REU: REU on Human Technology Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a9820689

Award Number: 9820689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randa L. Shehab rlshehab@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis T. Durso  (Principal Investigator former)
              Craig M. Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site on
              Human Technology Interactions at the University of Oklahoma.  This
              interdisciplinary REU Site will give undergraduates the opportunity to engage
              in research on human-technical systems.  A total of 15 students, 10 funded by
              NSF and 5 funded by OU will spend eight weeks in the program.  A student's time
              will be divided into three types of activity: individual research, team
              research, and collective activities.  Each student will participate in
              individual research within an active laboratory.  Research assistantships will
              be available in Cognitive Psychology, Social Psychology, Computer Science,
              Industrial Engineering, Library and Information Studies, History of Science,
              Information Systems, and Communication.  A distinguishing characteristic of
              this program is that students will also participate on one of three
              multidisciplinary research teams composed of undergraduates and supervised by
              faculty and graduate students.  Team projects will fall under the rubric of
              Community Networks, Computer-supported Cooperative Work, or Human-Computer
              Interaction.  To provide students a sense of community spirit of science, they
              will also participate in seminar series, workshop series, and special events. 
              Students will be recruited nationally and regionally with an emphasis on
              students who would otherwise have little opportunity to gain research
              experience or to develop technical expertise.  

This award contributes to
              the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers
              in science through active undergraduate research experiences.

