Title       : REU SITE: Undergraduate Research in Brain, Sensory Systems and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9820355

Award Number: 9820355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aixa Alfonso aalfonso@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Comer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Neuroscience Research currently is providing much detailed information about
              nerve cells and neuronal circuits.  However, these data are most usefully
              interpreted in the context of the function of whole nervous systems: organismal
              behavior.  The University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) has formed a new unit in
              the College of Liberal Arts & Sciences to promote studies of neural systems
              that are integrated with an understanding of organismal behavior.  This new
              unit neural -the Laboratory of Integrative Neuroscience - will coordinate a
              group of UIC faculty in running an REU site program that will introduce
              undergraduates to research on brain organization, sensory integration and
              behavior.  With this revised proposal we seek to expand our pilot program of
              summer research involvement for undergraduates by establishing an REU site in
              Chicago.  As has been done in a small scale for the last two summers,
              undergraduates from a diverse group of institutions will be invited to UIC to
              study neural and behavioral biology and to conduct original research along with
              our faculty and students.

Our goal is to give undergraduate, especially
              women and members of underrepresented minority groups, an opportunity to
              experience research in a socially supportive environment.  The Program will
              last for two months each summer.  The first week includes a mini-course on
              principles of neural and behavioral biology.  During the following seven weeks
              students will conduct individual research projects in the laboratories of
              participating faculty.  Trainees will present their results at a final
              symposium.  The experience will be enriched by inclusion of
              presentations/discussions on research ethics, and by exposure of students of
              use of novel data visualization tools.  The Program will give trainees hands-on
              experience with specific research techniques, but equally important it will
              introduce the students to research and teaching as a profession.  Data
              collected from two trial summer programs, involving eight students, are
              included to document our effort and success in promoting this type of
              research.


