Title       : Perpendicular-Current Spin-Polarized Transport Studies at Low Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a9820135

Award Number: 9820135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Pratt pratt@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9820135
Pratt

This is and experimental Condensed Matter Physics project
              which studies spin-polarized electrical transport in metallic magnetic
              multilayers. This transport is of interest from both fundamental and
              technological viewpoints. Of particular interest is a current geometry where
              the electron flow is perpendicular to the layers of the multilayers, versus
              in-plane current flow. The perpendicular current geometry was pioneered by this
              research group at the Michigan State University. By controlling magnetic order
              in the perpendicular geometry, the project will address four research topics:
              (1) Spin-memory-loss at the interfaces between two non-magnetic metals or
              within superconductors; (2) Wall resistances and dynamics of individual
              magnetic domains: Relation of scattering at interfaces to potential steps and
              interfacial alloying; and (4) Experimental realization of a predicted magnetic
              analog of the AC Josephson effect. The research involve state of the art
              instrumentation and training for graduate students and prepares them for a
              variety of careers in information storage technology, academe or
              government.
%%%
In one decade, Giant Magneto-Resistance (GMR) in metallic
              magnetic multilayers has moved from a laboratory discovery to practical
              application in commercial devices such as hard disk drives found in computers.
              Further progress requires even larger magnetoresistance and even smaller
              detectors. A candidate for the next generation of detectors is GMR in
              multilayers measured with current flow perpendicular to the layers, a geometry
              pioneered by the group at Michigan State University. This geometry promises
              larger magnetoresistance in smaller samples. But both fundamental and practical
              issues still need to be resolved.  This proposal addresses several such issues
              in novel ways. The research program provides undergraduate and graduate
              students opportunities to carry out research using state of the art
              instrumentation which will prepare them for careers in research or technology,
              particularly information storage technology.
***


