Title       : Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9820519

Award Number: 9820519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166649             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirk   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn G. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Each year, 20 students (10 to be supported by NSF REU funds, and 10 to be
              supported by local funds) will be selected from colleges and universities
              around the country to spend a ten week period between early June and mid-August
              at Washington University, in order to engage in intensive developmental-biology
              research under the guidance of one of the more than 50 potential faculty
              mentors. The emphasis of the program will be on getting all of the students
              quickly engaged in interesting research projects in active, productive
              laboratories, and on aiding them to move as quickly and as far as possible in
              the direction of becoming independent research investigators. However, the
              students will also be provided with an assortment of supplemental activities
              designed to aid them in developing other aspects of their scientific personae;
              these will include: (i) A series of weekly seminars and workshops led by
              faculty, in which students will be introduced to the leading model systems,
              methods and paradigms of modem developmental biology. (ii) An overnight retreat
              devoted to discussion of issues and problems in research ethics will be held at
              nearby Meramec State Park in the second week of each summer program. (iii) A
              follow-up to the retreat will occur at the bi-weekly Ethics Forum, in which
              participants grapple with issues in research ethics raised by scenarios
              prepared by a different group of students each time. (iv) In alternate weeks
              these student meetings will be devoted to a Developmental Biology Journal Club.
              (A graduate student with appropriate interests and experience will serve as
              organizer and moderator of these two kinds of weekly meetings.) (v) The program
              will conclude with a day-long Undergraduate Research Symposium, in which each
              of the participants will make a presentation summarizing her/his summer's
              research accomplishments.

