Title       : Combinatorics of Lie Type Conference to be held June 15-22, 2000 in Madison,
               Wisconsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9820376

Award Number: 9820376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia M. Benkart benkart@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter P. Orlik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820376
Benkart

This award will support a conference on the combinatorics of
              structures coming from algebras and groups of Lie type. These structures
              include Lie groups, Lie algebras, quantum groups, p-adic  groups, real
              reductive groups, finite groups of Lie type, reflection groups, and fundamental
              groups of configuration spaces.

The objective is to hold a 6-day conference,
              hosted by the University of Wisconsin, Madison, in order to foster discussions
              among current and future researchers working on the combinatorial structures
              that arise in the study of symmetry and its related mathematics.   The meeting
              will establish focus and promote research on the main combinatorial problems in
              an area that has had an enormous impact on particle physics, the study of
              crystals in chemistry, and mathematical research ever since the early work of
              mathematician Issai Schur and physicist Hermann Weyl.  Its continuing vitality
              is evidenced by much current activity, and it is expected to play a prominent
              role in mathematics throughout the next decade.  Because leaders in this area
              rarely claim to be from the same mathematical discipline, research is being
              carried out by "pure" algebraists, combinatorialists, topologists, analysts,
              mathematical physicists, algebraic geometers, and  number theorists.   The goal
              of this conference is to bring these diverse experts together and to focus
              their discussions on the basic questions:  "What is the combinatorics
              controlling fundamental structures related to symmetry, and what role does it
              play in algebra, topology, analysis, physics, geometry, and number theory?"  
              The plan is to have 20 to 22 one-hour talks on different aspects of these
              subjects, with sufficient free time between talks for informal discussion and
              collaboration. It is expected that between 100 and 125 participants will attend
              the meeting.  Special effort will be made to support the participation of
              graduate students and recent  Ph.D.'s.  These young mathematicians will be
              encouraged to bring their reprints and preprints for the "buffet" of preprints,
              which will permit browsers to sample their work.  Also, each of the young
              participants will be paired with a senior mathematician having closely related
              research interests, who will serve as a mentor during the conference.  The
              educational advantages of pairing young and experienced researchers will
              positively impact the careers of young mathematicians, just as the "preprint
              buffet" will help to publicize their work.  

