Title       : Summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Topics in Geometry, Analysis,
               Number Theory and Numerical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9820501

Award Number: 9820501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Dean dean@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suncica Canic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Four faculty members at the University of Houston plan to run a summer Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates site.  Two topics will be explored each summer. 
              During the first year, E. Dean will supervise two students in research on
              numerical optimization problems, including a simple model of control of fluid
              flows, which involves calculating approximate gradients.  This topic will have
              a computational component.  S. Ji will lead two students in research in complex
              geometry by looking at mappings of the unit ball in C2.

Proposed topics for
              the second summer are rings of operators on inner product spaces, and geometric
              constructions in matrix spaces; this topic will also have a computational
              component.  Two students will work in this area under the direction of D.
              Blecher.  S, Canic will supervise two students in research on hyperbolic
              conservation law models and applications, including the use of software
              packages in computing.

Students will learn to present their ideas orally and
              in writing, and will interact with all the key faculty and with graduate
              students and other department faculty and visitors.  The topics are suitable
              for rising seniors and for juniors who have had a course in advanced calculus
              and either differential equations, complex variables or modern algebra.

A
              distictive feature of this REU site is the selection of topics, with a focus on
              analysis, applied analysis and geometry.  The faculty who have designed and
              will supervise the research are all active researchers in these areas.

The
              key personnel have, among them, some experience in supervising undergraduate
              research, and experience in mentoring of undergraduates and of women and
              underrepresented minority students.  As well as advertising nationally for
              students, the group proposes to recruit extensively in Texas, especially in
              minority-majority colleges, to obtain a good mix of talented student
              participants.
