Title       : Application of Geomechanics/Geophysics to Solve Environmental Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a9820325

Award Number: 9820325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. Poulton mpoulton@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Satya Harpalani  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820325
University of Arizona
Satya Harpalani

This REU site will provide an
              opportunity for 10 students every year, for the next three years, to gain
              research experience in the area of application of Geomechanics and Geophysics
              to environmental problems.  The program will identify exceptional students by
              sending posters to different universities/colleges, and informal interviews
              during national meetings, each attended by over 200 undergraduates.  Four
              students recruited will be at the sophomore level, while the remaining six will
              be at the junior/senior level.  There will be a major emphasis on participation
              by women and minority students.  The goal of this program is to provide
              undergraduates with an experience of the excitement of conducting research,
              along with frustrations and failures when doing so.  The projects are designed
              to provide students with an improved understanding of research, in general, as
              well as exposure to the specific topics they will be working on.  It is
              anticipated that participating in this program will inspire and motivate
              students, increase student-student and faculty-student interactions and expand
              the choices available to them upon graduation to include research careers and
              graduate school.

The student participation will start with an intensive
              workshop on "what research is all about" which will include techniques of data
              recording and analysis, computer skills, report writing and public speaking,
              safety issues, and an introduction to the specific projects they will be
              working on.  Following this, the students will work on their research projects
              for nine weeks.  Some of the projects planned for undergraduates are integral
              components of ongoing research projects while the others are designed
              specifically for them.  The research activities span the areas of expertise of
              faculty members in the field of Geotechnical Engineering.  The specific topics
              for research projects are as follows: 1) utilization of mine waste, 2) fluid
              flow in fractured rock, 3) effect of fluids on rock strength, 4) use of image
              processing to study the discontinuities in rock and their impact on
              strength/flow behavior, and 5) geophysical modeling of subsurface fluid
              migration.  To promote teamwork, the students will work in groups of two or
              more.  At the end of each summer/semester, the program will conclude with a
              mini conference/seminar series to include presentations/posters by participants
              on their research findings, successes and failures, and an open discussion on
              their learning experience.  The students will be allowed to use their work as
              2/3 units of "Independent Study", if they want to.

