Title       : Feasibility of a Qunatum Dot Neural Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9820606

Award Number: 9820606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth C. Behrman elizabeth.behrman@wichita.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Steck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Skinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820606
Behrman

Most artificial neural networks are simulations, running on
              algorithmic computers. With this setup some of the inherent advantage of a
              neural network is lost; namely, the speed due to distributed computing. Clearly
              it would be better to utilize the intrinsic physics of a physical system to
              perform the computation. Many efforts have been expended in this direction,
              using systems ranging from nonlinear optical materials to proteins to DNA. At
              the same time, many other researchers have been exploring the possibility of
              building quantum computers. In previous work, using the real time evolution of
              quantum dot molecules, the investigators have shown by simulation that such an
              architecture could act as a recurrent temporal quantum neural network. Inputs
              were prepared by fixing the initial states of two such quantum dot molecules,
              and outputs determined by reading their values at a given time T later. The dot
              molecules were assumed to interact with the substrate phonons and with an
              externally applied time dependent electric field. Trainable parameters were the
              numbers of phonons, optically excited, their frequencies, and the value of the
              electric field as a function of time. This network could perform any classical
              logic gate, and, in addition, could calculate a purely quantum gate, for which
              there is no classical equivalent. Unfortunately the physical problems to be
              surmounted in actual construction of this device seemed beyond present
              technology. For example, the reading and writing of the final and initial
              states at sufficiently precise times, on this scale, might be very difficult.
              

This new project will explore by simulation the possibility of a spatial,
              rather than temporal, design. The new network will consist of a regular array
              of quantum dot molecules on a suitable substrate. The molecules interact with
              each other directly through Coulombic interactions and indirectly through their
              mutual interaction with local and phononic modes of the substrate. These modes
              can be preferentially excited by optical excitation, and, therefore, controlled
              externally. The number of excitations can thus be used as trainable "weight"
              parameters for a neural network. As with the temporal net, the spatial net has
              none of the "wiring problems" of traditional neural nets: the necessary
              connections are supplied by the physical system itself. The long range
              character of the phononic interactions takes the net beyond traditional
              connectionist structures.

This work will involve three successive phases.
              The first phase will be a complete rederivation of the neural net setup to the
              spatial case, in one and two dimensions, and an extension of the training
              algorithm from the temporal to the equilibrium state. The second will be the
              simulation of large networks of neurons, in one and two dimensions, to perform
              benchmark neural network tasks. The physical system will be progressively more
              accurately modeled, to include the effects of noise, defects, and finite
              temperature. The third will develop a backpropagation training scheme to enable
              the network to train itself and to develop a hardware implementation at the end
              of the project. A working quantum neural computer is expected to have wide
              application and interest.
***

