Title       : Social Settings and Dynamics: Representations of Interpenetrating Social Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9820146

Award Number: 9820146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harrison C. White hcw2@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a set of analytical models and measurement techniques
              that calibrate action sequences to specific aspects of social settings and
              cultural context.  These methods will allow for the representation of social
              settings as "relational conjunctives," composed of complex interpretations of
              individuals, organizations, and discursive forms over time.  Through a
              combination of algebraic and statistical techniques (k-partite lattices and
              random graph models), the research will explore the relationship between
              descriptive/exploratory and probabilistic/explanatory approaches to these sorts
              of interdependencies.  The models to be used center on lattice and graph
              theoretic decomposition propositions, supplemented by Markov chain and random
              assignment algorithms.

The methodological tools developed through this
              project will contribute to our understanding of the sociocultural dynamics of
              social settings.  The project will involve collaboration between U.S. and
              Australian research teams over a one-year period, during which a new set of
              formal mathematical techniques will be developed, refined, and applied to
              several substantive research projects.  One data set will come from a two-year
              field study of management workgroups and networks in a major New York bank.  A
              second data set comes from field study over a four-year period of political and
              social movement mobilization in Brazil.  A third data set will be developed
              from a longitudinal sociometric and attitudinal study of friendship relations
              in a large Australian university.  We also will explore the extrapolation of
              such models to theoretical and empirical studies of production markets.  The
              possible applications of this approach can be extended to many other problems
              in historical, organizational, and sociolinguistic research.  The resulting
              models and techniques represent a next wave in mathematical network analysis,
              by allowing us to explore the multi-dimensional and contingent nature of social
              processes as embedded in sociocultural network relations.

