Title       : Step Edge Decoration and the Characterization of Substrate Misorientation
               Effects on Thin Film Nucleation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a9820061

Award Number: 9820061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Hinch jhinch@rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project is concerned with the role of step and edge defects on the
              chemistry and growth of metal thin films.  Using elastic and inelastic helium
              atom scattering methods, combined with spot profile anaylsis low energy
              electron diffraction studies, Professor Barbara J.  Hinch and her coworkers at
              Rutgers University examine the motion of steps during thin film growth, and the
              adsorption and reaction of molecules at these step defects. With the support of
              the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry and
              the Solid State Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, these
              diffraction probes combined with the real space structural probe of scanning
              tunneling microscopy to provide models for the reaction and diffusion of step
              edges, primarily on aluminum thin film surfaces.  Growth of these films from
              atomic sources as well as the chemical vapor deposition of aluminum from
              organometallic precursors such as trimethylamine alane is explored, with a view
              to developing technologically important information about the growth
              process.

The fabrication of electronic devices involves the growth of thin
              films of metals on various substrates.  This growth process is often controlled
              by the presence of step edge defects on the surface.  This research project
              obtains fundamental information about the nature and dynamics of these step
              edge defects, and assesses their role in the growth of thin film materials. 
              This fundamental work has a clear connection to technologically important areas
              of microelectronic device fabrication.
