Title       : A Proposal for Research on Markov Chains, Approximate Counting and Finite Metric
               Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9820951

Award Number: 9820951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alistair Sinclair sinclair@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A Proposal for Research on Markov Chains, Approximate Counting and Finite Metric
              Spaces

                                                                   
              Alistair Sinclair
                                                   
              University of California, Berkeley

This project contains three loosely
              related themes: computational applications of Markov chains, approximate
              counting, and algorithmic apects of finite metric spaces.

During the past
              decade, the so-called "Markov chain Monte Carlo method" has emerged as a
              powerful algorithmic paradigm, with applications in such areas as approximate
              counting, statistical physics and combinatorial optimization.  The PI is
              pushing ahead with these applications, in the following three
              directions:

Development of new techniques based on multicommodity flow to
              analyze geometric Markov chains (where the state space is the set of integer
              points inside a convex body).

Investigation of techniques such as Chebyshev
              acceleration, which can potentially modify a Markov chain so as to
              substantially speed up its convergence.

Improved understanding of newly
              emerging connections between the rapid mixing property of certain Markov chains
              on the configurations of physical systems and the thermodynamic properties of
              those systems.

In parallel with recent activity aimed at classifying NP-hard
              optimization problems according to their degree of approximability, the PI is
              contributing to a similar classification of #P-hard counting problems. 
              Specific aims here include:

Investigation of novel algorithms for the
              central problem of approximating the permanent. 

Development of
              approximation-preserving reductions between counting problems so that, for
              example, a class of problems that are equivalent to the permanent can be
              constructed.

Finite metric spaces provide a clean and elegant paradigm that
              captures (and often streamlines) several previously ad hoc algorithmic ideas. 
              The third part of the project involves a systematic study of finite metrics,
              and specifically:

The design of new techniques for l1 embedding, both in the
              general case (to achieve a distortion within o(log n) of optimal) and for
              special metrics (such as those supported on planar graphs).  This has
              algorithmic applications to, among others, the central problem of approximating
              the sparsest cut in a network.


Development of improved techniques for
              embeddings into low-dimensional spaces. These have applications to algorithms
              for ubiquitous problems such as nearest-neighbor searching and
              clustering.

Approximation of complex metrics by simpler ones.  This would
              allow existing algorithms that work well for simple metrics (such as trees) to
              be applied more widely.

