Title       : Moist Atmospheric Adjustment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9820233

Award Number: 9820233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Bannon bannon@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator will undertake a theoretical investigation of moist
              atmospheric adjustment processes.  Moist atmospheric adjustment is defined as
              the response of a moist compressible atmosphere to a prescribed heating and/or
              moistening.  Immediately after an instantaneous heating/moistening of arbitrary
              shape, the atmosphere will, in general, be in a state of geostrophic and
              hydrostatic imbalance.  The study of moist atmospheric adjustment describes the
              subsequent tendency of the air to achieve a state of geostrophic and
              hydrostatic balance.  It is an extension of the classic problem of geostrophic
              adjustment to include the effects of compressibility and to allow for
              nonhydrostatic and moist processes.  The solutions will also shed light on the
              dynamics of clouds, gust fronts, and other nonhydrostatic circulations driven
              by moist convection.  Although both heating and moistening correspond to an
              addition of buoyancy to the air mass, there is a fundamental difference.  An
              addition of heat can be transformed to other forms of energy which can be
              propagated away; an addition of water must be conserved and can not be
              transformed (in the absence of phase changes) and propagated out of the system.
              A prototype model of the atmospheric response to the problem of evaporative
              cooling in a compressible atmosphere is presented in the proposal.

A suite
              of problems are proposed to examine the full effects of compressibility that
              include heating and moistening.  Linear and nonlinear solutions of idealized
              one-dimensional problems will use Lagrangian techniques and the conservation of
              potential vorticity to obtain the final state of balance.  Laplace and Fourier
              transform techniques will be used to solve for the linear time-dependent
              problems analytically and numerically.  The energetics will be examined and the
              partitioning of the energy between the acoustic and gravity modes and the
              balanced final state will be assessed.  These solutions provide a benchmark to
              test the dynamical cores of mesoscale, cloud, and forecasting models.

The
              proposed research will also seek to develop a set of moist anelastic equations
              that are energy conserving, that are consistent with the acoustic component of
              moist atmospheric adjustment, and that best capture the effect of moisture on
              the Brunt-Vaisala frequency.

Successful completion of this theoretical study
              will increase knowledge of the accuracy of various approximations that are
              often employed in atmospheric forecast systems.


