Title       : Process Monitoring, Diagnosis and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9820846

Award Number: 9820846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suraj M. Alexander   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding to develop, test, and evaluate a framework for
              process monitoring, diagnosis, and control.   The unique feature of this
              framework is the integration of diagnosis, with monitoring and control.   In
              existing process monitoring and control systems process compensatory
              adjustments are made without regard to the cause of  process disturbances, or
              diagnosis is attempted without any guidance.   This is not efficient.   The
              multiresolution analysis capability of  wavelet theory will be used as a
              "mathematical microscope" to glean process fingerprints, which are then mapped
              to a diagnosis.   The mapping is done by extracting statistical features from
              wavelet transforms and  utilizing neural networks.   Diagnostic information
              obtained from the  fingerprints will be used by a control decision module to
              make the "optimal" control decision.  This framework will be tested and
              evaluated in the laboratory and in actual industrial settings.
     With
              manufacturing becoming more automated, many online sensors for process
              monitoring and control have been developed, however, the methods used for
              monitoring and control have not adapted to this, nor has the information
              available been used effectively.   The results of this research, which uses
              both coarse and detailed views of processes, can be used for effective and
              efficient monitoring, diagnosis and control.   This would reduce process
              variability, and improve process capability, resulting in higher quality and
              efficient production.   This framework is applicable to other areas such as,
              equipment maintenance, medicine and finance, where the integration of
              monitoring and diagnosis offers considerable advantages.

