Title       : REU: Consortium for Undergraduate Research Experiences (CURE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9820546

Award Number: 9820546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163880             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Gregorich dtg@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Milan B. Mijic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Gillam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1214,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

AST 98-20546
Gregorich, David 
 
The Los Angeles Consortium for
              Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) will conduct a community-based,
              year-round NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site with a unique
              but critical mission, to provide students from academically underrepresented
              groups with a total research experience as part of their undergraduate studies.
              The Consortium pools the resources of eight institutions: one state university,
              four community colleges, one research university, one private liberal arts
              college, and a NASA field center.  These are California State University, Los
              Angeles, Los Angeles City College, East Los Angeles College, Los Angeles
              Southwest College, and Pasadena City College. The educational institutions
              serve those who are underrepresented in the fields of the physical sciences and
              engineering and will provide candidates for the program.  The NASA Jet
              Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the University of California Riverside, and the
              Pomona College will supply the faculty with research topics for the students,
              the needed research facilities and personnel to train and mentor the students. 
              The research projects are mainly in the area of solar system and star formation
              studies, and some might be related to the on-going and future space missions.
              The astronomical observations will be conducted at JPL Table Mountain
              Observatory that houses 0.6-meter and 1.2-meter telescopes owned by the JPL,
              and a 1-meter telescope owned by Pomona College.
There is a formal process to
              select approximately ten undergraduate students per year to participate in the
              program, which, for each student, is two years in duration.  CURE will provide
              stipends to the students so they will be able to concentrate on their studies
              and research topics.  The stipends will be paid over a 12 month period.  The
              observing program will be carried out during the summer.  The CURE program is
              structured so that it will not interfere with the students' courses of study,
              but rather it will enhance their progress and chances of success.
The concept
              of CURE as a unique community-based, year-round program involving a minority
              serving state university and community colleges with research universities and
              a NASA field center should serve as a good model for other colleges,
              universities and research institutions located in urban areas.
This award is
              supported by funds from the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.


