Title       : National Musuem of Natural History Research Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9820303

Award Number: 9820303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross B. Simons simons.ross@nmnh.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Tyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary S. Sangrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. McCoy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides opportunities for 13 undergraduate students, competitively
              selected each year, to participate in the National Museum of Natural History
              Research Training Program at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC.
              Since 1980, the Museum has actively participated in training the next
              generation of scientists by hosting a ten-week summer program for 24-28
              undergraduate students to explore their interests in the biological,
              geological, and anthropological sciences. Helping students develop confidence
              and competence in the research process is the cornerstone of the Program. This
              is accomplished by means of a thorough curriculum centered on guided research
              experiences in these natural history sciences. The participant, working
              one-on-one with a mentoring scientist, develops and tests a scientific
              hypothesis using appropriate techniques, and communicates the results in
              written manuscripts and oral presentations. Students conduct their research in
              the extensive collections, libraries and laboratories of the NMNH, which houses
              over 121 million specimens of plants, animals, insects, fossils, rocks,
              minerals, meteorites, marine organisms, and human artifacts. Complementing the
              research is an interactive series of lectures, discussions, workshops, and
              tours that introduce participants to the diversity of scientific disciplines,
              research techniques, and career choices available in the natural history
              sciences. The specific objectives of the Program are: to encourage the most
              talented and highly-motivated young scientists to pursue careers in the
              biological, geological, and anthropological sciences, especially women and
              minorities; to offer opportunities for career exploration and research
              experiences not available in traditional academic institutions; and to create
              future scientists who transmit an appreciation of interdisciplinary natural
              history studies and the value of collections and collections-based research.
