Title       : Undergraduate Research Experiences in Composite Materials for Petrochemical and
               Offshore Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9820369

Award Number: 9820369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Su-Seng Pang mepang@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt C. Schulz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Forest D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Stubblefield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820369
Louisiana State University		
Dr. Su-Seng Pang
                       
               
The objectives of this project are to: (1) enhance the technical and
              educational backgrounds of undergraduate students by offering more
              collaborative research activities; (2) increase the number of well prepared
              undergraduate students, especially minorities, entering graduate school by
              providing vital information and necessary training for their admission to and
              success in graduate school; (3) promote intercultural participation among
              non-minority and minority students; (4) assist students in their development
              towards obtaining employment in high level engineering jobs; and (5) enhance
              students' computer capacities by integrating these skills into composite
              engineering applications.  Undergraduate students in their junior and senior
              years of study will participate in this project.  They will be recruited from
              Louisiana State University, the state's flagship institution, and Southern
              University, the largest HBCU (Historically Black College and University) in the
              nation.  The 16 selected students per year (about half will be minority) will
              participate in selected projects of composite materials, co-advised by academic
              mentors and industrial supervisors.  By affording non-minority and minority
              students the opportunity to work together on projects, cultural interaction
              will allow the different races to learn more about one another.  The
              investigators will assign projects to the undergraduate students, which deal
              with any of the above sources addressing their petrochemical and offshore
              applications, as these industries are very important to the economic
              developments in Louisiana and in the nation.  Each participant will receive
              professional counseling and instruction concerning graduate school admissions
              and funding. Participants will attend monthly seminars dealing with improved
              technical writing, graduate school survival (especially for minorities), and
              ethical issues in engineering.  The investigators have confidence that the
              program will be a successful national model of how a majority white and a
              historically black institution can jointly develop and assist undergraduate
              students in developing research skills needed for industry, as well as for
              graduate studies.



