Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phonetics and Phonology of Handshape in American
               Sign Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9820423

Award Number: 9820423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5630               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Meier rmeier@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820423
Meier

While examinations of the distinction between phonetics
              (gradient sound patterns) and phonology (categorical sound patterns) in spoken
              languages have increased our understanding of linguistic patterns, further
              understanding can be gained by examining this distinction in sign language. The
              current proposal outlines a program of research that will probe the distinction
              between gradient and categorical patterns of handshape variation in American
              Sign Language (ASL).

Through a series of production and perception
              experiments, the researchers will quantify the degree to which handshape
              coarticulation (gradient overlap of gestures) and assimilation (categorical
              feature spreading) are present in ASL. The production experiments will yield
              kinematic data on ASL handshapes as produced in different linguistic
              environments by native ASL signers. These data will be subjected to repeated
              measures analyses of variance (ANOVA's) to determine the extent to which
              handshape variation occurs in ASL and the factors that significantly affect
              such variation. The temporal correlation of the handshape gesture with respect
              to the movement gesture of a sign will also be analyzed to determine whether
              the data are best understood as the product of an assimilatory or a
              coarticulatory process. Finally, the production data will be used to create the
              stimuli for the perception experiments. Native and near native signers of ASL
              will be perform forced-choice identification tasks. Through the perception
              experiments the researchers will be able to determine the extent to which
              handshape neutralization occurs, thus gaining evidence as to whether the
              handshape variation patterns should be classified as assimilation or
              coarticulation.

Similarities found in the articulatory patterns of speech
              and sign can be used to extend theories of gestural overlap and feature
              spreading beyond the oral-audio modality and into the manual-visual modality,
              providing a broader theory of coarticulation and assimilation. Similarities in
              the production of sign and speech suggest that phenomenon such as
              coarticulation do not depend on the availability of a speech module. Instead
              commonalities in the production of sign and speech may reflect general
              principles of motor control, such as motor economy, that are common to all
              motor systems.































