Title       : Undergraduate Neurosciences Summer Research Program in Mechanisms of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9820514

Award Number: 9820514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren H. Meck meck@psych.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Nowicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Undergraduate Neuroscience Program at Duke University plans a summer
              research program for undergraduates who will have the opportunity to become
              involved in neuroscience research at a major research university. Research and
              training experiences will be organized around the theme of "Mechanisms of
              Behavior". The emphasis on integrative, systems, and behavioral neuroscience
              that unifies faculty research interests within this interdisciplinary field at
              Duke serves as the common theme for the individual projects available to
              student participants in the program. The focus of the ten-week summer program
              for each student will be a research mentorship with a participating faculty
              member. Two weekly seminar series - "Research in the Neuroscience" and "Science
              Basics" - will be included in the summer schedule. "Research in the
              Neuroscience" will focus on ongoing faculty research so those students in the
              program gain exposure to the field of neuroscience research beyond their
              mentor's specific interests. "Science Basics" will address practical matters
              pertaining to science careers. The summer program will begin with a two-day
              familiarization retreat and will close with a research forum. Applications to
              participate in "Mechanisms in Behavior" will be accepted from sophomore
              undergraduates. The Program is especially interested in receiving applications
              from women and minorities as well as undergraduates at liberal arts colleges.
