Title       : The Worchester Foundation/UMMC Summer Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9820568

Award Number: 9820568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. O'Connell Robert.OConnell@umassmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-2119

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Worcester Foundation/WUMMC Summer Training Program is a ten-week immersion
              in biological research for undergraduate students. It consists of intensive
              "hands-on" laboratory research experience individualized for each student and
              performed under the guidance of working scientists' expert in many of the
              modern areas of biological science. The Program is designed to provide students
              with their first exposure to the actual practice of scientific research in the
              hopes that the excitement, challenge and creativity of the enterprise will
              convince them to consider basic research in the sciences as a viable career
              choice. In the spring, each student is matched with a basic research project,
              initially proposed by a preceptor with an active research program in the
              students stated area of interest. Upon acceptance, each student is provided
              with a reading list of current publications in the selected area to provide the
              background required for the proposed summer research project. The program will:
              1) instruct each student in safe laboratory, and appropriate ethical practice;
              2) acquaint them with current issues in biology; 3) teach them scientific
              techniques and skills, many of which can be utilized in their future endeavors;
              4) guide them in shaping the specific research questions to be asked; 5)
              require that they work independently toward the agreed upon research goals; 6)
              encourage cross disciplinary approaches by providing opportunities for
              interaction with other students, research staff, and visiting scientists; and
              7) maintain an educational setting which is maximally challenging and thus,
              fosters each student's exploration of future career choices in science. In
              addition to the required written report detailing the progress made in their
              individual research projects, each student presents a report to the Faculty and
              public summarizing the results of their efforts at a closing poster session and
              award ceremony.
