Title       : New Algebraic Methods for Simplifying the Design and Measurement of Sculptured
               Shapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9820804

Award Number: 9820804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300125             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Wolovich waw@lems.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of relatively simple and
              innovative mathematical procedures and computer algorithms for modeling,
              aligning, modifying and measuring large classes of manufactured objects that
              have free-form or sculptured shapes.  A new algorithm for decomposing
              two-dimensional algebraic curves as sums of products of simple lines and conics
              will play a major role in the development of these new procedures.  This
              algorithm will be used to describe free-form curves in terms of their
              primitives; to determine the pose of objects in arbitrary configurations; to
              modify existing implicit polynomial models both locally and globally; and to
              interpolate sculptured, three dimensional surfaces between two dimensional
              curves in parallel planes. A state-of-the-art coordinate measuring machine will
              be used in many of the proposed investigations to test, refine and verify the
              procedures

If successful, this research will provide more user-friendly
              methods for modeling and measuring objects with complex contours, such as
              turbine blades, gears, ship hulls and automobile bodies; streamlined procedures
              for the computer aided geometric design of a large variety of manufactured
              objects; new techniques for measuring such objects more accurately and in less
              time using coordinate measuring machines; and the simplification of reverse
              engineering algorithms to produce objects for which there are no known
              technical drawings or specifications. This will reduce the cost and improve the
              quality of future manufactured products.  Furthermore, the underlying
              mathematical decomposition will lead to a far better understanding of higher
              degree algebraic curves, a fundamental mathematical subject that has been
              studied extensively since the 17th century by some of the world's most foremost
              mathematicians.  Algebraic curves are used widely in many different practical,
              technical areas, and adding insight relative to their underlying features will
              facilitate their use in these areas.
