Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Grassland Ecology at Konza Prairie
               Research Natural Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9820302

Award Number: 9820302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter K. Dodds wkdodds@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eva A. Horne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher C. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Konza Prairie Research Natural Area/Long-Term Ecological Research REU
              program will offer ten undergraduates per year, over the next five years, the
              opportunity to study tallgrass prairie ecology. The focus of the Long-Term
              Ecological Research (LTER) project on Konza Prairie Research Natural Area
              (KPRNA) is the study of the impact of fire and grazing on native tallgrass
              prairie. To facilitate investigation of these variables, watersheds on Konza
              Prairie have been assigned burn regimes and native and domestic grazers have
              been introduced to some watersheds. The watershed-level manipulations on KPRNA
              offer a unique opportunity for the study of many aspects of prairie ecology.
              Currently, 41 Kansas State University faculty, 32 visiting scientists, 29
              graduate students, and 15 undergraduate researchers are working on 126 research
              projects on KPRNA. The REU project on KPRNA will feature several components
              including an independent research project, a seminar/discussion course in
              grassland ecology, a course in research ethics and ecology, and a trip to a
              national scientific meeting. Each REU student will have a faculty mentor as
              well as contact with resident graduate students and research associates. KPRNA
              REU students will interact with other undergraduates, who are brought to KSU
              each summer by other programs such as the Physics Department and the Summer
              Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program, to conduct research in other
              scientific disciplines. At the conclusion of the summer, students will make an
              oral presentation of their research results and prepare the results for
              publication. There will be a yearly assessment of the program by student and
              faculty participants in order to insure that the REU program continues to
              provide a quality experience for all participants.

