Title       : The California Academy of Sciences Summer Systematics Institute as an REU Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2001     
File        : a9820251

Award Number: 9820251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence M. Gosliner tgosliner@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project will, in each of three year's funding, bring seven undergraduates to
              the California Academy of Sciences for a 10-week summer session in the
              Academy's Summer Systematics Institute. Recruitment will be on a national
              level, with emphasis given to minority and female students in science. Each
              prospective intern will apply to work with an Academy curator on a research
              project. Successful applicants will take part in formal lectures in systematic
              biology, tours of each of the Academy's nine research departments and research
              seminars in systematic biology by scientists outside the Academy. Students will
              work on directed projects circumscribed so that an introduction to the problem
              and organisms to be studied, as well as data collection, interpretation, and
              dissemination can be accomplished. Each student will produce a manuscript of
              the project's results, in the form of a scientific paper, and make an oral
              presentation of their results to their peers. Evaluations of interns and
              participating Academy staff will be conducted each year to fine tune/improve
              the Institute for the succeeding years. Interns will also be brought back to
              the Academy for additional work, to publish their findings, and to present
              their results at professional scientific meetings.
