Title       : REU for Technology-Guided Therapy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a9820566

Award Number: 9820566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vicki B. Booker                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Galloway bob.galloway@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duco Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benoit M. Dawant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia B. Paschal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Michael Fitzpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820566
Galloway, Robert L.
Vanderbilt University

Technology-Guided Therapy
              (TGT) uses traditional engineering techniques such as triangulation, 
image
              processing, rigid rotation transformation and manipulations in Fourier space
              towards the task 
of improving how therapy such as surgery, radiation therapy
              or injected materials is delivered.  
Spatial targeting and interactive
              guidance can improve both the specificity (treating only diseased 
tissue) and
              sensitivity (delivering therapy more all-diseased tissue).  This should result
              in more 
complete surgical resections, more exact radiation delivery and
              better delivery of materials to the 
disease site.  The Center for TGT is a
              collaboration between engineers in Biomedical Engineering, 
Computer Science,
              and Electrical and Computer Engineering with colleagues on the medical side in
              
the departments of Neurosurgery, Radiation Oncology, Radiology, and Surgery. 
              Students working 
under the auspices of the REU will work on projects from the
              basic science research to device 
development to clinical applications. 
              Examples of projects in the basic sciences are: development 
and testing of
              improved Magnetic Resonance Angiography, development of metrics for assessing
              
registration quality or grays-scale based mapping of images across a patient
              data set.  Examples of 
device include designing, constructing and validating
              the performance of a new three-dimensionally 
tracked instrument.  Clinical
              applications are, at present, intracranial, hepatobiliary and spinal with 
new
              applications awaiting talented personnel to begin development.  We are looking
              for a group of 
technology-talented students with diverse skill sets.  While
              any one student need not have all of the following skills, we are looking for
              students with computer programming, mathematics, physics, 
physiology, and/or
              engineering skills.  The students who enter the REU will work closely with the
              
faculty member, his or her graduate students and, if appropriate, other REU
              students.  The students 
who are working on basic science development will not
              be far from the clinical applications of their 
work and the students who are
              working on the clinical applications will ground them in solid 
scientific
              approaches.

