Title       : GOALI: Lattice-Mismatched Inx (AlyGal-y)1-X P/GaP for Transparent Substrate
               Light Emitting Diodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9820095

Award Number: 9820095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Fitzgerald eafitz@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan A. Stockman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project represents a collaborative effort between researchers at MIT
              and Hewlett-Packard (Optoelectronics Division) to address fundamental materials
              problems in heteroepitaxy of lattice mismatched materials that prevent the
              fabrication of low threading dislocation density, relaxed InAlGaP on GaP
              substrates. Graded composition InAlGaP and InGaP on GaP substrates grown by
              MOVPE may lead to low threading dislocation density, relaxed layers. This
              project aims to develop a generic view of relaxed lattice-mismatched graded
              layers. Preliminary data show that extrapolation from the more ideal SiGe alloy
              system to the InGaP alloy system will not result in high quality buffers.
              Specifically, threading dislocation flow during graded buffer relaxation is
              inhibited by previously unexamined branch defects, resulting in higher
              dislocation nucleation rates which lead to higher threading dislocation
              densities in the final layer. Identifying the structure of the branch defects,
              their origin, and their formation as a function of MOVPE growth parameters are
              key aspects of the project directed toward better understanding and the ability
              to fabricate low threading dislocation density, relaxed InGaP buffers on GaP.
              Such buffers are technologically important in visible LED applications, since
              GaP substrates and graded InGaP buffers do not absorb visible light. The
              current process for achieving a transparent substrate LED technology uses a
              wafer bonding process, due to the lattice- mismatch problem between transparent
              GaP substrates and InAlGaP lattice-matched LED structures. A successful
              epitaxial solution to the lattice-mismatch problem is anticipated to be a more
              cost-effective solution, and therefore can have significant impact on the high
              brightness LED manufacturing process. In addition, a new range of direct band
              gap III-V materials may become accessible. Current binary substrates are not
              lattice -matched to many InAIGaP alloy concentrations that have direct band
              gaps.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              materials science having high potential technological relevance. The research
              will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to
              important fabrication aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  New experimental
              materials science and optical tools are now available to allow more detailed
              observation of elementary surface and optical processes which when better
              understood allow advances in fundamental science and technology. The basic
              knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute
              to improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and circuits
              for computing and communications.  An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project is co-supported
              by the DMR/EM, ECS/PFET, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities).
***

