Title       : Support of the National Center for Atmospheric Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9820037

Award Number: 9820037
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Clifford A. Jacobs                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127501407          (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy L. Killeen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Anthes  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 4200      NAT CENTER FOR ATMOSPHERIC RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) operates the National
              Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR).    NCAR, with UCAR's leadership, will
              contribute to strengthening the atmospheric sciences.  NCAR and UCAR will also
              continue to contribute strongly to the overarching goals in NSF's strategic
              plan.  NCAR's priorities over the next five years fall into six main areas:
              
(1) Fundamental Research.  In keeping with the mission of NSF, the foundation
              of NCAR's program is fundamental research, particularly research of sufficient
              complexity to command the resources of a national center.  This program
              includes solar physics, fluid dynamics and turbulence, cloud and precipitation
              physics, atmospheric chemistry mesoscale meteorology, and climate.  
(2)
              Understanding and Predicting the Earth System.  Building on the broad base of
              fundamental research, NCAR and its many university collaborators will carry out
              major crosscutting efforts toward understanding and predicting the earth
              system.  This includes research on prediction of weather on short temporal and
              small spatial scales, longer-term prediction of monthly and seasonal means, and
              studies of the influence of human, solar, and other forcing processes on
              weather and climate.
(3) Advanced Scientific Facilities.  NCAR will continue
              to put a high priority on developing new and cutting-edge scientific facilities
              that can be efficiently and cost-effectively supplied by a national center. 
              This effort will include computing systems, instruments and observing systems,
              community models, datasets, advanced networking and communications tools, and
              provision of these facilities to the community.
(4) Human Dimensions and
              Societal Impacts.  NCAR will place increasing emphasis on studying the impacts
              of climate and weather on society; on human influences on the climate system;
              on society's ability to cope with weather- and climate-related impacts; and on
              the use and value of meteorological, climate, and other atmospheric-related
              information in a variety of contexts.  
(5) Education and Training.  NCAR will
              continue and strengthen its efforts in education.  The Advanced Study Program
              will support a strong postdoctoral fellowship program and graduate research
              assistantships to encourage the development of creativity, independence, and
              breadth in young scientists.  Other educational activities will increase
              diversity in the atmospheric sciences.  
(6) Applications and
              Technology/Information Transfer.  NCAR will transfer information, technology,
              and research results to the public and private sectors and to university
              colleagues and constituents in three major ways.  Through direct transfer,
              public domain access to make information freely available to the broadest
              audience, and licensing. 

