Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemical Engineering Using the
               Colorado Bioprocessing Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a9820545

Award Number: 9820545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent G. Murphy vince@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian C. Batt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Linden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth F. Reardon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Nazmul Karim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ranil Wickramasinghe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820545
Colorado State University
Vincent G. Murphy

Biotechnology is a
              field that has grown rapidly in the past decade.  As biotechnology products
              
are identified and their efficacy verified, there will be an increasing need
              for chemical engineers with 
expertise in bioprocessing.  Colorado has
              established the Colorado Bioprocessing Center (CBC) at 
Colorado State
              University as a resource for both academic and industrial research and
              development.  
The CBC has a full spectrum of bioprocess equipment at both
              bench and pilot scales for fermentation, 
cell culture and product recovery
              research.  A skilled group of faculty in the Department of Chemical 
and
              Bioresource Engineering CBE) works closely with the CBC staff on both basic and
              applied
research projects.  This proposal requests funds for renewing a REU
              site focused around the unique 
research environment of the CBC.  Students
              selected for participation in the program would first 
participate in a series
              of lectures conducted by CBE  faculty on the fundamentals of biochemical
              
engineering.  This would be followed by hands-on experience with the process
              and analytical 
equipment in the CBC and the development and execution of a
              focused research project with the 
guidance and support of a CBE faculty
              advisor and the CBC staff Students would share their 
experiences with fellow
              participants at weekly colloquia and a concluding symposium.  The goal is to
              
expose the students to a variety of bioprocessing research opportunities at
              both the undergraduate and 
graduate levels in preparation for a career in
              bioprocessing research and development.  The initial three 
years of the
              program were successful in providing research opportunities to minority
              students (two), 
women (ten), and to eight students from smaller schools with
              limited research programs.  Fourteen of 
the 22 students representing 16
              universities) who participated in the program are either in or committed 
to
              attending graduate school or now work in research laboratories.

