Title       : Develpoment of a Second Generation Video Plankton Recorder for General
               Oceanographic Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9820099

Award Number: 9820099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1299112            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cabell S. Davis cdavis@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoou Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert M. Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Gallager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredrik T. Thwaites  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820099
Davis

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will undertake
              development of a second generation Video Plankton Recorder (VPR) system with
              improved performance and capabilities. The original prototype VPR has been
              developed over the past eight years to quantify the distribution patterns of
              plankton and hydrography over broad range of scales (millimeters to 100s of
              kilometers). A new image processing/data display system that can automatically
              identify planktonic taxa and provide visualizations of their distributions at
              sea in real time has also been developed. While the VPR has potential for
              enabling biological oceanographers to obtain real-time high-resolution
              distribution data on plankton and environmental variables, only one prototype
              system exists. This effort will make improvements in key areas, reduce overall
              size and weight, and make it more accessible to the general oceanographic
              community. Tasks to be accomplished include: 1) upgrading the tow-body from a
              depressor fin to an undulating body that is dynamically controllable
              horizontally and vertically. This new design will enhance towing capabilities
              at variable depths while reducing cable diameter, winch size, and cost, and
              thus allow deployment from small coastal vessels.  2) upgrading  from two video
              cameras to a single high-resolution digital camera having an order of magnitude
              greater pixel density, and 3) upgrading the image processing system to improve
              accuracy and ease of use and reduce the computers needed for image processing
              from a PC and unix workstation to a single PC.

By making the new VPR system
              versatile,, easy to use, and accessible to the general oceanographic community,
              the instrument will allow biological oceanographers to rapidly sample the
              dynamic pelagic environment, obtaining distribution data on planktonic taxa and
              environmental variables over a broad range of scales.


