Title       : The Human Brain Project: Phase I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a9820016

Award Number: 9820016
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel H. Goddard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Institutes of Health
	      
	      Washington, DC  20014    /   -

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Over the last decade computational modeling has become central to neurobiology. 
              While much of this work has focused on cellular and sub-cellular processes, the
              last few years have seen increasing interest in systems level models and in
              integrative  accounts that span data from the sub-cellular to behavioral
              levels.  This proposal, in summary, is 1) to extend existing work in parallel
              discrete event simulation (PDES);2) integrate it with existing work on
              comparmental modeling enviroments to produce a software enviroment which has
              comprehensive efficiently exploit the full range of parallel platforms. 
              Because of the scale of the models needed at this level of integration,
              advanced parallel computing is required.  The critical technical insight upon
              which this work rests is that neuronal modeling at the systems level can often
              be reduced to a form of discrete event simulation in which single cells are
              node functions and voltage spikes are events.  Three neuroscience modeling
              projects, will mold, test, and utilize these new capabilities in investigations
              of system-level models of the nervous system which integrate behavioral,
              anatomical and physiological data on a scale that exceeds current simulation
              capabilities.  In collaboration with computer scientists at the Pittsburgh
              Supercomputing Center and UCLA, neuroscientists at the University of Virginia,
              the Born-Bunge Foundation, Antwerp, the Salk Institute and the developers of
              the Neuron and Genesis packages, these tools will be developed and made
              available to the neuroscience community.  The software development aims include
              1)Investigation of a portable, PDES for Neuron and Genesis allowing models
              developed in those packages to be scaled up, 3) Investigation of a network
              specification language for neuronal models, and associated visualization
              interface, to facilitate investigation of systems-levels models, 4)
              Sufficiently robust and well-documented software for download and installation
              at other sites.  The three neuroscience projcts will guide development of the
              software tools and use the tools for investigation of large-scale models of
              cerebellum, hippocampus and thalamocortical circuits.
