Title       : Robust Algorithms for Restricted Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9820840

Award Number: 9820840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay Raghavan raghavan@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy P. Spinrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Sometimes, restricting the domain of interest makes a hard problem easy.  For
              example, one can find the minimum vertex cover of a bipartite graph in
              polynomial time even though the general problem is NP-hard.  Sometimes,
              restricting the domain does not make a problem easier.  For example, finding
              the minimum vertex cover of a planar graph is NP-hard.  
     This project is
              to study issues relating to problems whose instances come from classes obtained
              by natural restrictions on more general classes.  Many subtleties which arise
              naturally in dealing with such problems have been glossed over in the
              literature.  Perhaps the most common interpretation of solving a problem on a
              retricted class is the "promise" version, in which there is a guarantee that
              the input is in the class, and an algorithm to "solve" the problem need not
              function correctly (or even terminate) if this guarantee is not met.  This
              research is based on different definition, one in which the algorithm must
              produce correct output even if the input is not in the restricted class; such
              output may either be "the input is not in the class" or the correct solution to
              the problem. 
     The new definition of solving proglems on restricted
              domains requires algorithms to be "robust: in the face of invalid input, a more
              stringent requirement than "don't care."  Robust algorithms are amenable to
              manipulation as building blocks of more general algorithms; in contrast,
              "promise" algorithms are not.  Furthermore, there exist problems which are in P
              in the "promise" version of solving a problem, while being NP-hard under the
              new definition.  Arguments can be made that the hardness results are sometimes
              more meaningful, necessitating a revamping of the notion of restricted class
              NP-completeness.
     Graph classes provide interesting and natural restricted
              domains; the project will also study many problems on graph classes which
              satisfy the twin requirements of being:

.  Easy to solve given a special and
              natural representation of a graph (i.e., a "model")

.  Open with respect to
              complexity if the graph is given in a general form such as an adjacency
              list.

While some of these open problems appear to be quite hard, they are
              not easily classifiable as "really" being hard.  This is because the model
              provides a certificate for the problem to be in NP and in co-NP; consequently,
              such problems can be NP-hard only if NP = co-NP.  An operational notion of
              intractability is needed for several such problems and the project will
              investigate possibilities

