Title       : Compact Modeling of Integrated Microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9820430

Award Number: 9820430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168337             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Ringo ringo@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Darling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ringo
EEC-9820444

This project is funded as a part of the EEC initiative on
              Research Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D.  The cooperating partners are
              the Center for the Design of Analog-Digital Integrated Circuits (CDADIC) at
              Washington State University, and Analogy, Inc., a small firm located in
              Beaverton, OR.  The work will draw upon compact device modeling carried out at
              CDADIC that deals with micromachined structures mainly applicable to pressure
              and inertial sensors.  The study to be conducted under the present award will
              extend this concept to more generic integrated microsystems which will involve
              more than just electrical-mechanical coupling, and will provide a structured
              basis through which new public domain device models can be readily developed
              and incorporated into microsystem design.  The work will involve close
              collaboration between the Center and Analogy, Inc., which is the leading
              developer of multi-domain, mixed-mode simulation software.  The primary
              product, the Saber simulator, which is now a standard for automotive and
              aerospace system simulation, is ideally suited for treating the multiple and
              interconnected physical domains which arise in microsystems.  The development
              of of simulation tools and methods for integrated microsystem design will
              encourage standardization, validation, and model accuracy performance measures
              to emerge which will support the growing field of integrated sensors,
              transducers, micro-electro-mechanical systems, and microanalytical systems.

