Title       : Artificial Dielectrics: Hybrid Structures for MID-IR Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a9820200

Award Number: 9820200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haim Grebel grebel@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl D. Moeller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9820200
Grebel

The dielectric properties of passive thin films can be
              tailored by incorporating small scattering features within them.  Artificial
              Dielectrics (ADs) are achieved upon the embedment of conductors as fine
              structures within dielectric materials.  The same concept works in the
              complementary mode where an array of very small holes are placed within a thin
              metal film.  This concept is of particular interest in the mid-IR wavelength
              region where the variety of transparent dielectric materials is quite limited. 
              Moreover, tailoring the dispersion properties for systems such as band-pass
              filters or resonators is extremely important for chemical and biological
              characterizations.  Only a very few structures have been realized in that
              spectral region and we intend to explore it in a systematic manner.  Although
              much theoretical effort has been invested in understanding the wave propagation
              in the microwave and far infrared region, only recently an adequate model was
              constructed in the 2-5 microns region by P. Lalanne.  Recent developments in
              high aspect ratio photoresists make it very appealing to fabricate complex
              structures using photo lithography.  Moreover, since the thickness of the film
              may be made larger than the propagating wavelength, near-field and far-field
              elements may be realized.  We, therefore, propose to analyze and fabricate
              dispersion elements made of stacks of small scattering features within
              dielectric or metal films (Artificial Dielectrics) for mid-IR wavelength
              region.  These features will be constructed as periodic arrays of hybrid
              structures (metal/dielectric combination) with scattering elements much smaller
              than the propagating wavelength.  In particular we propose to study
              analytically and experimentally the properties of hybrid structures, such as
              wavefront dividing beamsplitters.  The resonance's of band pass filters, the
              resonance structure of two of these hybrid structures in a Fabry-Perot
              configuration, and the dispersion properties of stacks of hybrid structures as
              3-D artificial dielectrics.  The samples will be produced in the class 10 clean
              room at NJIT using special facilities for Si bonding and deep reactive ion
              etching.  Near and far-field measurements will be performed at the Electronic
              Imaging Center at NJIT, making use of an IR-CCD camera (Samoff, 3-5 microns)
              interfaced with a SUN workstation to acquire and process images with various
              integration times.
***

