Title       : Dynamic Data Structures in Advanced Programming Languages Implementation: Theory
               and Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9820852

Award Number: 9820852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Desh Ranjan dranjan@NMSU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gopal Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Enrico Pontelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Over the past several years there has been an advent of a host of new
              programming methodologies and  paradigms based on sophisticated features like
              concurrency and parallelism. These programming features and paradigms provide
              users with high levels of abstraction, enabling them to stay closer to the
              problem domains.  Supporting these features causes a considerable increase in
              the interpretation/compilation overhead, leading to complex and relatively slow
              implementations.  Experience in the development and implementation of
              programming systems based on these new paradigms shows that one of the main
              sources of inefficiency is the repeated specialized searches that must be
              performed to realize the correct semantics at run-time.  To limit inefficiency,
              existing languages and implementations restrict the expressiveness of the
              constructs.
The aim of this project is to study the search-related problems
              that arise in sequential and parallel implementation of advanced programming
              paradigms, with specific attention to logic programming and non-deterministic
              languages.  The specific goals of this study are: (i) to abstract the key
              implementation aspects of these programming frameworks as problems of design
              and implementation of dynamic data structures;
(ii) to design efficient data
              structures for the resulting problems and analyze their complexity; and, (iii)
              to use the results from the complexity analysis to quantitatively evaluate the
              various implementation schemes described in the literature as well as to guide
              the design of efficient dynamic data structures and algorithms that will lead
              to optimal implementations.
Precise complexity measures  of the  solutions to
              these problems would allow system implementors to quantitatively compare
              different execution models, propose and develop optimal implementations, and
              talk about performance guarantees and system efficiency in a formal and
              mathematically precise fashion.  These results would also be of importance to
              the  users of these implementations, since they will allow them to understand
              the implementation-wise troublesome  aspects of the language and to make better
              use of the capabilities that the language possesses.  The results obtained in
              this research are expected to be directly applicable to the specific
              programming paradigms studied here.  Furthermore, these results are expected to
              be transferable to other domains like constraint management and semantic
              networks, where efficient specialized tree and graph searches are key
              components of the execution models.


