Title       : Nano-and Microscale Experiments and Theoretical Modeling for Strain Gradient
               Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a9820770

Award Number: 9820770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Slaughter wss@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott X. Mao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Nano- and Microscale Experiments and Theoretical Modeling
for Strain Gradient
              Plasticity

William S. Slaughter and Scott X.
              Mao


Abstract

Micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), micro-electronic
              packaging, and micromechanical sensors and actuators commonly use thin films
              and multilayers whose behaviors are found to be significantly different from
              that of the bulk materials from which they are made.  As such, there is a need
              to deal with design and manufacturing issues at micron levels, and even down to
              nanometer levels.
Experimental evidence shows that the microscale behavior
              manifests itself as a strong size effect on the plastic flow stress of metals
              and ceramics when the characteristic length scale of deformation is on the
              order of several microns or less.  Conventional theories of plasticity are
              unable to explain and predict these effects, which reflect some inherent nature
              of the material.  The cause of these size effects is rooted in the dependence
              of plastic flow stress on not only the plastic strain, but also on the gradient
              of plastic strain.  Plastic strain gradients are, in general, inversely
              proportional to the length scale over which plastic deformation occurs so that
              strain gradient effects tend to become important at these small scales.
This
              proposal is aimed at understanding the deformation mechanisms behind large
              plastic strain gradients in thin films and multilayers and using continuum
              strain gradient plasticity theories to characterize the deformation. Large
              strain gradients will be generated through innovative nano- and microscale
              bending and indentation tests.  The proposal will provide a thorough,
              experiment-based examination of the basic deformation behavior and mechanisms
              for various thin films and wires at nano- and microscales, and a development of
              the strain gradient plasticity theory with emphasis on determining the values
              of pertinent material properties.
The proposal includes the study of (i)
              strain gradient plasticity in monolithic materials using bending tests for thin
              foils and wires, and indentation tests; and (ii) strain gradient plasticity and
              layer thickness effects in nano- and micro-layered materials.  The former will
              include the development of new experimental methods for nanomechanics and will
              validate current theories of strain gradient plasticity for nanoscale
              deformation.  The latter will examine material length scales associated with
              both strain gradient plasticity and with layer thickness. 




