Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9820175

Award Number: 9820175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Laybourn laybourn@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Bamburg  (Principal Investigator former)
              Norman P. Curthoys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biochemistry/molecular biology employs methods from chemistry, physics, cell
              biology, microbiology and genetics to study the structure and function of
              complex biomolecules, how they operate in living organisms and how alterations
              in these molecules perturb the living state. Biochemistry/molecular biology
              integrates didactic and experimental material learned in many basic courses.
              The Program in Molecular Biosciences will enable qualified undergraduates to do
              independent research projects, using a variety of experimental approaches. The
              program is designed to offer the participants a variety of research areas from
              which to choose a meaningful and exciting independent study project. Students
              will learn how to formulate and test hypotheses and develop the ability to
              troubleshoot and problem-solve when confronted with the unexpected. They will
              have access and training in the use of state-of-the-art instrumentation.
              Through weekly meetings and a research poster presentation, students will
              develop the ability to communicate their results to their peers. The program
              will provide appropriate role models for these students that will reinforce
              their excitement for a scientific research career and will emphasize to all
              participants the gender and diversity issues that impact research careers in
              science. Through an International Internship, the program will provide the
              opportunity for undergraduates who demonstrate superior research aptitude to
              work in a foreign host laboratory on a collaborative research project in which
              they have received prior training. These students will learn to appreciate
              scientific research as an international endeavor. The program will render
              assistance to all participants in preparing and applying to graduate schools
              and for fellowships.
