Title       : Dendritic and Hybrid Linear-Globular Molecules: Design and Synthetic Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2000   
File        : a9816166

Award Number: 9816166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. J. Frechet frechet@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9816166
Frechet
The last decade has seen an explosion in research, both pure
              and applied, exphasizing molecular architecture, supramolecular chemistry, and
              chemistry at the nanometer scale.  Dendrimers and other dendritic molecules
              such as linear-dendritic hybrids and hyperbranched polymers have been major
              contributors to this surge of activity spanning several fields including
              chemistry, materials science, physics, medicine, and mathematics.

This
              project is focused on the discovery and development of versatile families of
              dendritic polymers, the establishment of reliable synthetic methods and
              procedures for their preparation, and their early characterization.  One of its
              aims is to stimulate the development of novel applications by providing access
              to versatile  structures and contributing to a better fundamental understanding
              of these unique molecules and their behavior.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                    %%%                                      
                                                                                             
                                                               Synthetic targets include both
              simplified and high yielding approaches to dendritic molecules, the use of more
              accessible starting materials, as well as the design and preparation of more
              complex targets for which structure defines function.  For example, the
              exploration of a versatile new family of hydrolytically stable dendrimers with
              reactive end-groups is proposed.  These dendrimers, obtained in high yield
              processes from simple starting materials, will complement the limited array of
              dendrimer families in widespread use today. Their potential applications span a
              broad spectrum from targeted drug delivery, to sensors, molecular "machines",
              micellar catalysts, nanoscale components, or biological mimics.  Hyperbranched
              polymers, obtained through polymerization processes rather than repetitive
              stepwise syntheses, are candidates for use in industrial additives, improved
              plastics, coatings, or adhesives.  Finally, well-defined linear
              hybrid-dendritic structures should prove useful as building blocks in
              supramolecular chemistry, surface active agents, micellar catalysts,
              adsorbents, etc.  The characterization and availability of these novel globular
              molecules will also contribute greatly to our understanding of
              structure-property relationships.     
