Title       : Specification of Anterior-Posterior Identity in the Vertebrae Hindbrain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9816905

Award Number: 9816905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecilia B. Moens cmoens@fhcrc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  981091024    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Moens, C;  IBN #9816905    The enormous functional complexity of the
              vertebrate nervous system is built upon events that occur during early
              embryogenesis when an initially homogeneous field of cells, the neural plate,
              is divided and subdivided into progressively more sharply restricted domains. 
              Within the hindbrain, these domains are overtly segmental in character,
              containing re-iterated sets of neurons and being separated by morphologically
              and molecularly distinct boundaries.  These hindbrain segments, or rhombomeres,
              acquire their distinct anterior-posterior identities through the action of the
              hox genes, which also pattern the body segments of invertebrate animals.  As
              such, the vertebrate hindbrain has an archetypal significance as being
              patterned by mechanisms that are conserved across animal phyla.
     This
              project proposes to study the mechanism by which vertebrates establish
              anterior-posterior pattern within the hindbrain, and thereby co-opt the hox
              gens into their segmental body plan.  The zebrafish is used as a model system,
              because its relatively simple nervous system allows the identification of
              individual neurons at particular anterior-posterior levels within the
              hindbrain.  Thus, it is possible to study the specification and patterning of
              individual neurons both experimentally, by transplanting them to different
              anterior-posterior levels, and genetically, by studying mutants in which their
              organization is disrupted through gene deletions.  Using this combination of
              experimental embryology, molecular biology and genetics, the experiments
              outlined in this proposal will address when and how individual neurons become
              committed to their region-specific identities, and what role candidate
              signalling molecules and candidate signalling sources play in this process. 

