Title       : Protein Monolayer Electrochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9816268

Award Number: 9816268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmond F. Bowden edmond_bowden@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project is supported by the Analytical and Surface
              Chemistry
Program.  The Principal Investigator, Professor Edmond Bowden at
              North
Carolina State University, and his colleagues are addressing
              fundamental
questions of electron transport between the heme site of
              cytochrome
proteins and the organic monolayer modified gold electrode surface.
               By
varying the self-assembled monolayer modification of the gold surface,
              and
by careful site directed mutation of the cytochrome protein, the effects
              of
protein orientation and electron transfer distance are probed in
              these
studies.  Spectroscopic characterization of the modified overlayers,
              using
scanning probe methods, infrared spectroscopy, and
              photoelectron
spectroscopy, is used to determine overlayer structure and
              properties.
Mutation and selective chemical modification of the protein
              overlayer is
used to characterize the interaction between the protein and the
              modified
electrode surface.  Fundamental information gained from these studies
              will
be of use in the subsequent design of biosensors and biomedical devices.
              

An understanding of electron transfer between electrode surfaces
              and
protein molecules bound to the surface is important for the design
              of
antigen specific sensors and bioanalytical methods.  This research
              project
addresses this electron transfer problem by careful modification
              and
characterization of both the electrode surface and the protein
              interacting
with it.  Detailed fundamental information on electron transfer
              rate
processes results from these studies, with direct application to the
              design
of biosensors. 

