Title       : Genome Reorganization in Hypotrichous Ciliated Protozoa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9816765

Award Number: 9816765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Klobutcher klobutcher@nso2.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Developmental, or programmed, DNA rearrangement occurs in a variety of
              organisms. The molecular mechanisms involved are, in some cases, well
              understood but little information exists for the large-scale rearrangement
              processes that occur in numerous eukaryotes. The hypotrichous ciliated
              protozoan, Euplotes crassus, undergoes extensive genome reorganization during
              sexual reproduction. A copy of the germinal micronucleus eliminates about
              100,000 interstitial segments of DNA or internal eliminated sequences (IES)
              with concomitant rejoining of flanking sequences to form the transcriptionally
              active macronucleus. The eliminated IESs consists of two large, related
              families of transposons, as well as short unique segments of DNA. Chromosome
              fragmentation generates the gene size macronuclear DNA molecules. Simple
              repeats are added to the ends of the gene size pieces as telomeres. Models have
              been developed to explain the mechanisms involved in this extensive
              rearrangement and the models will be tested. Further characterization of the
              molecular mechanisms of the two major rearrangement processes will be done.
              Highly sensitive ligation-mediated PC procedures will be used to search for in
              vivo rearrangement intermediates that have undergone chromosome fragmentation,
              but not telomere addition. A similar series of PCR analysis will be performed
              to identify intermediates in the IES excision process. In vitro chromosome
              fragmentation activity in extracts derived from appropriately staged developing
              macronuclei will be sought. Finally, additional in vitro studies with partially
              purified telomerase preparations will be performed to test the current model of
              de novo telomere synthesis.
E. crassus is one of the few cases where there is
              strong evidence for the involvement of transposable elements in developmental
              DNA rearrangement. Further insight into this process will allow this mechanism
              to be validated as well as providing information relevant to the co-evolution
              of transposons and their host genomes. Ultimately these studies may also lead
              to tools that are of practical use in generating artificial chromosomes both in
              vivo and in vitro, as well as suggesting strategies for mitigating the harmful
              effects of chromosome breaks. 

