Title       : Mechanisms and Ecological Consequences of Predawn Soil-Plant Water Potential
               Disequilibrium in Desert Shrubs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9816670

Award Number: 9816670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Donovan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Water is the primary factor limiting plant growth and distribution in many
              habitats.  Thus, plant water status and water relations characteristics are
              closely related to plant performance, particularly in arid habitats. 
              Measurements of plant water status just before sunrise, called plant predawn
              water potential, are used as a standard for comparing plant water availability
              in different habitats because of the expectation that predawn plant water
              potential is in equilibrium with soil water potential. The PIs have evidence
              from field and controlled environment studies that at least two desert shrub
              species show major departures from the expected soil-plant predawn water
              potential equilibrium, even when hydraulic continuity (soil-root contact) is
              not a limiting factor, and the PIs call this phenomenon "predawn
              disequilibrium."  Predawn disequilibrium in the study species provides a focal
              point for investigating a suite of mechanisms that may account for departure
              from classical physiological expectations and for study of ecological
              consequences and adaptive significance of those mechanisms. The study shrubs
              are Chrysothamnus nauseosus ssp. consimilis (salt-excluding, non-halophytic)
              and Sarcobatus vermiculatus (salt-accumulating, halophytic) which are similar
              in life history and rooting characteristics.  Mechanisms to be tested, in both
              greenhouse and field studies, include lack of time for overnight recovery,
              nighttime transpiration, nocturnal efflux of water from roots, growth-induced
              reduction in plant water potential, and solute accumulation in intercellular
              spaces.  The PIs will then assess the plant carbon gain consequences of predawn
              disequilibrium by examining its relationship to photosynthesis, transpiration
              and water-use-efficiency.  This project will contribute to a more accurate
              understanding of fundamental plant water relations in areas where classical
              interpretations fail. This improved understanding is essential for making valid
              ecological interpretations of water relations adaptations of wildland plants. 
