Title       : Gordon Research Conference on Mammalian DNA Repair, February 7-12, 1999, in
               Ventura, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9816626

Award Number: 9816626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip C. Hanawalt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel H. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1158      BIOMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hanawalt         This award will help enable  less-established scientists to
              participate in the seventh bi-annual Gordon Research Conference on Mammalian
              DNA Repair in Ventura, California, Feb. 7 - Feb. 12, 1999.  The selected
              speakers are current leaders in this area and related cellular processes.
              Besides providing a forum for these experts to present their most recent
              results and ideas, the conference will facilitate wide-ranging interactions
              among all attendees through Plenary Discussion Sessions and at posters. To
              stimulate debate following the plenary talks, selected poster presenters
              (generally students and younger scientists) will be given the opportunity to
              highlight their research results in short presentations, The attendees will be
              chosen globally from universities, research institutes, and government and
              industrial research labs.  The sessions will define areas in which exciting new
              information is emerging but in which experts may disagree. The session topics
              include the following:  repair of endogenous damage in nuclei and mitochondria;
              translesion synthesis and repair of mismatches; DNA repair enzyme structure and
              substrate interactions; nucleotide excision repair - the role of transcription;
              base excision repair - overlap with other pathways; inducible responses and
              cell cycle checkpoints; and cellular localization of repair and effects of
              bound proteins.

In summary, this conference will examine DNA repair as a key
              component in the genomic surveillance that is so crucial to the overall
              integrity and function of mammalian cells. Recent discoveries have catapulted
              DNA repair into a pivotal position in fundamental research in the fields of 
              aging, environmental health, and developmental biology. It is hoped that the
              most promising and exciting avenues of research will be highlighted in robust
              discussions at this conference.

