Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: The Technological Styles of Late Postclassic Slipped
               Pottery Groups in the Peten Lakes Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9816325

Award Number: 9816325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11602              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prudence M. Rice price@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Prudence Rice, MS Leslie Cecil will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct both stylistic and technological
              analysis on a large series of potsherds from Postclassic sites in the Peten
              region of Guatemala. The Peten was inhabited by Mayan speaking peoples and the
              archaeology of the Classic period - the height of Mayan development in the
              region - is well known. The early Spanish explorers in the region encountered
              the descendents of these groups and the written descriptions they recorded have
              been extensively analyzed. However it is difficult to match this written record
              with individual Classic period Mayan groups. During the intervening Postclassic
              period, the highly centralized form of social organization which resulted in
              the construction of impressive temples and monuments was transformed and
              populations were redistributed into smaller more dispersed and independent
              units. Archaeologists wish to understand why and how this process occurred and
              thus, in recent years have increasingly focused on the Postclassic period. They
              have learned that it is difficult to match individual sites to places and
              groups mentioned in the Spanish descriptions and MS. Cecil's research is
              directed towards this goal.

Ceramics can be fabricated in a variety of ways
              and the potential variation in the form and decoration on the finished products
              are practically endless. Pottery is produced and used in a social context and
              its final form reflects unspoken group rules as do other aspects of culture.
              Through both stylistic and technological analysis of potsherds from a number of
              Postclassic Peten sites, MS Cecil will determine commonalties and differences
              among sites, define larger social units and then hopefully link these to
              ethnohistorically described groups. 

This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide insight into what is commonly regarded as the
              "collapse" of Mayan society. It will help to refine an analytic technique of
              potentially wide archaeological applicability and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

