Title       : Louisiana Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers (LaCEPT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a9816194

Award Number: 9816194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry Davidson davidson@regents.state.la.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Brd of Regents
	      150 Third Street, Suite 129
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708011302    504/342-4253

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The successful institutionalization of teacher preparation reform requires more
              than isolated course and curriculum reform. It is a systemic standards-based
              approach to the preparation of teachers that includes overarching state
              policies, campus support at all administrative levels, and a continuing
              evolving cross-disciplinary culture of reform. LaCEPT will promote activities,
              and campus support at two levels to cultivate these prerequisites for
              successful at institutionalization. The first is for university personnel to
              learn from exemplary sites; the second, to engage in presentations and other
              activities designed to engender the understanding and support of key campus
              administrators.    Louisiana's strengthened commitment to the reform of teacher
              preparation and undergraduate education is underscored by recent actions of the
              Legislature: creation and funding of TOPS and the BoR Center for Innovative
              Teaching and Learning (CITAL).    CITAL, which aims to promote reform in
              teacher education programs throughout the state,will function in several
              capacities: (1) as a clearinghouse to promote and disseminate the latest in
              education research, materials, and data about Louisiana teacher education; (2)
              as an agency to provide funds for targeted teacher preparation reforms; and (3)
              as an evaluator of existing teacher preparation programs. Four areas of
              concentration in teacher preparation were emphasized during 1997-98: (1) K-3
              Reading and Mathematics; (2) Middle Grades; (3)Classroom Technology; and (4)
              Leadership Development.  Building on the TOPS program (II.B) and several pilot
              mentoring programs initiated under the CRPs, LaCEPT will cultivate further
              systemic support for preservice students and novice teachers. The continuing
              commitment of the Board of Regents, the Governor, and the Legislature provide
              the supportive context within which reform efforts on campuses will continue to
              expand and grow in vigor. With additional legislative funds expected the impact
              of CITAL will elevate visibility of th e reform effort at the campus level and
              among the public at large. Supplemental support from NSF, for both symbolic and
              material reasons, will help make certain that these developments occur.
