Title       : Structure and Function of Fertilization Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9816426

Award Number: 9816426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. D. Stout dave@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Stout
MCB 9816426

Technical Aspects
The objective is to define the
              molecular basis of sperm-egg interactions during fertilization. The experiments
              focus on the structure and function of four fertilization proteins, lysin, 18K,
              VERL and ADP ribosyl cyclase, and on the cyclase homologue, CD38. The Specific
              Aims address the structural basis of species specificity and the mechanisms of
              dissolution of the egg VE, fusion of the sperm and egg membranes, and synthesis
              of cADPR. Two abundant gamete recognition proteins from the abalone sperm are
              lysin and the 18K protein. Lysin hypervariable residues mediate recognition of
              the egg vitelline envelope (VE) receptor for lysin (VERL). Lysin binds
              irreversibly to the VERL resulting in non-enzymatic dissolution of the VE. The
              18K protein mediates fusion of the gamete plasma membranes. The goals are to
              solve and analyze crystal structures of monomeric and dimeric lysin and the 18K
              protein from two abalone species, and to crystallize the lysin:VERL complex.
              These experiments will establish the structural basis of species specificity
              residing in lysins from divergent species, visualize the interaction of lysin
              with the VERL, and define the structure and function of the 18K
              protein.

General Significance
How does the specific recognition, binding
              and fusion of sperm and egg cells occur? Although a great deal is being learned
              about cellular processes, very little is known about the molecular interactions
              that underlie the process of fertilization. Sperm-egg interaction remains one
              of the least understood fundamental biological processes, and yet it is
              exemplary of the general problem of how cells use surface molecules to adhere
              to each other and intercommunicate. Marine invertebrates have long been used as
              model systems to study basic biological processes. Abalone are advantageous
              model organisms in which to study fertilization biochemically. Key events
              during sperm-egg interaction in abalone are species specific binding of the
              gametes, dissolution of the egg protective coat and fusion of sperm and egg
              membranes. Proteins involved in these key steps of fertilization will be
              studied to determine their structure and function.

