Title       : Impulse Models for Fluid Motion with Flexible Boundaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9816951

Award Number: 9816951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo Cortez cortez@math.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cortez
9816951

The investigator develops new numerical methods for the
              solution of problems involving the interaction of flexible boundaries and the
              incompressible fluids in which they are immersed.  Typical applications of such
              problems are found in biology and physiology.  The approaches pursued include
              Lagrangian and Eulerian methods based on impulse variables, which combine
              elements from other numerical techniques such as vortex and projection methods.
               A hybrid particle method is developed for high Reynolds number flows.  In this
              case the accumulated effect of immersed boundary forces is accounted for
              through the evolution of impulse variables.  The viscous effects are modeled
              using a deterministic method for the diffusion of vorticity using vortex
              monopoles.  Finite-difference grid-based methods are also developed for the
              solution of the these problems in moderate Reynolds number flows.  Making use
              of the Lagrangian representation of the flexible boundaries, the investigator
              and his collaborators use ideas from the Lagrangian impulse method to describe
              the evolution of the immersed boundaries within the framework of the grid
              solution.  The researchers highlight improvements to existing numerical methods
              for this type of problems.

The numerical solution of fluid flow problems
              with thin flexible moving boundaries is motivated partly by the wide range of
              potential applications in biology and physiology.  For example, the membranes
              of the inner ear, the walls of the heart or lungs, muscle tissue, swimming
              jellyfish and eels can be modeled as thin membranes embedded in a fluid.  These
              examples are part of everyday life and yet many of their technical aspects are
              not fully understood.  The development and availability of reliable numerical
              simulations that could help our understanding of such commonly occurring
              natural phenomena is of great importance.  Numerical methods can be used to
              conduct improved computer simulations of new heart valve designs; computer
              simulations of collapsible tubes with a fluid inside, such as arteries weakened
              by disease, can be studied; efficiency in swimming motions of a single organism
              as well as the apparently synchronized patterns of groups of animals can be
              analyzed; new propulsion mechanisms can be devised.  Undulatory motion, for
              example, is present in organisms of a wide range of sizes because it is the
              preferred swimming mode of spermatozoa as well as eels and snakes.  The
              mathematical solution of such problems lies at the crossroads of natural
              sciences, mathematical modeling and scientific computing.

