Title       : NMR Structure and Dynamics and Computational Studies of RNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  2000  
File        : a9816906

Award Number: 9816906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen B. Hall hall@bionmr3.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Hall
MCB 9816906

Two RNA hairpins, the Iron Responsive RNA hairpin, with a
              six-nucleotide loop, and a UUCG tetraloop with either a C:G or G:C loop-closing
              base pair, are used here as model systems to probe structure, stability, and
              dynamics. The RNA structures are determined by 15N/13C/1H/31P heteronuclear NMR
              methods, and characterized thermodynamically using thermal melting monitored by
              ultraviolet absorption. 13C and 31P NMR relaxation measurements are used to
              determine the dynamics of the individual base and ribose, and phosphodiester
              backbone, respectively. To independently measure the dynamic motions of the RNA
              bases, 2-amino-purine is introduced at specific positions in the RNA, and the
              time-resolved fluorescence lifetimes and anisotropy are measured. These
              experimental results are compared with simulations of molecular structure and
              dynamics, using stochastic dynamics in a solvent continuum (GB/SA).


The
              structure and flexibility of an RNA molecule will determine how it interacts
              with other cellular components, such as proteins or other nucleic acids.
              Several spectroscopic methods are now available to describe the structure and
              motional properties of small RNA molecules: nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              provides structural information as well as a description of the flexibility of
              the structure, and fluorescence also provides a window on the time scales of
              the motion. These methods are applied to two RNA molecules which are
              anticipated to have distinctly different properties, reflecting their
              biological functions: one binds a protein, and the other acts as a staple to
              confine the structures of larger RNAs. Computational methods are then used to
              model their structures and intrinsic motions.

