Title       : Multi-Ligand Recognition by the Transcriptional Regulator BmrR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9816983

Award Number: 9816983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Neyfakh neyfakh@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neyfakh

Multidrug-efflux membrane transporters, which are expressed in all
              cells, present one of the most puzzling and long standing problems of
              biochemistry. These proteins recognize dozens of structurally dissimilar toxic
              organic molecules, mostly hydrophobic cations, and extrude them from the cell
              to the outer medium. The phenomenon of multidrug recognition seemingly
              contradicts the existing views on the mechanism of enzyme-substrate interaction
              and remains unexplained. In this project the mechanism of multidrug recognition
              will be analyzed in a different, yet somewhat related protein, BmrR. BmrR is a
              transcriptional regulator of the Bacillus subtilis multidrug transporter Bmr.
              Upon binding a wide variety of structurally diverse hydrophobic cations, it
              activates the expression of Bmr, which in turn promotes their efflux from the
              cell and thus protects the cell from their toxic effects. The inducer-binding
              activity of BmrR is confined to its 159 residue-long C-terminal domain. This
              domain, designated BRC, has been individually expressed, crystallized and its
              structure was solved.  Additionally, the structure of the complex of BRC with
              one of the inducers, tetraphenylphosphonium (TPP), has been solved. BRC forms a
              dimer each subunit of which contains an electronegative glutamate in the middle
              of the hydrophobic core of the protein. Substitution of electroneutral
              glutamine or alanine for this glutamate does not affect protein folding but
              completely abolishes the binding of the inducers. Furthermore, in the structure
              of the complex, TPP forms an electrostatic contact with this glutamate and
              multiple interactions with the surrounding hydrophobic residues. In order to
              allow TPP to gain access to the core of the protein, the surface amphiphilic
              a-helix completely unwinds. Therefore, the key to the bewildering inducer
              promiscuity of BmrR may lie in its flexibility, which allows each of the
              different inducers to penetrate into the protein and interact with the
              glutamate and the surrounding hydrophobic residues. 

This hypothesis will be
              tested by using three approaches. First, attempts will be made to crystallize
              and solve the structures of several additional BRC-inducer complexes. Second,
              by using fluorescence measurements, the conformational changes occurring in the
              BRC molecule upon inducer binding will be assessed. Finally, mutational
              analysis will be used to verify whether different inducers interact with
              different sets of residues of the protein. If the hypothesis described above is
              proven largely correct, this will indicate the existence of a new principle of
              ligand recognition by proteins, which may be described as a "flexible induced
              fit", in which a protein achieves tight binding of structurally diverse ligands
              by acquiring a conformation dictated by the ligand itself. This principle is
              likely to be used in many situations requiring multi-ligand recognition,
              including the recognition of multiple drugs by multidrug-efflux
              transporters.

This project will investigate the question of how an enzyme
              can recognize structurally dissimilar substrates. The structures of a variety
              of substrates complexed with a bacterial protein that regulates gene expression
              will be determined. Since most enzymes recognize only a very limited set of
              substrates, this is a fundamentally important problem addressing the
              relationship between protein structure and function. Moreover, since multidrug
              resistance results when a diverse class of compounds are recognized and pumped
              out of the cell, this work has the potential of increasing our understanding of
              this clinically important process.

