Title       : Damage-Induced Transactivation of the Drosophila Reaper Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9816841

Award Number: 9816841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Abrams abrams@utsw.swmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Previous work indicated that transcriptional expression of a gene in Drosophila
              melanogaster, REAPER, is acutely responsive to ionizing radiation. It was also
              determined that control elements governing this response can be uncoupled from
              developmental cues which engage this gene. Together, these data implicate a
              distinct signaling pathway that recruites REAPER in response to genotoxic
              damage. Since expression of REAPER is sufficient to promote apoptosis, these
              observations also account for cell killing by a defined external insult in this
              animal. In recent developments, a discrete 150 bp sequence has been identified
              in the promoter, referred to as the distal RRE, which alone is sufficient to
              confer radiation-induced transactivation in the context of a transgenic
              reporter gene. Through focused studies of this apoptotic target in vivo, the
              interface between damage signaling and cell death in this genetic model
              organism will be examined. Specifically: 1) concerted biochemical and molecular
              approaches to study factors that mediate radiation-induced transactivation of
              the cell death gene, REAPER, will be done. 2) A genetic approach to identify
              functions important for radiation-induced trasactivation will be initiated. 3)
              It will be determined whether signals eliciting alternate forms of
              "unscheduled" apopotsis recruit REAPER through a pathway that is distinct from
              radiation-induced responses.

Programmed cell death (apoptosis) is
              responsible for the deliberate elimination of cells in normal development and
              is also recruited as an adaptive response to remove cells that are potentially
              damaged. The broad goal of research proposed here seeks to understand how
              injured cells engage apoptotic physiology by examining important features of
              this process in a genetic model, Drosophila. In this animal, a complex genomic
              interval is required for all programmed cell death during embryonic
              development. Three genes mapping to this region are well established activators
              of the apoptotic pathway and one of these genes, REAPER, also contributes
              important functions during unscheduled deaths provoked either by genotoxic
              damage (radiation) or by developmental defects. Control elements that mediate
              radiation-responsive transactivation define an important connection between
              damage signaling and induction of an apoptosis activator in Drosophila. As
              such, they offer a unique and attractive vantage point to examine determinants
              that specify apoptosis in response to genotoxic challenge. The proposed studies
              should uncover novel insights regarding adaptive apoptotic responses in a
              sophisticated animal model.

