Title       : The People of the Andes as Evaluated Using Nometric Dental Traits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9816958

Award Number: 9816958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Sutter sutterr@ipfw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine genetically heritable dental traits - such as tooth
              cusp size and patterns and tooth root and cusp number - to estimate the genetic
              relations among ancient Andeans of Peru and Chile.  The use of such traits is a
              faster, less costly, and less destructive method than is the analysis of DNA
              extracted from ancient skeletalmaterials, while still providing valuable
              information on the genetic relations among ancient peoples. For this study,
              dental trait data will be collected for a large number of previously unstudied
              prehistoric Andean human remains. Data will be collected from Andean human
              remains that represent the earliest South Americans, who were hunter-gatherer
              populations who lacked ceramics and complex social structure (9500 - 1800 BC ),
              the earliest agriculturalists (1800 - 900 BC), emerging state-level societies
              (900 - 200 BC), the earliest empires (500 - AD 1000), and pre-Incaic balkanized
              societies (1000 ? 1476 AD) from both coastal and highland sites of the northern
              and central Andes. The dental trait data to be collected by this study will
              then be used to: 1) test competing hypotheses on the peopling of the New World,
              and, more specifically Andean South America; and 2) address competing
              scientific models that account for observed changes in the dental traits among
              previously examined skeletal populations from northern and central Peru. 

It
              has been hypothesized that a single prehistoric migration accounts for all the
              dental and genetic variability observed among modern native South American
              populations. According to this model, the Paleoindians - the earliest
              inhabitants of the New World - represent the only prehistoric migration into
              South America. However, recently reported genetic, linguistic, and skeletal
              investigations indicate that there may have been more than one ancient
              migration into South America. Ongoing research on the dental traits of ancient
              southern Peruvians and northern Chileans suggests that the earliest South
              Americans were characterized by dental crown and root traits that more closely
              resemble those reported for modern Southeast Asian populations, while
              subsequent food producing (i.e., agricultural) populations are characterized by
              dental traits that more closely resemble those reported for modern Northeast
              Asians and indigenous North Americans. This suggests that the earliest South
              Americans may have their biological origins among different populations than
              previously thought.

The biological relations among ancient Andeans, once
              evaluated, will greatly contribute to our understanding of critical scientific
              questions regarding prehistoric human biological variability, the peopling of
              South America, the relationship between ancient migrations and apparent changes
              in the archaeological record, and the relationship between ancient migratory
              events as detected in dental trait data and the observed patterns of molecular
              and linguistic variability among contemporary Andeans. These questions are of
              interest to biological anthropologists, archaeologists, linguists, molecular
              biologists, and the larger scientific community.




