Title       : Mesoscale Boundary Layer Structures Observed During the Lake-Induced Convection
               Experiment (Lake-ICE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  2001   
File        : a9816203

Award Number: 9816203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Hjelmfelt hjelmfel@ias.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The state of knowledge of air-sea interactions indicate that current scientific
              problems (such as weather forecasting and global change) require increased
              understanding of marine boundary layers in complex surface and synoptic
              conditions.  Lake-effect snow storms, which develop over the Great Lakes during
              fall and winter cold air outbreaks, are useful "laboratories" for the study of
              complex boundary layer growth and mesoscale circulation patterns.  Data
              collected during the recent Lake-Induced Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) offer
              a unique opportunity to gain insight into the development of convective
              boundary layers, mesoscale circulations in complex conditions, and
              interrelationships between growing boundary layers and the ambient synoptic
              conditions.

Past research efforts of the principal investigators have
              provided considerable insight into the development of lake-effect boundary roll
              convection and mesoscale snowbands in conditions of intense surface heating and
              strongly stable upwind conditions.  However, these efforts revealed the
              importance of atmospheric and surface conditions close to the upwind shore of
              Lake Michigan, where no observational data were available.  Data from Lake-ICE
              allow for direct testing of these hypotheses and an expansion of knowledge of
              the effects of non-classic, complex surface and atmospheric conditions on
              boundary layer growth and mesoscale circulation patterns. Specifically, the
              principal investigators propose to (1) understand the evolution of
              roll/cellular convection and boundary layer growth across Lake Michigan, (2)
              determine the influences of synoptic conditions, lake-surface temperature
              variations, and air-mass modification by Lake Superior, on boundary layer
              growth and mesoscale circulations over Lake Michigan, and (3) determine the
              respective mechanisms controlling the evolution of lake-effect vortices of
              different scales over the Great Lakes.

The proposed research will utilize
              the unique dataset available from the 1997/1998 field operations of the
              Lake-ICE, supplemented with data taken during two past field experiments
              conducted over the Great Lakes.  Of particular importance to the proposed
              research efforts will be the use of the NCAR Electra Doppler Radar (ELDORA),
              WSR-88D, and satellite observations to quantify spatial and temporal variations
              in mesoscale boundary layer circulation patterns in lake-effect events. 
              Numerical modeling efforts will use the Advanced Regional Prediction System
              (ARPS) to develop a better understanding of the physical processes responsible
              for variations in mesoscale circulation patterns and boundary layer growth in
              complex convective boundary layers and to determine the sensitivity of their
              characteristics over a wider range of atmospheric conditions than can be
              obtained by observations alone. 












2

