Title       : Urban Research Initiative: Infrastructure and Metropolitan Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9816816

Award Number: 9816816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Anas aanas@adelphia.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Boyce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerrit J. Knaap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis D. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1349      URBAN RSCH INITIATIVE PROPOSAL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1349,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project, supported under the Urban Research Initiative, combines
              urban economists, transportation engineers, and urban and regional planners in
              a project to design and implement a dynamic, general equilibrium model of the
              Chicago metropolitan region.  The purpose is to evaluate the net benefits of
              alternative metropolitan futures with a model designed to analyze the effects
              of:  1) transportation and other infrastructure investments, schools and open
              space on metropolitan areas; 2) alternative infrastructure financing schemes
              for each type of infrastructure as well as average versus marginal cost
              pricing; 3) land use regulations such as urban growth boundaries, greenbelts
              and green corridors, minimum density limitations and use-oriented
              zoning.

The model is sufficiently disaggregated with respect to income, work
              vs. non-work travel in peak and off-peak periods, industrial sectors and
              inter-industry linkages, multiple housing and commercial building types, to
              enable evaluation of the impacts of alternative policies on various
              socio-economic groups to be identified.

To estimate and implement the model,
              the investigators are utilizing data from the Northeastern Illinois Planning
              Commission, the Chicago Area Transportation Study and the 1900 Census.  They
              are also building of the Chicago regional economic model developed jointly by
              the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Regional Economic Applications
              Laboratory of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  Representatives
              of these organizations plus the Metropolitan Planning Council, a citizens
              group, serve as an advisory board for the research project.

The resulting
              prototype model is used to examine whether and how the above policy options
              influence the long-term course of metropolitan development.  In particular, the
              investigators focus on three visions of the future, frequently debated in the
              literature:  a) laissez-faire with control of metropolitan decentralization at
              the margin; b) compact city emphasizing aggressive land use controls to
              increase densities and public transit-oriented development; c)
              centralization-within-decentralization emphasizing sub-centers and edge city
              formation.  The central question is whether combinations of infrastructure and
              land use policies can be found which, over a period of time, induce adjustments
              in land uses to alter existing patterns, and how the above visions compare in
              economic efficiency, equity among different groups, and indices of urban
              environmental quality.



