Title       : Role of Threonine Phosphorylation in Integrin Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9816832

Award Number: 9816832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Lerea ken_lerea@nymc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York Medical College
	      
	      Valhalla, NY  10595    914/594-4480

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Integrins on the plasma membrane of cells are central recognition elements for
              conveying signals from the extracellular matrix to the cell interior.  One of
              the best studied model systems for integrin function is the platelet, which
              undergoes complex biochemical and structural changes in response to integrin
              activation.  The overall goal of this project is to define the molecular
              mechanism by which protein serine/threonine (Ser/Thr) phosphatases control
              platelet responses associated with integrins.  The first objective is to
              examine Thr phosphorylation of the beta subunit of the platelet-specific
              integrin alphaIIb/beta3.  Platelet spreading and other responses induced by
              platelet aggregation are critical steps in the activation by this integrin. 
              Inhibitors of protein Ser/Thr phosphatases block spreading on fibrinogen
              matrices and aggregation-induced signaling.  Thus, these responses are
              apparently regulated by phosphatase activity.  The carboxy-terminal segment of
              the beta3 subunit of the integrin has a sequence that includes sites for both
              tyrosine (Tyr) and Thr phosphorylation.  Under normal conditions, activation of
              alphaIIb/beta3 integrin by fibrinogen causes phosphorylation of Tyr residues,
              which in turn promotes the assembly of signaling complexes on the
              carboxy-terminus of beta3.  In contrast, inhibition of platelet Ser/Thr
              phosphatases promotes phosphorylation of Thr residues within the
              carboxy-terminus.  The hypothesis is that this phosphorylation modulates
              alphaIIb/beta3 activity.  The first specific aim is to test whether Thr
              phosphorylation of beta3 affects the Tyr phosphorylation or the ability of this
              subunit to form signaling complexes.  This will be accomplished using intact
              beta3 and peptides derived from its cytoplasmic domain, with and without target
              Thr residues, as Tyr kinase substrates.  The second specific aim is to
              characterize the protein kinase that phosphorylates the beta3 subunit, again
              using an appropriate synthetic peptide to assay kinase activity.  The third
              specific aim is to assess whether the phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A affects
              just beta3 integrins or, in addition, integrins with other beta subunits. 
              Specifically, the ability of calyculin A to alter the localization of beta1
              integrins to focal adhesions will be tested.  The studies are significant for
              understanding both specific integrin signaling in platelets as well as more
              general mechanisms of integrin regulation in other cell types.

