Title       : Arrest of DNA Replication in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9816998

Award Number: 9816998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Hill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1154,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              DNA replication in Escherichia coli is always initiated from a specific point on
              the circular chromosome, called the origin of replication.  The two replication
              forks initiated from the origin travel along each half of the chromosome and
              meet 180 from the origin in a region called the terminus.  In the terminus
              region of the chromosome, replication forks are arrested at specific DNA
              sequences, called Ter sites.  Arrest of DNA replication is mediated by the Tus
              protein, which binds to the Ter sites to form an asymmetric protein-DNA
              complex.  The Tus-Ter complex shows polarity of function; that is, it halts
              replication forks approaching from one direction but not the other.  Thus, the
              Tus-Ter complex constitutes an orientation-dependent barrier to the progression
              of DNA replication.  The primary objective of this project is to understand the
              mechanism by which Tus arrests the replication machinery.  Preliminary
              experiments from this lab have suggested that mutations mapping near to or in
              the gene for topoisomerase I (topA) of E. coli suppress replication arrest by a
              wild-type Tus-Ter complex.  Biochemical, genetic, and molecular approaches will
              be used to characterize these mutations and to identify the mechanism by which
              the Tus-Ter complexes are bypassed.  This lab has also found that mutations at
              certain amino acids in Tus impair replication arrest activity without
              significantly impairing DNA binding.  To extend these studies further, random
              mutagenesis will be used to identify the domains of Tus that contribute to its
              function, followed by site-directed mutagenesis to target specific amino acids.
               The ability of the mutant Tus proteins to arrest DNA replication will then be
              assessed using in vivo and in vitro assays.  The information gained from this
              research will help elucidate the mechanism by which DNA replication is halted
              by Tus and shed light on the physiological role that replication arrest systems
              play in bacteria.  In addition, understanding the Tus-Ter system in E. coli
              will increase our understanding of yeast and higher eukaryotes, which also have
              replication arrest systems.
