Title       : Collaborative Research: The Evolutionary Consequences of Floral Display Size in
               a Self-compatible plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9816712

Award Number: 9816712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Karron karron@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Karron 
9816712

The number of flowers blooming simultaneously on a
              self-fertile plant may have profound consequences for reproductive success. 
              For example, plants with large displays may receive more pollinator visits,
              increasing seed production.  However, large displays may also entail
              significant costs.  Self-pollination is more likely, since large displays
              promote within-plant pollinator movements.  If there is inbreeding depression,
              female reproductive success will suffer.  Self-pollination may also decrease
              pollen transfer to other plants, reducing male reproductive success.  This
              project utilizes a novel experimental system to test the hypothesis that these
              conflicting selection pressures favor the evolution of intermediate-sized
              floral displays.  Monkeyflower (Mimulus ringens) displays will be manipulated
              in replicate (cloned) populations consisting of genetically distinct
              individuals.  These arrays facilitate unambiguous measures of paternity and
              individual selfing rates.  Manipulation of floral display size on a common
              genetic background allows examination of how floral display and other traits
              interact in affecting reproductive success.  To examine how floral display may
              evolve in natural populations, an artificial selection experiment will be
              conducted under field conditions in a common garden.  

These experiments
              will provide unique data concerning the adaptive significance of floral
              displays, and will enhance our understanding of the evolution of plant mating
              systems.  The results of this research will also have important implications
              for agriculture (breeding of crops to maximize yield) and conservation biology
              (maximizing reproductive success of endangered species in botanic
              gardens).



