Title       : Collaborative: Female Preference for Multiple Components of a Complex Secondary
               Sexual Trait in the Swordtails Xiphophorus Multilineatus and X. Cortezi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9816209

Award Number: 9816209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28007              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Nicoletto   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lamar University Beaumont
	      4400 Port Arthur Road
	      Beaumont, TX  777055748    713/838-7011

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nicoletto
9816209

This study examines how females use complex male traits to
              make mate choices. Female preference for both dynamic (changing during a
              lifetime) and static (do not changing over a lifetime) components of the
              vertical bars, a pigment pattern found on swordtail fishes, will be examined. A
              newly developed video technique will be used to determine how components of the
              bars (bar number, bar intensity) and their interactions influence mate choice.
              Videotapes of males courting females are manipulated frame by frame to vary
              different components of the bars while holding all other aspects of a male
              constant. The responses of females to the videos will be compared to variation
              in the male trait in nature and relationship between the trait and male
              condition to determine the following:
1 ) Does female preference responsible
              for variation in the bars? 2) Are females are more likely to prefer components
              of the bars that provide static over dynamic information about male
              condition?

Female choice is often influenced by complex male traits,
              composed of multiple components, and yet little is known about how females make
              mate choices in these situations. Dynamic components, which may reflect a
              male's health, physical condition, his recent feeding history, immediate social
              circumstances, and his sexual interest, have the potential of providing females
              with different kinds of information as compared to static components which are
              more likely to provide information about species identity and genetic quality.
              Identifying the relative roles of static and dynamic trait components in mate
              choice will allow for a clearer understanding of why females are choosey and
              how the male traits they prefer evolve

