Title       : Magnetic Position-Finding and Navigation in Sea Turtles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9816065

Award Number: 9816065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Lohmann KLohmann@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract


Proposal #:  9816065
PI: 
              Lohmann, Kenneth
Title:  MAGNETIC POSITION-FINDING AND NAVIGATION IN SEA
              TURTLES

     How sea turtles navigate across vast expanses of seemingly
              featureless ocean has remained a mystery for decades.  Recent experiments have
              revealed that hatchling loggerhead turtles can sense two different features of
              the earth's magnetic field that may provide information on global position. 
              These results suggest that the key to the sea turtle navigational system may be
              an ability to determine location using magnetic field features.  The proposed
              research has three major objectives.  The first is to investigate how hatchling
              loggerheads respond to magnetic features marking various locations throughout
              the North Atlantic.  A second is to examine whether turtles can distinguish
              between the magnetic features that mark different coastal regions that are
              contiguous and relatively close together, as adults would presumably need to do
              if they use magnetic features to navigate into the vicinity of their natal
              beaches.  A final set of experiments investigates what specific feature or
              features of the earth's field the turtles detect and respond to.

    
              Results of the research are likely to reveal previously undiscovered mechanisms
              of position-finding and navigation that are used not only by sea turtles, but
              by diverse animals such as migratory birds, commercially important fishes
              (e.g., salmon), and marine mammals.  In addition, understanding how sea turtles
              navigate, and how they find their natal regions as adults, may benefit
              conservation efforts to save these threatened and endangered species from
              extinction.  Results may also reveal new navigational methods relevant to human
              guidance systems.

