Title       : Hormonal Regulation During Growth and Limb Regeneration in Crustacea:
               Ecdysteroid and Retinoid Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9816709

Award Number: 9816709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311207             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Durica ddurica@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Penny M. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In animals, the steroid hormones have long been recognized as playing important
              roles in regulating many physiological processes, from calcium balance to
              growth and development.  Similarly, vitamin A and its hormone-like derivatives,
              the retinoids, are essential for normal development.  Dietary vitamin A
              deficiencies in humans can lead to sterility, loss of vision and skin
              pathologies.  Retinoid excess can be equally damaging, causing profound
              deformities in developing embryos.  It has recently become clear that both
              steroids and retinoids play a major role during invertebrate animal
              development, serving as signaling molecules which influence the processes that
              result in normal body shape and tissue differentiation.  The basic mechanisms
              through which steroids and retinoids exert their physiological effects remain
              unclear.  This research will examine the type and distribution of signaling
              molecules present during the growth cycle of the fiddler crab, and investigate
              how signaling molecules interact with specific cell receptor proteins to
              regulate gene expression in a special type of development-regenerating
              crustacean limbs; a system amenable to experimental manipulation. 

Retinoids
              and steroids are known to modulate gene expression through the use of specific
              cellular receptor.  The amount and type of receptor that may be present in a
              given cell is too small to measure directly.  Recombinant DNA techniques,
              however, can be used to develop molecular probes that can mark the presence of
              specific receptors at the subcellular level, and microbes can be engineered to
              produce large amounts of receptor protein.  These methodologies will be
              employed to detect which cells contain receptors, and by inference, identify
              particular cells that may be responding to steroid/retinoid signaling.  The
              recombinant proteins will also be used to examine the physical characteristics
              of the receptors, such as their ability to bind to specific signaling molecules
              and gene sequences.

The regeneration of limbs must occur in concert with the
              animal's growth and reproductive activities.  How a "common" signal might
              modulate these varied physiological events is unclear.  Knowledge of the type
              and amounts of signaling molecules present at specific stages of growth and
              regeneration, coupled with information on the physical properties and
              distribution of receptors, will elaborate the role of steroid/retinoid
              signaling and help us to better understand the evolution of basic developmental
              processes.

