Title       : The Creation of Networded Interactive Tools for Teachin Astronomy and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9816444

Award Number: 9816444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Impey cimpey@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project, operated as a collaborative grant between the University of Oregon
              and the University Arizona, is developing interactive experiments and
              delivering them over the Internet.  Most of these experiments are executed
              using the JAVA programming language extension to HTML document structure. 
              Others use the VRML extension to HTML, which allows 3D representations of
              complex spatial relationships.  These tools will be integrated into a
              fully-featured World Wide Web site which will act as a virtual classroom for
              about 5400 students per year at the University of Oregon and the University of
              Arizona.  The Web site will have an electronic textbook, research data bases,
              supercomputer simulations, and animations.  There is a critical need to engage
              introductory science students in an experimentation mode that will lead to
              student-driven inquiry.    This project aims (1) to allow students to use
              active experimentation to learn abstract topics, (2) to incorporate
              scientifically realistic modes of inquiry into instructional technology, (3) to
              build a library of experiments that is adaptable to any curriculum, and (4) to
              construct a Web site that can be customized for use by any instructor. 
              Instructional technology can be a very cost-effective means of achieving our
              main pedagogical goal:  teaching science as a discovery process that relies
              heavily on experimental results, not memorized facts and figures.  The project
              also has distance education dimensions, involves the cooperation of
              institutions for curriculum development, and uses emerging technologies to
              engage the students in this new learning mode.  The potential audience for
              these tolls extends to the 500,000 physics and astronomy students at two and
              four year colleges nationwide and more students at the high school level.  The
              work builds on an already highly successful implementation of hypertext based
              course material, in which professional data, scientific animation, and links to
              other resources are all organized into a network textbook tha t becomes the
              lecture and learning tool that students see in class and access out of class. 
              Building more interactivity into this curriculum is both the next logical and
              most critical step.
