Title       : Mapping of Nucleus Accumbens Afferents and Efferents Mediating Opioid-Induced
               Feeding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a9816699

Award Number: 9816699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Bodnar richard_bodnar@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Organisms engage in feeding behavior under different circumstances.  These
              include spontaneous intake regulating body weight and intake in reponse to such
              homeostatic challenges as food deprivation or the loss of glucose or fat energy
              sources.  Intake increases also occur in relation to palatable, hedonic or
              taste qualities of  the food.  Endogenous opioid peptides (enkephalins,
              endorphins) and their receptors (mu, delta and kappa) in the brain are
              intimately involved in stimulating these different types of feeding behavior. 
              Specific brain sites, including the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental
              area, are places where opioid agonists stimulate feeding behavior as well as
              mediate other reward and addictive behaviors.  Advanced neuroanatomical and
              neurochemical techniques have mapped the intrinsic neuronal circuitry
              interconnecting these brain areas as well as extrinsic connections with sensory
              and montor areas controlling feeding behavior.
The goals of this proposal are
              to systematically study these receptor substrates within and between the
              nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area by using selective mu and delta
              opioid agonists to stimulate feeding, and then determine whether
              pharmacological anatagonists of other specific neurochemical receptors (opioid,
              dopamine, GABA, excitatory amino acids) block these responses.
This approach
              identifies specific neuroanatomical and neurochemical circuits within the brain
              mediating feeding as an important hedonic and homeostatic response as well as
              having potential implications for the understanding of reward and addiction
  
                            
