Title       : Numerical and Observational Studies of Mountain Wave Breaking, PV Banners, and
               Momentum Transports in Support of the Mesoscale Alpine Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a9816160

Award Number: 9816160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209678             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Fritts dave@colorado-research.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Poulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NorthWest Res Assoc Inc
	      14508 NE, 20th Street
	      Bellevue, WA  980093027    425/644-9660

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP) is an international program that, inter
              alia, offers an unprecedented opportunity to quantify understanding of airflow
              dynamics in the vicinity of complex terrain.  The Principal Investigator will
              participate in the MAP and will focus on the following specific topics:
              mountain wave/boundary-layer interactions, instability dynamics and evolution,
              generation of potential vorticity (PV) banners, momentum transport and
              deposition aloft, and flow intermittency over three-dimensional terrain.

The
              Principal Investigator will address these topics through a coordinated program
              of numerical simulations and observational efforts performed as a component of
              the U. S. participation in MAP.  One class of numerical studies will examine
              the excitation and evolution of strong wave events in the presence of realistic
              boundary-layer flows and three-dimensional terrain.  Other simulations will
              address wave breaking over complex terrain, the origins and scales of PV
              banners arising from localized wave instability and dissipation, and the
              influences of these processes on momentum transports and flow intermittency. 
              Observational efforts will include participation in the MAP field program,
              inputs to aircraft flight planning and instrument measurement modes (dependent
              on model mountain wave forecasts, measurement objectives, and available
              instrumentation), and data analysis efforts aimed at quantifying the dynamics
              of mountain wave excitation, breaking, momentum transports, and
              intermittency.

Successful completion of this research will lead to a better
              understanding of airflow near complex terrain including a better understanding
              and potentially better forecasts of clear air turbulence.

