Title       : CONFERENCE: 1999 CSHL Meeting on Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Cell Signalling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9816995

Award Number: 9816995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas K. Tonks tonks@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Protein tyrosine kinases and their partner phosphatases are key regulatory
              elements of many cell signaling pathways that control such basic and essential
              functions as cell division, cell-cell communication, and cell differentiation. 
              Control within these pathways is also critical in such important processes as
              activation and inhibition of lymphocytes in immune responses, integration of
              developmental pathways involving interacting cell types, and prevention of
              neoplastic cell growth.  This conference is a continuation of an annual series
              of conferences on these topics which began in 1995.  The aims of this year's
              meeting are (1) to examine the structure, function and regulation of these
              kinases and phosphatases as related to their specific regulatory context, (2)
              to provide overviews of specific areas in which recent significant advances
              have been made, including studies on the cross-talk with phosholipid-dependent
              signaling and new genetic approaches, and (3) to encourage the development of
              young scientists, including women and minorities, by their inclusion in the
              program.  The organization of the meeting consists of two invited keynote
              addresses followed by topical sessions in which all presentations will be
              chosen from the abstracts of meeting participants.  There will be no
              predetermined list of speakers.  Session chairs will share the responsibility
              of choosing speakers with the meeting organizers and will give overviews of the
              current status of each field.  All participants will have an opportunity to
              present findings in poster sessions.  Meeting abstracts will be published by
              Cold Spring Harbor Press for the general scientific community.  The organizers
              encourage the participation of students, young investigators, women, and
              under-represented minorities.



