Title       : Exploration of Channel Specialization in Transport of Metabolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9816788

Award Number: 9816788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco Colombini mc34@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tatiana Rostovtseva  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Transmembrane channels are involved in many cellular processes, such as
              transport of metabolites, proteins and transcription factors through biological
              membranes.  It is evident that the ability of large channels to permeate small
              ions does not necessarily reflect their ability to allow larger ions or
              macromolecules to cross the membrane.  However, the same basic
              electrophysiological techniques, initially developed for studies of
              ion-selective channels, are routinely applied to all groups of channels.  A new
              approach was developed that opens the possibility to monitor channel
              permeability for virtually any molecule.  The method allows measurement, at the
              single channel level, of the transport of relatively high molecular weight
              molecules such as metabolites and macromolecules in the presence of small
              permeant ions.  This is potentially a very general method and should be
              applicable to measuring the permeation of a wide-range of physiologically
              important solutes through a variety of different channels.  By using the
              mitochondrial channel, called VDAC, it is intended to show that while the
              channels with large pores are poorly selective for small ions, they may show
              high selectivity for the larger molecules they evolved to transport.  The new
              approach will be used to measure the partitioning of metabolites into the
              channel and their mobility within the channel. This is achieved by analyzing
              the change in average current and current noise produced when these metabolites
              now through a single channel and thus obstruct the passage of the smaller ions.
              Preliminary evidence demonstrates that VDAC selects among metabolites based on
              their 3-dimensional structure, not merely size and charge.  ATP permeates the
              pore, but a glutamate tetrapeptide with similar size and charge does not.  The
              nature of this selectivity will be examined by using other molecules whose
              physical properties resemble those of ATP. In addition, the importance of
              charge distribution within the pore that favors ATP permeation over other
              molecules will be verified.  A panel of site-directed mutants will be used.  To
              explore the possibility that this selectivity is a conserved property, VDAC
              channels isolated from very different species will be analyzed.  Different VDAC
              isoforms within the same organism will be examined to determine whether they
              exhibit different selectivity patterns reflecting their specialized functions. 
              Furthermore, apocytochrome c permeation will be studied in order to determine
              whether small proteins might be able to go through VDAC.  If successful, this
              work will gain needed insight into the transport characteristics of large
              channels to develop ideas about their metabolite selectivity.

The ability of
              living organisms and individual cells to compartmentalize is critical to life. 
              This compartmentation allows each region to maintain an environment especially
              tuned to the function it serves.  Proteins called channels aid in this
              compartmentation by allowing selected molecules and ions to cross the barriers
              between the compartments, the membranes.  This project explores the hypothesis
              that channels that allow the passage of large molecules do so in a highly
              selective way.  This differs from the current presumption that these larger
              pathways are nonselective.  The research can be pursued thanks to the
              development of a new method to both detect and quantitate the passage of larger
              molecules through the pathways formed by channels.  The interference of the
              flow of small ions by the larger molecules is measured. If successful, this
              research will change the way we think about the role of large channels in the
              lives of cells.


