Title       : Collaborative Research: Using Demographic Techniques to Test for the Signatures
               of Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9816980

Award Number: 9816980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Doak doak@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Morris/Doak  9806818  A major difficulty in assessing the real environmental
              importance of ongoing or future climate change is the lack of adequate
              monitoring data from the past. In particular, most methods used to infer the
              consequences of climate change rely upon past data to determine normal or
              baseline conditions. In the work proposed here, a technique is developed that
              circumvents this problem, relying instead on a comparison between current
              population size or age structures and those predicted by current demography to
              test for evidence of the ecological effects of local or global environmental
              change, in the absence of past data.. In the proposed work, the demography and
              population structure of Silene acaulis, a circumboreal alpine cushion plant,
              will be quantified. The work will be conducted in southcentral Alaska,. an area
              that has undergone rapid increases in temperature over the last three decades. 
                 At the field sites in Alaska's Wrangell Mountains, two types of data will be
              collected: 1) demographic measures of the growth, reproduction, and survival of
              individual plants; and 2) the size frequencies of plants in several distinct
              populations. By comparing the observed size frequencies to those predicted by
              stochastic computer models using the data on current demographic rates,
              specific hypotheses about how Silene demography may have changed due to
              environmental alteration will be tested (for examples, has earlier snowmelt and
              higher summer temperatures led to decreased seedling recruitment but an
              increase in the growth rates of adults?). In order to corroborate the most
              likely population responses to past climate changes identified by our models,
              additional experiments will be also be conducted to modify season length and
              temperature in order to directly assess the effects of climatic changes on
              demographic performance. These experiments will conform to the standard
              protocols of the International Tundra Experiment (ITEX, an international
              consortium of arctic and alpine global change  researchers), thus allowing the
              results to be linked to a circumboreal assessment of climate change effects. By
              providing a method to look retrospectively at the population-level effects of
              environmental change, the work proposed will both expand the toolbox of
              methodologies available for detecting biotic effects of past changes and
              provide a baseline for determining whether effects of ongoing climate changes
              will accelerate in the future.
