Title       : Digital Library Research on CCD Funded Educational Repositories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a9816443

Award Number: 9816443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283160             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Scott Owen sowen@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajshekhar Sunderraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project performs digital library based research on educational repositories
              previously funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) CCD Program. 
              Because these repositories are oriented towards educational materials to be
              used by educators for education, they contain some special problems that can be
              addressed by this effort.    These NSF funded repositories have several unusual
              properties.  They are distributed across several different universities and
              each site has a specific orientation.  They contain material that will be used
              by a variety of educational disciplines such as computer science, natural and
              physical sciences, mathematicians, artists, and others.  They contain a variety
              of different media types including text, demonstration programs in several
              languages, Java applets and programs, images, live video, and computer
              animations.  another property is that different types of users will try to
              access these web sites.  Some of them will be K-12 educators and some will be
              college or university professors.    There are two primary thrusts to this
              proposal.  The fist is the general issue of helping educators to find the
              materials that are of most interest and most useful to them.  There are several
              strategies and thus several research issues that are commonly used including
              general navigation, e.g., browsing to determine what might be in the libraries,
              and more specific query-based searches.  There are efforts in this proposal
              that address both of these issues.  An issue that is more specific to
              educational libraries is the effectiveness of the materials after they have
              been found and used.  This question is also a focus of this project.
