Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course on Advanced Bacterial Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9816758

Award Number: 9816758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335741             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory is continuing its highly successful summer
              course in Advanced Bacterial Genetics.  This course has its roots in the
              original Bacteriophage Course, initiated by Dr. Max Delbruck in 1945.  This
              three week course prepares the participants to enter directly into research
              that requires advanced techniques and concepts in molecular genetics. 
              Experiments providing a solid grounding in classical genetic analysis support
              training in contemporary uses of transposon mutagenesis, gene fusion
              technology, molecular cloning, site-directed mutagenesis and polymerase chain
              reaction as applied to diverse problems in bacterial and bacteriophage
              genetics.  This course, which is unique in providing instruction in both
              genetics and molecular biology, gives participants the wherewithal required to
              perform analogous experiments in their home laboratories.  The course
              instructors are chosen on the basis of their contributions to and knowledge of
              the field of bacterial genetics.  Daily discussion periods cover the basis of
              the methodology used and fine points of experimental design and analysis.  The
              course instructors invite guest lecturers to give up-to-the-minute reports on
              current research. Because the laboratory is always open, and because of the
              informal atmosphere, spontaneous discussions between participants, instructors,
              lecturers and laboratory staff occur regularly and at all hours.  Course
              participants are chosen from a pool of highly qualified applicants ranging from
              graduate students to senior investigators.
