Title       : Molecular Basis for Voltage-Dependent Channel Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9816063

Award Number: 9816063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger, II, E. Koeppe rk2@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise V. Greathouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Koeppe
Greathouse
9816063


Technical:
Solid-state NMR experiments will be
              performed on oriented membranes containing modified, labeled voltage-dependent
              gramicidin channels at both zero and nonzero voltage. Systems for study will
              include channels in which an asymmetry is introduced near the channel center,
              by modifying only one of the subunits, and a newly discovered homodimeric
              voltage-dependent gramicidin channel. The modified channels show nonlinear
              behavior and voltage-dependent gating among two or more conducting states. The
              helical subunits are held together by hydrogen bonds that link amino acids 1-5
              of each subunit, and these regions of sequence are responsible for the gating.
              Specific backbone and side chain groups within the first five residues of each
              subunit will be selectively labeled with 2H or l5N by solid-phase chemical
              synthesis. Solid-state NMR spectroscopy will be used to characterize the
              average orientations and dynamics of specifically labeled sites that sense
              voltage changes in lipid bilayers. The homodimeric samples will be advantageous
              because all of their channels will have the same chemical composition. This
              feature will allow studies at nonzero potential to be feasible for the first
              time.

Lay:
This project seeks to define a molecular mechanism for the
              voltage-dependent gating of ion-selective membrane channels using the only
              known gated system for which the chemical architecture is understood at the
              molecular level. The model system for study consists of several recently
              discovered chemically modified derivatives of the antibiotic gramicidin A.
              These derivatives were designed to have voltage-dependent properties that would
              help further the basic understanding of channel gating. Solid-state magnetic
              resonance experiments will be performed on these designed gramicidin channels
              supported within oriented membranes at zero voltage, and in the presence of a
              pulsing electric field. The results will be important for understanding the
              chemical and molecular basis for channel gating in biological membranes.

