Title       : Dissertation Research: Child Illness in Rural Laos: CulturalPerceptions,
               Caregiver Response and Implications for Child Survival
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9816972

Award Number: 9816972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Nichter mnichter@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              the University of Arizona. The student will study infant and child illness in
              Laos, one of the least developed countries in the world.  The research will use
              ethnographic methods to document the socio-cultural and economic contexts in
              which caregivers in rural Laos distinguish, categorize, diagnose, and select
              treatments for childhood illnesses, paying careful attention to seasonal
              variation. In addition the student will study how informal and formal health
              providers, including vendors, pharmacists, lay healers and public health
              workers interpret the illness terms and categories presented by caregivers. 
              Methods include participant-observation in a Laotian rural village over 14
              months including a household survey, semi-structured as well as structured
              interviews with small samples of caregivers, additional interviews with a
              random sample of 50 caregivers, a formal study of drug stores and village
              market shops selling medicine and providing advice, and interviews with users
              of public and private clinics and hospitals.
At present there are almost no
              qualitative studies of Laotian health behavior.  This project will advance our
              understanding of how poor people in an underdeveloped society seek out and
              interpret the information available to them to treat illness in young children.
               This new knowledge will be valuable to health officials in similar
              less-developed societies in preparing programs to provide care. The project
              will also advance our understanding of this important region of the world.

