Title       : Ribonucleotide Reductase and DNA Precursor Pool Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a9816576

Award Number: 9816576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Mathews mathewsc@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ribonucleotide reductase reduces four ribonucleotide substrates to the
              corresponding 2'-deoxyribo-nucleotides in the first reaction committed to DNA
              synthesis. The enzyme is regulated by nucleoside triphosphate effectors that
              interact with two classes of allosteric sites to control the specificity of the
              enzyme, so that deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) are synthesized in
              proportion to the base composition of the genome. Using an assay procedure that
              monitors the four reactions in one mixture, at substrate and effector
              concentrations similar to those in vivo, the project will investigate several
              interrelated aspects of the control of dNTP pool sizes in mammalian cells.
              Because balanced dNTP pools are essential for accurate DNA replication, these
              studies should illuminate how cells determine the fidelity as well as the rate
              of DNA replication.

1. ADP has been found to specifically inhibit the
              reduction of GDP and of ADP itself. Using the four-substrate assay, competitive
              binding experiments, and photoaffinity labeling, this project will ask whether
              the effect involves ADP binding at the catalytic site, an allosteric site, or a
              previously undescribed site.

2. Hydroxyurea, a free radical scavenger,
              inhibits all four activities of rNDP reductase. However, treating cells with
              hydroxyurea causes preferential depletion of the dATP pool. This project will
              ask whether this effect results from accumulation of ADP, with consequent
              inhibition of ADP reduction in vivo. An alternative model relates to the
              selective depletion of dGTP, the prime allosteric activator of ADP
              reduction.

3. Culturing cells under hypoxic conditions has been found to
              selectively shrink the dCTP pool, while the other three dNTPs accumulate. Since
              oxygen is required for rNDP reductase activation, there may be a specific
              inhibition of the activation of CDP reduction at low pO2. This hypothesis will
              be tested by use of the four-substrate assay mentioned above.

4. dNTPs
              within mitochondria comprise pools distinct from the larger pools that serve
              the nuclear genome. Also, mitochondria contain a distinctive rNDP reductase.
              The mitochondrial enzyme will be purified and characterized with regard to
              regulation, genetic origin, and role in synthesizing mtDNA precursors.

This
              research is designed to help us understand how enzymes function in their
              natural environment, the living cell, using as the principal enzyme
              ribonucleotide reductase, which catalyzes the first reaction committed to DNA
              synthesis. Possibly, significant insights will be gained into relationships
              between energy metabolism and genome replication, into the control of DNA
              replication, into cellular responses to oxygen stress, and into mitochondrial
              DNA replication.

