Title       : The Evolutionary History of the Genus Pan: A Molecular Investigation Using Y
               Chromosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9816508

Award Number: 9816508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15242              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Stone acstone@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               	The primary aim of this pilot study is to search for variation on the Y
              chromosomes of chimpanzees. Efforts to find new markers will be concentrated in
              individuals of the western subspecies of chimpanzee Pan troglodytes verus
              although individuals belonging to the other two subspecies of P. troglodytes as
              well as Pan paniscus (the pygmy chimpanzee or bonobo) will also be included. To
              find new markers, non-coding single-copy sequences from different locations
              along the Y chromosome  will be investigated using rapid techniques to detect
              nucleotide polymorphisms. These data will provide a new perspective to test
              hypotheses about population history within P. t. verus and to examine the
              phylogeny of the genus Pan with particular attention to the question of whether
              the subspecies P. t. verus should be raised to full species rank. The genetic
              data will also allow the comparison of chimpanzee and human demographic
              histories which can shed light on our own evolutionary history. 
	A secondary
              aim of this project is to sequence the hypervariable region of the
              mitochondrial DNA for each chimpanzee sampled in order to identify the
              subspecies of each individual. The majority of the chimpanzees in captive
              populations are of unknown subspecies. These mitochondrial DNA sequence data
              will be compared with data from wild populations, and thus will help us
              determine the subspecies origin of the captive population. This information
              will be shared with the zoos, primate centers and species coordinators to aid
              in the management of the captive population.
	The majority of the Y
              chromosome, like mitochondrial DNA, does not recombine. While mitochondrial DNA
              is passed from mother to child, the Y chromosome is passed from father to son.
              As a result, polymorphisms at these loci provide complementary pictures of
              maternal and paternal lineage histories and can contribute a wealth of
              information about population structure and gene flow within a species. To date,
              population genetic investigations in chimpanzees have been limited, and they
              have focused primarily on mitochondrial DNA. This pilot study will begin to
              address this deficiency by providing data from the Y chromosome. 

