Title       : Learning That Works: A School-to-Career Video Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9816634

Award Number: 9816634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $902565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Korf michele_korf@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise Blumenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9816634
Korf

Learning That Works is a series of videos and associated print
              materials that model effective, contextualized, rigorous learning in science in
              both classroom and workplace settings.  The two-one hour tapes and an overview
              tape are produced by WGBH TV in partnership with Jobs for the Future (JFF) to
              be a professional development tool for preservice and inservice teachers.  Each
              tape is divided into three segments focusing on particular science content
              drawn from the science standards for grades 9-12.  Vignettes early and late in
              the year and at two different sites are shown to demonstrate growth and address
              the nature and extent of students' learning, future plans and attitude.  A
              thirty-minute documentary-style video, targeted to parents, policy-makers and
              the general public, presents an overview of school-to-career issues and
              promotes the concept as a way to generate scientific literacy.  Guided by the
              national science standards, appropriate skill standards and JFF's criteria for
              high quality work-based learning, the videos demonstrate that learning to know
              should not be separated from learning to do.  The tapes help schools visualize
              effective practice and employers visualize opportunities to provide work-based
              learning sites.  The project builds upon WGBH's experience in producing video
              libraries focused on standards-based teaching practices in mathematics and
              science.  The materials are field tested widely and distributed through
              multiple channels.  An advisory board guides the project and review the
              materials.


