Title       : Combinatorial Interactions Among Eukaryotic Transcriptional Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  2000  
File        : a9816990

Award Number: 9816990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry V. Baker hvbaker@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Baker
Combinatorial interactions between transcription factors are a common
              theme, yet in most cases the mechanisms governing these interactions are not
              known. At glycolytic enzyme gene upstream activating sequence (UAS) elements of
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae, repressor activator protein 1 (Rap1p) and glycolysis
              regulatory protein 1 (Gcr1p) come together to form some of the strongest
              promoter-binding complexes known. The properties and mechanisms responsible for
              combinatorial interactions between Rap1p and Gcr1p will be elucidated. Rap1p
              serves as a model for multi-functional transcriptional factors that are capable
              of carrying out seemingly opposite roles in transcription, functioning as both
              an activator or repressor depending on the sequence context of their binding
              sites. Gcr1p serves as a model for a class of sequence-specific transcription
              factors that display high affinity but low specificity for their binding sites
              in vitro. With regard to Rap1p and Gcr1p, there are indications that they both
              may participate in combinatorial interactions with other binding partners as
              well. At glycolytic enzyme gene UAS elements, Rap1p facilitates the binding of
              Gcr1p. To determine the mechanism by which Rap1p facilitates Gcr1p's binding,
              alternate models for binding cooperativity will be tested. A protein-protein
              interaction model and a DNA-bending model will be investigated. A genomic
              approach will be used to identify other proteins that participate in
              combinatorial interactions with Gcr1p. Yeast genomic arrays will be used to
              identify every gene within the cell that is dependent on Gcr1p for full
              expression. The regulatory regions of Gcr1p-dependent genes will be searched
              for common sequence motifs. Common sequence motifs adjacent to Gcr1p-binding
              sites will be investigated to test the hypothesis that they are the binding
              sites for binding partners of Gcr1p. Both in vivo footprinting and
              site-directed mutagensis will be undertaken to confirm the importance of the
              putative binding sites. Once the sequence motifs are established as binding
              sites, they will be used to identify clones from a phage lambda-gt11 yeast
              expression library expressing proteins that bind to the sequence motif.
              Identification of the phage clones encoding the DNA-binding activity will lead
              directly to the identification of yeast genes encoding other binding partners
              of Gcr1p. These experiments will define the precise nature of the DNA binding
              interactions that occur between Rap1p and Gcr1p and will lay the ground work
              for structural studies on the DNA-binding domain of Gcr1p. This work will also
              lay a foundation for elucidating the network of combinatorial interactions
              within cells.

A major control point of gene expression is the regulation of
              transcription, the process by which the information in DNA is copied into mRNA.
              The goal of this project is to define the interactions between two proteins
              that regulate the transcription of yeast genes that encode proteins that break
              down glucose. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has proved indispensable as a
              model system for studies of gene expression. The experiments will determine the
              molecular mechanisms by which these two proteins interact with each other and
              with DNA to regulate gene expression. Furthermore, additional genes that may be
              regulated by similar mechanisms will be identified. This work will lay a
              foundation for elucidating the network of interactions between transcriptional
              regulatory proteins that occur within cells.

