Title       : Collaborative Research: Sources and Fates of Ecosystem 
Nutrients Across the
               Hawaiian Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9816637

Award Number: 9816637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179139             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry J. Huebert huebert@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1309,1584,4444,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is a collaboration between the University of California, Santa
              Barbara, the University of Hawaii, and Cornell University. It was submitted to
              the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program (EGB) and supported
              by the Atmospheric Chemistry, Petrology and Geochemistry, and Hydrologic
              Sciences Programs. The interdisciplinary team includes an ecosystem ecologist,
              a pedologist, an atmospheric chemist, and an isotope geochemist. 
The
              objective is to evaluate the sources and fates of elements deposited to
              Hawaiian ecosystems. Well characterized gradients in substrate age and
              precipitation will be utilized. Preliminary analyses of certain of these
              gradients suggest that atmospherically derived elements are crucial to the
              functioning of both older and wetter systems. This project will: (1) determine
              rates of atmospheric deposition of elements by wet, dry, and cloudwater
              deposition; (2) use elements in the lanthanide series, particularly the
              europium anomaly and neodymium isotopes, to trace the integrated contribution
              of continental dust to pools of more immobile elements; (3) determine the
              mineralogy, element pools, and weathering status of soils in all sites, and
              measure mineralogic indicators of dust inputs from continental sources; (4)
              analyze directly the cumulative contribution of atmospheric versus weathering
              sources to plant and soil strontium pools in all sites, and evaluate the
              sources of that strontium; and (5) integrate these measurements to estimate the
              contribution of atmospheric inputs to the pools and availability of all major
              elements, as these vary with substrate age and climate.
	Atmospheric wet, dry,
              and cloud deposition will be directly monitored at two sites representing the
              end members of the Hawaiian physical climate system. Deposition of mineral
              aerosols derived from Asia will be inferred by measuring the concentration of
              unique materials such as quartz in soils and the concentration of continentally
              derived trace element patterns (rare earth elements and Th, Hf) and neodymium
              isotopes. Further, the relationship between Nd and P will be explored to
              determine whether it is possible to use Nd isotopes as an indicator of mineral
              aerosol contributions of P to Hawaiian ecosystems. Measurements of soils will
              be used to determine patterns of mineralogy and element pools in space and
              time; because the sites are arrayed on well defined gradients, these can be
              used to calculate weathering inputs. Strontium isotope measurements will make
              use of the difference in isotopic ratio between the marine source of most
              atmospheric deposition and the rock source of weathering; both of these are
              well defined and consistent in the Hawaiian system. Measurements of quartz and
              trace elements will allow an estimate of Sr input from highly radiogenic
              continental sources.  

