Title       : Metabolic Interactions of Malate Dehydrogenases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9816774

Award Number: 9816774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee McAlister-Henn henn@uthscsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              McAlister-Henn
The overall goal of this research is to examine the importance
              of compartmentation in control of metabolism in eucaryotic cells. A basic
              hypothesis to be tested is that features other than catalytic activity may be
              essential for optimal function of an enzyme in vivo. The focus of this work is
              the family of three differentially compartmentalized isozymes of malate
              dehydrogenases (MDH's) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. These enzymes catalyze a
              reaction with a very unfavorable equilibrium for production of oxaloacetate and
              it has been proposed that direct interaction with other enzymes in specific
              pathways would facilitate correct delivery of this limiting metabolite. Three
              specific aims of this proposal are designed to define structural features of
              the mitochondrial MDH1 enzyme and of the cytosolic MDH2 enzyme that contribute
              to respective functions in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and in gluconeogenesis:
              (1) A physical association between two yeast cytosolic gluconeogenic enzymes,
              MDH2 and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, has been observed using the yeast
              two-hybrid system as an assay. The specificity, structural basis, and metabolic
              significance of this interaction will be examined using molecular genetic
              techniques and appropriate yeast mutants. (2) The two-hybrid system and other
              techniques will be used to test interactions between the yeast tricarboxylic
              acid cycle enzymes, MDH1 and citrate synthase. (3) To determine if MDH1 has
              structural attributes other than catalytic activity that impact function in the
              tricarboxylic acid cycle, a mitochondrial form of cytosolic MDH2 will be
              engineered and expressed in a yeast mutant lacking mitochondrial MDH1. The
              final specific aim (4) is designed to determine the requirements for each of
              the central metabolic pathways involving malate dehydrogenases in the normal
              developmental processes of mating and sporulation in yeast. This is technically
              a simple aim but it has broad implications; it will be used as a teaching tool
              for students desiring experience in a research laboratory.
SIGNIFICANCE:
              Results of this research will contribute to the depth of our understanding of
              the mechanisms for regulation of central metabolic pathways in vivo and,
              consequently, to an appreciation of the molecular basis for dysfunctions at a
              new level of regulation. For this project, a model organism that is uniquely
              amenable to molecular genetic manipulation will be used.  Nevertheless, the
              results are expected to be broadly applicable and could have a significant
              impact on current views about metabolic regulation as well as about the
              selective pressures that drive the evolution of enzyme structure and function. 
              In addition, this research will promote the education and training of student
              personnel directly involved in the project.

