Title       : Ninth Copper Mountain Conference On Multigrid Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1998 
File        : a9816592

Award Number: 9816592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen F. McCormick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Manteuffel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Front Range Sci Computatio
	      1390 Claremont Drive
	      Boulder, CO  80305    303/554-1232

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              McCormick
9816592

The investigator and his colleagues organize a series of
              annual Copper Mountain Conferences.  The subject of these meetings alternates
              between multigrid methods in odd-numbered years and iterative methods in
              even-numbered years.  The Copper Mountain Conferences provide a forum for the
              exchange of ideas in these two closely related fields.  The program for a
              conference in this series consists of tutorials, invited lectures, and
              contributed papers, as well as time for scientific interaction among the
              participants.  Topics of emphasis for the conferences include advanced
              architectures, algebraic-type methods, and nonsymmetric linear systems.  This
              grant provides support for students to participate in the conferences.

The
              mathematical description of real-world problems leads inevitably to equations
              to solve.  Many times the equations are nonlinear ones, arising because the
              underlying problem is nonlinear.  Often, however, the original problem is
              linear and the mathematical equations are too.  Such problems arise in all
              areas of science and technology, and are of special interest in biology,
              materials, environmental studies, and manufacturing.  Progress in these areas
              requires solution of more comprehensive modeling equations --- such models are
              usually more nonlinear than simpler models ---, or more accurate solution of
              existing models --- increasing the size of the numerical problem to be solved. 
              Many problems lead to equations that are not symmetric; computational methods
              for such problems offer special difficulties.  Numerical methods for solving a
              differential equation usually begin by imposing a grid on the region where the
              equation holds.  From the differential equation, algebraic equations are then
              developed; their solution represents the solution of the differential equation.
               The accuracy of the approximate solution commonly is measured by the fineness
              of the grid.  Multigrid methods are numerical methods for solving partial
              differential equations that systematically exploit the relationship between
              approximate solutions on different grids to arrive at a solution whose accuracy
              is consistent with the finest grid but for considerably less work.  The methods
              are often dramatically more efficient than others.  The conferences address
              advances in iterative methods and in multigrid methods to deal with larger
              numerical systems, nonsymmetric and nonlinear systems, and the use of
              multiprocessor computers.  The methods are of great practical import in
              engineering, manufacturing, materials, physics, and fluid dynamics.  This
              project supports student participants at the Copper Mountain conferences on
              multigrid methods and on iterative methods.  The students present a talk on
              their research in the regular sessions of the conference.  The primary
              objective here is to encourage student participation in these rapidly evolving
              areas, and to provide an excellent opportunity for these students to
              demonstrate their new results, to learn more about the field from its experts,
              and to become a more integral part of the discipline.  Supporting student
              participation is critical for developing the next generation of scientists and
              engineers.


