Title       : Functional Analysis of WNT-Signaling in Embryonic Stem Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a9816916

Award Number: 9816916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Q. Martindale mqmartin@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nearly one third of all extant animal phyla including the annelids produce their
              embryonic cell lineages via a stereotypic program, called spiral cleavage. 
              This developmental program generates a number of distinct embryonic stem cells.
               The size and location of those cells allows the unequivocal identification of
              homologous embryonic stem cells across phyla.  Despite the fact that this
              widely used mode of cell fate specification has many ancestral features, the
              underlying molecular mechanisms have not been elucidated.

The purpose of
              this project is to understand the role of wnt-signaling in early cell fate
              specification and segmentation of the annelid Helobdella triseralis whose
              embryos are suitable for the proposed experiments.  The wnt-pathway has been
              shown to control early cell fate decisions in vertebrates, insects, nematodes
              and echinoderms which suggests that it is an ancient patterning mechanisms.  In
              order to investigate the role of wnt-signaling in a spiral cleaving embryo, the
              sites and function of wnt-signaling will be analyzed.  Two downstream
              components and key mediators of the pathway, a beta-catenin and a LEF-1
              ortholog, have been already recovered from Helobdella.  Specific antisera
              against both will be used to localize wnt-responsive cells in early embryos. 
              The function of the wnt-pathway will be determined by the overexpression of
              dominant negative and dominant active forms of both molecules in distinct
              embryonic stem cells to inhibit or elicit wnt-responses in a targeted cell
              lineage.  The proposed research will provide information to determine the role
              of wnt-signaling in an ancestral type of embryogenesis and thereby will give
              insights into the evolutionary history of a fundamental developmental program
              that operates during axis formation and segmentation in extant embryos of
              bilaterian animals.

