Title       : Biochemistry of FAtty Acid Transport In Escherichia Coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9816414

Award Number: 9816414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul N. Black blackp@mail.amc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany Medical College
	      47 New Scotland Avenue
	      Albany, NY  122083412    518/262-5181

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Transport in Escherichia coli	BLACK, Paul
              N.

ABSTRACT

BLACK

Long-chain fatty acids (C x4 - Cls) are important
              substrams for energy production and macromolecular biosynthesis and are
              important regulatory molecules. The gram negative bacterium Escherichia coli
              can utilize these compounds as a sole carbon and energy source to support
              growth and thus has evolved a highly specific system for their transport across
              the cell envelope. Exogenous long-chain fatty acids are taken up by a
              concentrative process that is tigh~y coupled to utilization and reclulres at
              least the outer membrane protein FadL (product of the fadL gene) and the inner
              membrane associated fatty acyl CoA synthetase (FACS; product of the fadD gene).
              FadL binds exogenous long-chain fatty acids with high affinity and facilitates
              their transport across the outer membrane. FACS activates long-chain fatty
              acids concomitant with transport across the inner membrane by a process that
              proceeds through the hydrolysis of ATP demonstrating that process of long-chain
              fatty acid transport is responsive to the energized state of the cell. The
              research analyzing the functional properties of the long-chain fatty acid
              transport system in E. coli will define domains within the long-chain fatty
              acid transport protein FadL required for fatty acid binding and transport and
              bacteriophage T2 binding, define the substrate binding regions of fatty acyl
              CoA synthetase and define the role of fatty acyl CoA synthetase as a component
              of the long-chain fatty acid transport apparatus. The amino-terminal proximal
              domain of FadL is hypothesized to be involved in fatty acid binding and that
              the membrane-bound domain forms a long-chain fatty acid specific channel.
              Furthermore, it is suggested that the region of FadL responsible for binding
              bacteriophage T2 is amino-terminal proximal and overlaps the long-chain fatty
              acid binding domain. This research employs a combination of protein analyses
              (ligand binding and affinity labeling) and directed mutagenesis of the fadL
              gene coupled with phenotypic analyses to test these hypotheses. On the basis of
              predicted tertiary structure, fatty acyl CoA synthetase is proposed to contain
              two overlapping domains which are involved in the binding of ATP and long-chain
              fatty acid respectively. This hypothesis will be tested using a combination of
              fatty acid and ATP affinity labeling of the purified enzyme; ligand binding
              studies (fatty acid and ATP) using fluorescence spectroscopy; and directed
              mutagenesis of the fadD gene coupled with phenotypic and physiological
              characterization. Fatty acyl CoA synthetase is thought to partition into the
              inner bacterial membrane and function to facilitate the unidirectional
              transport by thioesterification of exogenous long-chain fatty acids. This will
              be tested using purified fatty acyl CoA synthetase, inner membrane vesicles
              prepared from a AfadD strain, and enzyme substrates (fatty acid, ATP, and
              coenzymeA). The bacterial molecular-genetic system is ideally poised to
              investigate the general and specific mechanisms that govern the process of
              long-chain fatty acid transport and define and characterize the functional
              domains of the protein components in this system. This work specifically
              addresses the molecular mechanisms of protein-fatty acid interaction during the
              process of transport and thus will serve as a paradigm for understanding this
              process.
 

