Title       : Spectroscopic Definition of Electronic Structure and Contributions to Reactivity
               in Binuclear Non-Heme Iron and Manganese Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9816051

Award Number: 9816051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $710000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. Solomon Edward.Solomon@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Solomon
MCB 9816051

1. Technical

Binuclear non-heme iron active sites
              are present in a wide variety of proteins and enzymes, which perform different
              biological functions.
These include oxygen binding, activation for
              hydroxylation, oxidation, desaturation and phosphate ester hydrolysis. All
              react with dioxygen from the binuclear ferrous state except the purple acid
              phosphatases, which are active at the mixed valent level. Crystal structures
              are now available for at least one oxidation state of each enzyme and define
              structural differences, which could relate to differences in reactivity. Peroxo
              and high valent oxo intermediates have been trapped for several of these
              enzymes and a number of relevant model systems are now available. Binuclear
              manganese sites are present in manganese catalase and manganese ribonucleotide
              reductase which are thought to have similar m-oxo, m-carboxylato bridged
              structures to the binuclear non-heme iron enzymes, and a Mn202 unit appears to
              be present in the tetra manganese cluster of the OEC. An excited state
              spectroscopic approach employing absorption, circular dichroism, magnetic
              circular dichroism and resonance Raman spectroscopies to define the excited
              states, variable temperature variable field magnetic circular dichroism
              analyzed using an exchange plus zero field splitting Hamiltonian to probe the
              ground state and electronic structure calculations is being utilized to study
              these proteins and relevant model complexes. These studies are directed toward
              obtaining detailed insight into: electronic and geometric structural
              contributions to the reactivity of these sites, geometric and electronic
              structural differences which relate to differences in function, the electronic
              structure of oxygen intermediates which promote the formation of high valent
              bridging oxo intermediates and the properties of these intermediates which
              contribute to reactivity, the relation of the binuclear manganese enzymes to
              the binuclear non-heme iron enzymes, and the properties of the Mn202 unit and
              interactions between these units which promote 0-0 bond formation.

2
              Non-Technical

Binuclear non-heme iron active sites are present in a wide
              variety of proteins and enzymes, which perform different biological functions. 
              These include oxygen binding, activation for hydroxylation, oxidation,
              desaturation and phosphate ester hydrolysis. Binuclear mangnese sites are
              present in enzymes which are involved in peroxide disproportionation and
              ribonucleotide reduction, and are thought to have similar structures to the
              binuclear non-heme iron enzymes. A related tetranuclear mangnese cluster is
              present in the oxygen-evolving center in photosynthesis. Detailed chemical and
              spectroscopic studies of these protein active sites, intermediates in their
              reactions with dioxygen and related small molecule inorganic complexes which
              model these binuclear sites are presented. These studies should contribute
              significantly toward defining general structure/function correlations for
              dioxygen binding and activation by binuclear non-heme iron enzymes, their
              relation to binuclear manganese enzymes and factors which contribute to
              dioxygen activation versus 0-O bond formation. The enzymes studied are
              important in catalytic processes (alkane oxidation technology, etc.),
              biotechnology (oxidoreductases, etc.), environmental regulation (CH4, etc.),
              oxygen evolution, detoxification, and DNA and fatty acid biosynthesis. Further,
              the spectroscopic methodology developed as part of this study has applications
              in understanding the structures and reactivities of a variety of important
              classes of metal sites in biology and catalysis.
 

