Title       : The Mechanism of the Bovine Liver Glutamate Dehydrogenase Catalayzed Reaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9816697

Award Number: 9816697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey F. Fisher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Med Center
	      3901 Rainbow Boulevard
	      Kansas City, KS  66160    913/588-5238

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9816697
The long-range goal of this laboratory is to learn the detailed
              chemical, thermodynamic and structural basis of enzymatic catalysis in
              particular and to understand how protein molecules function as biological
              machines in general. The work proposed here is focused on a detailed
              examination of the chemical events and changes in protein conformation that
              occur in the reaction catalyzed by beef liver glutamate dehydrogenase (blGDH).
              These studies involve the application of transient-state (real-time) kinetic
              approaches to two specific aims:

1. To complete the kinetic resolution of
              the reaction time course of the blGDH reaction. While the work of the
              investigator in the previous grant period was directed at the characterization
              and proof of kinetic competence of a sequence of four complexes in the central
              portion of the reaction, he will now turn his attention to the less understood
              earlier steps.

2. To resolve the time course of the blGDH reaction into a
              series of precisely defined "open" and "closed" phases. Crystal structure
              studies of the bacterial form of the enzyme (csGDH) have demonstrated the
              existence of both an open and at least two different closed forms of the
              enzyme. The investigator has obtained both physical and kinetic evidence of the
              occurrence of several such active-site cleft opening and closing steps during
              the enzyme-catalyzed reaction. He will continue his ongoing efforts to identify
              the points of occurrence, duration, and succession of these phases over the
              usable pH range in both the forward and the reverse reactions.

Molecular
              engineering, the ability to alter proteins to meet humanitys needs, is an
              important goal. The information required to fulfill this need is in the form of
              understanding a series of structure-function relationships at a detailed level.
              The current approach in the field is the combination of protein crystal
              structure information and site directed mutagenesis of those structures.
              However, without a more detailed knowledge of the mechanisms of action of these
              biological machines, we cannot formulate the proper strategy for such an
              approach. This research will provide just such knowledge.


