Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Storage Economy and Lithic Technology in the Upper
               Paleolithic of Eastern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9816407

Award Number: 9816407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9355               (Estimated)
Investigator: Olga Soffer o-soffer@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Olga Soffer, Mr. Valeriy Suntsov will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze lithic materials from eight
              archaeological sites located on the East European Plain in the Ukraine and
              Russia. All relate to the Epigravettian culture and are dated between 20,000
              and 12,000 years ago. These sites are best known because of their impressive
              hut structures, the frames and bases of which were constructed from mammoth
              tusks and bones. Large storage pits associated with these dwellings likely
              served to store meat which, because of cold winter conditions, could be
              preserved for months. The abundance of worked shell and bone artifacts,
              together with the storage pits and carefully constructed dwellings suggests
              that the inhabitants were sedentary for major portions of the year and not
              highly nomadic.  The sites are unusual not only for the degree of sedentization
              they reveal but also for the richness of their material remains which allow a
              significant degree of behavioral reconstruction. Within this controlled context
              Mr. Suntsov will examine the systems for lithic procurement, manufacture,
              utilization and discard. In this pre metal period, humans produced knives,
              scrapers, awls and other tools from stone and both the tools themselves and the
              byproducts of their manufacture have been recovered by the thousands from each
              site. The sources of the raw material are also well known.

Because lithics
              are well represented in most Paleolithic sites and often constitute the only
              class of material remain, archaeologists devote considerable time to their
              study. They have developed analytic systems which make many reasonable, but
              usually proven, assumptions. For example it is believed that when people live
              near abundant sources of high quality flint they will make a wide range of
              tools designed for specific purposes. When flint sources are more distant and
              of poorer quality, fewer all-purpose tools will be produced. Likewise
              assumptions have been made about the degree of settlement mobility and the
              nature of stone tool kits. At the Epigravettian sites under consideration,
              where both raw material sources and degree of mobility are known, it is
              possible to test these assumptions and approaches through the analysis of the
              lithics recovered. Because the sites are located at varying distances from raw
              material sources and because the flint varies in quality, one can use extant
              models to predict the nature of variation between sites. Mr. Suntsov has made
              an explicit set of predictions and through analysis of the lithics determine
              whether they are correct.

This research is important for several reasons. It
              will help to test and refine a series of analytic techniques which are
              potentially applicable in a wide variety of archaeological situations. It will
              also assist in training a promising young scientist.

