Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Context-Dependence in Hippocampal Place Fields:
               Experimental Investigation of the Dentate Gyrus-Hilus System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9816612

Award Number: 9816612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip J. Best   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali A. Minai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-16612  BEST (COLLABORATIVE with MINAI)      The hippocampus is known to
              be involved in the performance of  crucial cognitive tasks such as memory and
              spatial representation.  A very large body of experimental data is now
              available for the  hippocampus, but the interpretation of these data requires
              the  formulation of theoretical models for hippocampal function.  This  project
              applies a computational modeling approach to a very  important but poorly
              understood aspect of hippocampal function.  Experimental data suggest that
              representations of place (where an  animal is located with respect to its
              surroundings) in the  hippocampus are not based solely on sensory features
              (e.g., visual  cues), but also reflect a cognitive assessment of location.
              Thus,  two visually identical environments can be identified as different 
              locations based on contextual information. The computational  mechanism by
              which this context-dependence arises is not clear.  The present project
              addresses this issue by building on the  hypothesis that two sub-regions of the
              hippocampus --- the dentate  gyrus and the hilus --- are crucial to the
              emergence of context-  dependent representations in the hippocampus.  Over its
              duration,  the project will comprise four tasks:  (1) Implementation, 
              simulation, and analysis of an abstract computational model for  context
              processing in a network based on the gross architecture of  the dentate gyrus
              and hilus; (2) Implementation and simulation of  physiologically and
              anatomically more detailed models within a  phenomenological model of the
              hippocampal system; (3) Experimental  verification of the assumptions
              underlying the models, and the  predictions derived from them; and (4)
              Modification of the models  in light of the new experimental data. The aim is
              to set up a  continuous interaction between theory and experiment that leads to
               a better understanding of the hippocampal system.    This project continues a
              collaboration that Dr. Minai and Dr. Best  have developed over the last two 
              years under NSF's Collaborative  Research Initiation Program and represents a
              strong long-term  commitment to theoretical, experimental, and computational 
              research on the hippocampal system. It is expected that this  collaboration
              will elucidate critical information-processing  principles in the brain, and
              also lead to a fruitful application  of these principles in areas such as
              robotics and intelligent  systems.
