Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Micropatterned Neural Networks and
               Microelectrode Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a9816376

Award Number: 9816376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16504              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Wheeler bwheeler@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5942,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9816376
Wheeler

This award provides funds to permit Dr. Bruce C. Wheeler,
              Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Chamoaign, to pursue with Dr. Sung June Kim, School of Electrical
              Engineering, Seoul National University, for 24 months, a program of cooperative
              research on micropatterned neural networks and microelectrode arrays.  In this
              project, the neuronal cell patterning expertise at the University of Illinois
              is coupled with the microelectronics fabrication expertise at Seoul National
              University.  The research team at the University of Illinois has shown that
              novel surface treatment can be used to grow micropatterned neural networks in
              culture.  Essential elements of the technology are the ability to retard cell
              attachment and growth from background areas, to confine somata to desired
              positions, and to control axonal extension so as to create an oriented network.
               Microlithographic techniques, primarily microcontact printing, will be used to
              create patterns of biomolecules on planar culture surfaces in order to effect
              control of position of attachment and extension of neurons and glia.  The
              Korean team will greatly enhance the Illinois efforts by making passive
              electrode arrays available on a routine basis and pursuing novel fabrication
              technologies for electrode design.  In addition the Korean team will design and
              fabricate arrays incorporating active electronics for stimulation,
              amplification, and multiplexing.  Their instrumentation goal is to obtain
              better signal to noise ratio by placing first stage amplifiers nearly in
              contact with the low level signal source.  The Korean team has substantial
              capabilities for microelectronic fabrication and already has made devices for
              neural signal amplification.  Collaboration on this project will provide a
              biological context in which to improve their designs, for the benefit of both
              teams.

The complementary expertise of the two research teams will be
              mutually beneficial and will advance knowledge in this important field of
              research.  The collaborators are highly regarded scientists in their respective
              fields of research.  Korean and American graduate students will be included in
              the teams of collaborators.  This project is relevant to the objectives of the
              U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean participation is supported
              by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
***

