Title       : Evolution and Function of Primate Cytochrome c oxidase Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9816923

Award Number: 9816923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence I. Grossman l.grossman@wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose A. Rafols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Morris Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) comprises 13 subunits in mammals; three encoded in
              mitocondrial (mt) DNA and ten in nuclear DNA. Analysis of the evolution pattern
              of individual subunits can suggest tests of function and can serve as a model
              for the evolution of a multisubunit complex.  In humans, the COX complex is
              unique among mammals in lacking the heart isoform of subunit VIII, which was
              apparently silenced sometime in primate evolution. The lineage in which it was
              lost will be identified, the promoter regions of COX8 heart and liver isoforms
              from closely related lineages will be isolated and characterized, and reporter
              constructs will be used to evaluate their tissue-specificity and activity in
              differentiated and undifferentiated myoblasts. COX7A isoform genes have
              mitochondrial targeting presequences which previous results suggest are
              involved in tissue-specific isoform function. This was unexpected because the
              presequences are removed during mitochondrial import and are thought not to 
              participate in COX function. To investigate the potential for differential
              presequence function, the intracellular location of each of the two isoform
              proteins will be examined in cells that express both. Finally, the nucleotide
              substitution rates of three selected nuclear subunits will be
              determined.

COX provides a model system to test whether evolution of nuclear
              genes is parallel to that of mitochondrial genes with which they come in
              structural contact or functionally interact.

