Title       : Ensuring the Long-term Viability of the Teotihuacan Mapping Project Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9816263

Award Number: 9816263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99508              (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Cowgill Cowgill@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Redman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. McCartney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The site of Teotihuacan, located in the Valley of Mexico, represents one of the
              pinnacles of prehistoric Mesoamerican development and this great prehistoric
              city covered approximately 20 square kilometers. The impressive stone temple
              pyramids mark the center of an empire which extended over much of central
              Mexico and which has been a focus of archaeological investigation for decades.
              Beginning in the 1960s the Teotihuacan Mapping Project, headed by Renee Millon
              divided the ancient city into 550 tracts and described each in terms of more
              than 400 items of significant information, including observations made during
              the survey and results of ongoing studies of collections of approximately a
              million distinctive sherds and other artifacts. Such information permits one to
              trace site development and use over time. It allows reconstruction of both
              social and political organization. Electronic versions of these data have long
              since been created and are being used for research by project members. There
              remains however a great untapped potential in these files and it is important
              to update and preserve them in the most appropriate systems and ensure their
              long term integrity and accessibility. It is also necessary to create software
              so that remote users can query them through the internet. These enhancements
              will facilitate use of the data by project members and make them available for
              the first time to others. This award will provide funds for such work. The
              team, headed by George Cowgill will also produce a book illustrating salient
              patterns in the data. The Archaeological Research Institute of Arizona State
              University will curate these materials to assure their long-term integrity and
              accessibility. Versions of the files will be tested for quality and
              accessiblity through the internet by users with currently standard software.
              

This project is important for several reasons. It will not only make a body
              of valuable archaeological data readily available to a wide range of users but
              also provide a prototype system for many archaeological projects.

