Title       : The Structure and Entropy of Alloys Studied by Mossbauer Diffractometry and
               Nuclear Resonant Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9816617

Award Number: 9816617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent T. Fultz btf@hyperfine.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9816617
Fultz

For 35 years, almost all applications of the Mossbauer effect
              in materials science have utilized its capabilities as a spectroscopy.  Many
              investigators have identified and quantified spectral components from different
              crystallographic phases or chemical environments of the Mossbauer atom. 
              Mossbauer scattering can also be coherent, however, enabling its use for a
              fourth type of diffraction experiment on materials (the other three being
              X-ray, electron, and neutron diffraction).  The unique feature of Mossbauer
              diffraction is its spectroscopic selectivity.  This program studies disorder in
              metallic alloys by the chemical environment selectivity of Mossbauer
              diffraction.  The chemical sensitivity of Mossbauer spectrometry is used to
              select an atom in a particular chemical environment, and a diffraction pattern
              is then measured from atoms having that particular environment.  An area
              detector based on a CCD camera is now available, and funds are requested for a
              new type of gas-filled area detector developed by a group in Frankfurt. 
              Studies are on alloys of 57Fe3Al and 57FeRh having imperfect chemical order. 
              In these studies, measurements are made of the spatial periodicities of
              irregular chemical environments (Fe sites other than the Fe sites of the DO3
              and B2 ordered structures).  With the Frankfurt detector, it should be possible
              to measure diffraction patterns from different Fe environments in a
              quasicrystalline Al-Cu-Fe alloy.  If detector issues are resolved, some
              synchrotron experiments on Mossbauer diffraction will be performed during the
              course of this research.  In the last couple of years, advances at third
              generation synchrotron sources have made it possible to measure nuclear
              excitations accompanied by phonon excitations.  These inelastic spectra can be
              used to obtain the phonon partial densities of states of Fe atoms in the
              material.  This work on inelastic nuclear resonant scattering will show how
              vibrations of Fe atoms contribute to the vibrational entropy of different alloy
              phases.  Inelastic nuclear resonant scattering recently showed that the
              vibrational entropy of Fe3Al depends almost entirely on chemical short-range
              order (as opposed to long-range order).  This proposal describes measurements
              to be made on how the vibrations of  Fe atoms depend on chemical order in Pt3Fe
              and FeRh, how Fe vibrations depend on point defect concentrations in FeAl, and
              how Fe vibrations differ for quasicrystalline and crystalline
              Al-Cu-Fe.
%%%
After approximately 25,000 publications on Mossbauer
              spectrometry studies of materials, the Mossbauer effect is well established and
              well suited for many studies in materials science.  Its extension to inelastic
              nuclear resonant spectrometry should be useful for studies of atom vibrations
              in small samples such as thin films for which neutron methods are not
              practical.  The complementary nature of the three diffraction methods (X-ray,
              electron, and neutron) has sustained their widespread use in materials science.
               There is room for a fourth method of Mossbauer diffractometry.

