Title       : Mate Selection and the Role of Male-Donated Nutrients in Photinus Fireflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a9816432

Award Number: 9816432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara M. Lewis slewisl@emerald.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract


Proposal #:  9816432
PI: 
              Sara M. Lewis
Title:  Mate selection and the role of male-donated nutrients in
              Photinus fireflies

	The spectacular bioluminescent displays of fireflies
              have evoked admiration from human cultures around the world. In the common
              North American Photinus fireflies, these courtship displays are created by
              hundreds of males emitting flashes while flying slowly above the ground
              searching for females. Females respond to male flashes from perches in low
              vegetation.  Surprisingly little is known about firefly courtship and mating
              beyond this highly visible flash display.  Recent work by Dr. Lewis and her
              colleagues revealed that during mating, firefly males provide females with a
              nutrient-rich, sperm-containing package called a spermatophore, which is later
              digested within the female and used to provision her developing eggs.  Similar
              nuptial gifts are produced by males in organisms as diverse as giant octopi and
              tiny flatworms, and their occurrence across such diverse groups suggests that
              male nutrient donations may play a fundamental role in the evolution of animal
              mating systems. Dr. Lewis'  research will focus on Photinus fireflies to gain
              insight into the role of nuptial gifts in the evolution of animal mating
              systems and courtship behavior, combining controlled laboratory manipulations
              with field observations of natural Photinus populations.

 These studies will
              contribute to our understanding of key evolutionary issues concerning
              differences in resource allocation between males and females. This research is
              interesting from a conservation stand point, since the narrow habitat
              requirements and site specificity of fireflies make them extremely sensitive to
              habitat disturbance. 


