Title       : Three-dimensional Modeling of Combustion and Pollution from Wildland Fires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9816814

Award Number: 9816814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shankar Mahalingam   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jana B. Milford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research represents a joint initiative between the University of Colorado,
              the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), and the Intermountain Fire
              Sciences Laboratory of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service in
              Missoula, Montana, to significantly improve existing capabilities to model
              atmosphere-fire coupling as might occur during intense burning in wildland
              fires.  Specific tasks will include: (1) Development of subgrid scale models
              for turbulent combustion based on a description of the flame surface area. This
              will enable a more accurate treatment of fluid dynamic-combustion interactions.
              (2) Vertically and horizontally aligned vorticity can act as means of lofting
              and ejecting burning material from the fire that could lead to spotting. 
              Initially, using post-processed velocity fields from NCAR's existing
              atmosphere-fire model, a Lagrangian treatment of lofting, aerodynamics and
              settling of firebrands will be carried out.  Using this, a suitable Eulerian
              model will be developed. (3) A simplified model to describe drying, pyrolysis,
              and char oxidation from a solid fuel bed will be developed, based on basic
              conservation principles. (4) Lastly, a simplified smoke model that will allow
              quantification of carbon monoxide and particulate concentrations will be
              developed.  This is an important component that will assist with model
              evaluation and to test alternative smoke management scenarios.

The
              sub-models developed will be integrated into an existing three-dimensional,
              mesoscale large eddy simulation that has been under development for twenty
              years at NCAR, with recent collaboration with the Intermountain Fire Sciences
              Laboratory.  Recently completed and ongoing field experiments will provide
              observations on fires of opportunity ranging in scale from sub-meter to
              kilometers using a digital infrared camera.  With available data these
              experimental results will be used as a test bed for the fully integrated model.
               

Results are expected to assist forest management agencies to improve
              fire-fighting strategies and for planning prescribed burns.  These advances
              will have a fundamental impact on the scientific community working in the areas
              of turbulent combustion and pollution modeling.

