Title       : Structure-Function Studies of Lipid Binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9816575

Award Number: 9816575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bernlohr david-b@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9876575
The focus of this project is on a family of intracellular lipid binding
              proteins. These proteins are responsible for the solubilization and delivery of
              hydrophobic ligands within a cell.  The lipid binding proteins bind most avidly
              to fatty acids and retinoids although some weak association with such molecules
              as heme and lysophospholipids does occur.  Despite the wide variability in
              primary sequence, the 3-D structure of the family members, as determined by
              multidimensional NMR and X-ray crystallography, are remarkably superimposable. 
              The signature feature of all the lipid binding proteins is a beta-barrel fold
              forming an internal, water-filled cavity which serves as the ligand binding
              domain. Once inside, the ligand is sequestered from the external milieu and is
              held rigidly along one wall of the binding domain, displacing about one-third
              of the cavity water.  Despite the finding of the ligand bound to the protein
              within the cavity, there is no obvious site for ligand entry/exit.  The
              adipocyte lipid binding proteins bind to fatty acids and are used as model
              systems for the analysis of the entire class of lipid binding proteins.  The
              availability of structural information has allowed for the analysis of several
              questions relating to not only the physical basis for protein lipid
              interaction, but also for the molecular analysis of ligand binding affinity and
              selectivity.  For example, a large water-filled cavity that serves as the
              ligand binding domain seems intuitively contradictory to the purpose of the
              proteins.  If the proteins facilitate the solubilization of water-insoluble
              lipids, why enclose them in a cavity filled with water?  How do ligands enter
              and exit the cavity if there is no opening?  What are the thermodynamic factors
              which govern lipid binding?  What determines the ligand binding affinity and
              selectivity?  Do such proteins serve as passive intracellular fatty acid
              buffers or are they active molecular chaperones, directing the vectoral
              movement of lipid within cells? The following hypothesis addresses these
              issues:  The adipocyte lipid binding protein functions as a molecular chaperone
              for fatty acids, facilitating the directed movement of lipolytically derived
              fatty acids from the adipocyte lipid droplet to the plasma membrane.  This
              project tests this hypothesis by assessing the dynamic nature of the fatty acid
              binding process with a series of portal mutants designed to address cavity
              accessibility; and mapping the contact interface between the hormone-sensitive
              lipase and the adipocyte lipid binding protein.

While water soluble
              compounds may freely diffuse in biological systems, specific carrier proteins
              have evolved for the solubilization and delivery of molecules which have
              limited solubility in aqueous systems. The focus of this research is on the
              relationship between structure and function in one family of hydrophobic ligand
              carrier proteins which function within the intracellular environment, the lipid
              binding proteins.  Just as there are carrier proteins that function to
              solubilize and deliver hydrophobic molecules in the circulatory system (e.g.,
              lipoproteins, albumin), there exists an analogous family of proteins that are
              found intracellularly.  These proteins, which have been termed the lipid
              binding proteins, are responsible for the solubilization and delivery of
              hydrophobic ligands within a cell.   Their role as possible chaperones will be
              examined.

