Title       : Collaborative Research with Joe Stone on Education Policy and Social Mobility:
               The Role of School Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a9816629

Award Number: 9816629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80765              (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Figlio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the past several decades, Federal and state governments have pursued
              redistributive policies aimed at fostering `equality of economic
              opportunity`-the idea that while people's incomes may vary, this variance
              should be due primarily to factors such as individual ability and effort, not
              to differences in circumstance. This goal has motivated both social welfare
              policies, as well as mandated school finance equalizations, where state courts
              or legislatures have sought to equalize school spending between richer and
              poorer school districts. Despite decades of redistributive policies, numerous
              empirical studies continue to find evidence of a substantial level of income
              persistence across generations, even after holding constant many individual
              characteristics.   This proposed research will explore the redistributive
              effects of education policies, particularly those related to school finance.
              Specifically, we propose to address the following questions:   How do specific
              types of education policies affect the student body composition across 
              different types of public and private schools? Specifically, it will be
              determine how these  education policies affect where children at different
              points of the income and ability  distributions go to school. The consequences
              of three types of policies are analyzed:  (1) those that affect local control
              of education finance (e.g. school finance equalizations  or centralization of
              school spending); (2) those that influence the educational choices that 
              students and their families make (e.g. private school vouchers, or increased
              public school  competition); and (3) those that affect the provision of
              education within schools (e.g.  teacher unionization, school size and ability
              tracking).   How do these policies affect the distribution of teacher quality
              across different types of  public and private schools?   How do changes in
              student composition of schools and teacher quality affect the  distribution of
              student outcomes, such as test scores? (That is, what are the redistributive 
              consequences of these policies? And what can be inferred about the effect of
              education  policies on social mobility.)  To address these issues, three
              unique, extensive data sets are utilized, two with detailed individual level
              data with which it is possible to derive conclusions from a cross section, and
              also through panel type comparisons over time, and another panel data set with
              aggregate data concerning teacher quality and the student composition of
              schools.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
