Title       : Specificity of RNA Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a9816570

Award Number: 9816570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter M. Holmes holmes@hsc.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Holmes
MCB 9816570

1. Technical

This study is aimed at understanding how
              a specific tRNA is recognized and enzymatically modified at specific sites. One
              such enzyme to be studied here is M1G methyltransferase (1MGT) from Escherichia
              coli, which methylates position G37 (1 position of the guanine ring) using
              S-Adenosyl Methionine as the substrate. This important modification is required
              for the correct "in frame" reading of codons which begin with C. 1MGT is the
              product of the trmD gene, which has been isolated from both E. coli and
              Salmonella typhimurium. Relatively little is known about how the many
              modifications are introduced into cellular RNA in any system, and only a few of
              the possibly hundreds of specific modification enzymes have been isolated and
              characterized. It is likely that each enzyme has evolved to recognize and
              modify a unique RNA "determinant", and it will be important to know how this
              recognition is achieved in so specific a manner, and to ultimately understand
              the cellular function of these modifications. In a general sense, the
              remarkable specificity of modification enzymes, both in selection for the tRNA
              substrate and particular residue to be modified, raises important questions:
              What are the structural features of cellular RNA and scores of specific enzymes
              which permit recognition.  What are the catalytic mechanisms for these many
              interesting reactions?  What do these structures look like? How have these
              genes evolved?  Can we modify or otherwise use these enzymes to engineer RNA
              with expanded function? Using information obtained from solution probing and
              genetic experiments (and eventually form structural information gotten via NMR
              or X-ray crystallography), detailed structure function analyses will be carried
              out on protein and RNA. With these general ideas in mind, this study has the
              following specific aims: a. define the minimal domain of 1MGT that exhibits
              activity and tRNA binding. Enzyme deleted for residues at the amino or carboxyl
              terminus will be tested for catalytic efficiency and ability to bind tRNA, with
              key amino acid residues and protein domains required for RNA binding and
              subsequent, catalytic events identified.  Amino acid residues that are
              important for GpG and AdoMet interactions will also be determined. In the case
              of AdoMet, specific AdoMet consensus sequence will be elucidated by a
              mutagenesis approach. The GpG interaction site will be labeled using analogues
              of GpG that might interact covalently with residues in or near the GpG
              catalytic site. tRNA domains of tRNA, which have been shown to make contact
              with enzyme, will also be examined by the mutagenesis approach, with a focus on
              the anticodon stem-loop and variable loop. b. examine the nature of enzyme and
              RNA structural perturbations, which accompany occupancy of the GpG binding site
              by either tRNA or GpG. Changes in tRNA structure in normal and relevant mutant
              tRNA will be examined as well in complex. This will be accomplished initially
              using CD spectroscopy. Ultimately, NMR approaches will be employed to identify
              specific domains or residues involved in protein structural perturbations.
              Specific structural variants of 1MGT affected in binding and or catalysis for
              the ability to undergo structural changes will be tested. c. continue the
              ongoing collaborations with Drs. Ng, Giege and Scarsdale on structural
              determination of 1MGT, using the information so obtained as a basis for a more
              direct approach to enzyme structure function studies employing site directed
              mutagenesis.

2. non-techincal 

RNA has been shown to be made up of many
              unusual building blocks, which consist of modified nucleotides. At present over
              100 of these unusual bases have been found in naturally occurring RNA. The
              function of these many nucleotides has not been fully examined. This study
              seeks to understand how one such modified base in tRNA is synthesized. This
              modification which involves methylation of the 1 position of Guanine 37, is
              carried out by the Escherichia coli enzyme tRNA (guanosine-1) methyltransferase
              (1MGT). This question being examined concerns how this enzyme binds the correct
              tRNA structure and inserts a methyl group at just the correct site in the
              highly structured tRNA molecule. First, what portions of the protein bind RNA
              and are required for recognition will be identified. Next how changes in
              protein and RNA structure are involved in binding and or RNA recognition will
              be examined. Finally, attempts will be made to determine the structure of the
              enzyme using techniques of X-ray crystallography, and Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance. This work raises important questions of general interest. What are
              the structural features of RNA and scores of specific enzymes, which permit
              recognition?  What are the exact catalytic mechanisms for RNA modification? How
              have genes evolved to produce enzymes that modify RNA? Can we modify or
              otherwise use these enzymes to engineer RNA with expanded function? 

