Title       : Investigations of Protein Translocation in Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9816411

Award Number: 9816411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mechthild Pohlschroder pohlschr@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               M. Pohlschroder
University of Pennsylvania
 
 
Protein translocation across
              hydrophobic membranes is an essential process in all living organisms.
              Biochemical and genetic analyses of the bacterial and eukaryotic systems have
              shown that many proteins cross these membranes via an evolutionarily conserved
              pore. The mechanisms and energetics seem to be distinct and much has to be
              learned about the roles of the components involved in this process. Sequence
              comparisons suggest that organisms of the third domain of life, the archaea,
              contain a combination of homologs of the bacterial and eukaryotic protein
              translocation components, suggesting that some aspects of protein translocation
              through the cytoplasmic membrane of these organisms are unique. However,
              protein translocation studies in archaea, have been limited to sequence
              comparisons. This research is aimed at studying an archaeal protein
              translocation system. The specific aims of the project are: 1. To clone and
              sequence archaeal homologs of known protein translocation components, and
              provide necessary tools to study and validate the experimental system; and 2.
              To use a biochemical approach and reverse genetics to purify proteins
              associated with the archaeal translocon. In addition to identifying H. volcanii
              homologs of the known bacterial and eukaryotic protein translocation machinery,
              this research may lead to the isolation of archaea-specific components, or
              components that have not been previously identified in bacteria and eukaryotes.
              Gaining insights into archaeal protein translocation may help us to obtain a
              better understanding of this conserved process all domains of life, bacteria,
              archaea, and eukaryotes.

The ability to transport proteins across
              hydrophobic membranes is fundamental to the growth and survival of all cells.
              For example, in eukaryotes, secreted antibodies are essential for the defense
              against pathogens. On the other hand, many prokaryotes secrete toxins, which
              are central features of their pathogenicity. Thus, a better understanding of
              the mechanisms by which proteins traverse the membranes may allow us to
              modulate the secretion of pathogenic compounds as well as optimize defense
              mechanisms against them. Prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes also secrete enzymes
              to scavenge extracellular molecules. Many of these proteins have useful
              biotechnology applications. Understanding protein export mechanisms will help
              in the overexpression of recombinant secreted proteins. The archaea, which,
              along with bacteria and eukaryotes comprise one of the three domains of life,
              represent a relatively unexplored area in our study of protein translocation.
              An exploration of the biology of protein translocation in these organisms will
              not only shed light on novel processes by which proteins traverse hydrophobic
              archaeal membranes, but will also provide new insights into the mechanisms of
              previously identified bacterial and eukaryotic protein translocation systems.

              

