Title       : Antarctic Pack Ice Seals: Immunogenetic Diversity of Antarctic Pack Ice Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a9816011

Award Number: 9816011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent S. Stewart bstewart@hswri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Niles E. Lehman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hubbs-Sea World Res Inst
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92109    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9816011
STEWART
The pack ice region surrounding Antarctica contains at least
              fifty percent of the world's population of seals, comprising about eighty
              percent of the world's total pinniped biomass.  As a group, these seals are
              among the dominant top predators in Southern Ocean ecosystems, and the
              fluctuation in their abundance, growth patterns, life histories, and behavior
              provide a potential source of information about environmental variability
              integrated over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales.  This proposal was
              developed as part of the international Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) program,
              which is aimed to better understand the ecological relationships between the
              distribution of pack ice seals and their environment.  During January-February,
              2000, a research cruise through the pack ice zone of the eastern Ross Sea and
              western Amundsen Sea will be conducted to survey and sample along six transects
              perpendicular to the continental shelf.  Each of these transects will pass
              through five environmental sampling strata:  continental shelf zone, Antarctic
              slope front, pelagic zone, the ice edge front, and the open water outside the
              pack ice zone.  All zones but open water will be ice-covered to some degree. 
              This component of the APIS program will focus on the variation of two sets of
              genetic loci to determine species-wide genetic variability of 
pack-ice seals.
               One set is the major histocompatibility complex, which is involved in immune
              system responses while the other is the microsatellite locus which does not
              code for a gene product.  The dual approach will enable the team to assess
              quantify the amount of immunologically-relevant genetic variation in a species
              with the background of overall genetic variation.  This study will complement
              others on the health status of Antarctic ice seals.  Better insight into the
              interplay among pack ice seals and biological and physical features of
              Antarctic marine ecosystems will allow for a better prediction of fluctuation
              in seal population in the context of environmental change.


