Title       : LEXEN: Microbial Adapation to High Temperature and Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1998    
File        : a9816490

Award Number: 9816490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas S. Clark clark@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9816490  Clark  Hyperthermophilic microorganisms may be suitable models for
              ancestral, and possibly extraterrestrial, biosystems because their
              extraordinary adaptive capabilities allow them to colonize a wide range of
              subsurface volcanic areas on Earth.  Deep sea hydrothermal vents and
              terrestrial hot springs support highly diverse ecosystems without access to
              solar energy, harboring autotrophic microorganisms and their dependant
              heterotrophic micro and macro communities in geochemical conditions similar to
              those that may exist below the surface of Mars or Europa.  Hyperthermophiles
              also dominate most of the deeper branches of the universal phylogenetic tree,
              suggesting that ancestral microorganisms may have been thermophilic.  The
              environmental limits for growth and survival of known hyperthermophilic
              species, as well as newly isolated strains will be established, using a
              combination of bioengineering, microbiology and molecular biology.  This
              collaborative project with Dr. Frank T. Robb of the University of Maryland,
              Baltimore (Award MCB-9809352) emphasizes molecular adaptations to high pressure
              and high temperature, with the following objectives: 1. To determine the
              effects of supraoptimal temperatures and pressures on the survival and growth
              rates of existing hyperthermophilic microorganisms; 2. To utilize pressurized
              continuous fermentation systems for isolation and culture of new
              hyperthermophilic microbial strains and; 3. To examine physiological
              adaptations and genetic regulation of gene expression in response to transient
              challenges by heat and high pressure.  The hypothesis being tested is that
              hydrostatic pressure may greatly extend the upper temperature limits of growth
              and survival of hyperthermophiles.  Ongoing studies by these researchers have
              established that many enzymes from thermophiles display enhanced
              thermostability under pressure.  Further, the growth rate of Methanococcus
              jannaschii accelerated five-fold and its maximum temperature for methane
              production rose by 6 degrees C in response to pressure, and the growth rate and
              ATP production of a newly characterized abyssal hyperthermophile, Pyrococcus
              horikoshii, were elevated under pressure.  Novel equipment for incubating
              hyperthermophiles in continuous culture, under pressure and with thermal
              cycling, will be combined with molecular biology to explore the adaptive
              responses of hyperthermophiles in extremis.  Gene expression, membrane lipid
              composition and morphology will be examined.  The genes that are induced under
              conditions approaching lethality, will be identified by subtractive cloning and
              transcriptional assays.  Upper survival limits of the abyssal hyperthermophiles
              as a function of pressure, using isolates from a shallow terrestrial sampling
              site to provide control data for pressure responses, will be determined. 
              Enrichment cultures of hyperthermophiles from the vent systems of the back-arc
              region of the Northwest Pacific (Okinawa Trough and Uzzon Caldera on the
              Kamchatka Peninsula) will be incubated at temperatures and pressures exceeding
              those tolerated by known strains, thus using survival rather than rapid growth
              as the criterion for selection of new isolates.  The phylogenetic positions and
              physiological requirements of the new strains will be determined.  ***
