Title       : The Moche Foodways Archaeological Project: Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9816038

Award Number: 9816038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36037              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Gumerman IV george.gumerman@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. George Gumerman IV and his
              colleagues will conduct one season of archaeological excavation at the site of
              El Brujo, located on the arid northern coast of Peru. The El Brujo complex,
              over a square kilometer in size, consists of a series of pyramids and
              associated domestic architecture dating from approximately 4000 BC through
              colonial times. The site contains a substantial component referable to the
              Moche culture (AD 200-800) that is spatially segregated from earlier and later
              components. The presence of monumental architecture and associated domestic
              zones suggests that the site probably served as a major political and
              ceremonial center. Prior work at the site by both Gumerman and other groups
              indicates that organic materials including textiles and botanical remains are
              remarkably well preserved. This amazing preservation offers an unparalleled
              opportunity to explore specific aspects of Moche foodways.

The Moche peoples
              occupied the northern coast of Peru and are archaeologically significant for
              several reasons. It is possible to trace their development for over a
              millennium from a simple level of village organization to complex primitive
              state. Lacking writing and situated in a harsh and unpredictable desert
              environment the Moche were able to unite a large population scattered over
              separate isolated river valleys into a single political entity. Through a
              complex irrigation system they produced sufficient surplus to erect monumental
              pyramids and other ceremonial structures. Archaeologists wish to understand how
              this culture developed and was maintained. Dr. Gumerman has proposed a unique
              approach and plans to focus on how food moved through the social system. He
              will study not only production of both plant and animal species, but also their
              distribution through the social system, consumption and final discard. In this
              way it will be possible to address issues such as the development of social
              hierarchy and ceremonial/ritual behavior. He will excavate a series of Moche
              households to collect and analyze not only flora and fauna but also lithic and
              ceramic remains. On this basis it will also be possible to address questions
              such as status differentiation.

This research is important for several
              reasons. It will increase our understanding of the development of social
              complexity. It will shed new light on an important archaeological culture and
              will also help to develop an analytic approach of potential use in many parts
              of the world.

