Title       : The Role of Xanthophylls in the Mechanism of Nonradiative Energy Dissipation in
               Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9816759

Award Number: 9816759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry A. Frank harry.frank@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Harry A. Frank
9816759


Photosynthetic organisms contain protective
              mechanisms by which excess light energy is dissipated before it leads to the
              photodestruction of the photosynthetic apparatus. Also, energy flow from the
              light-harvesting pigment-protein complexes to the photosynthetic reaction
              center is highly regulated. The molecular features that control these processes
              are not well understood. Xanthophyll pigments have been implicated in the
              mechanisms, but the precise nature of their involvement is unclear. In this
              project, several different xanthophylls will be studied. The experiments to be
              performed include steady state and time-resolved absorption and fluorescence
              spectroscopy and electrochemical determinations. The spectroscopic experiments
              will measure the efficiencies and dynamics of energy transfer between the
              xanthophylls and chlorophyll. The electrochemical experiments will reveal the
              oxidation potentials of the molecules in solution and bound in the
              pigment-protein complexes. The major objective of this research to examine each
              of the molecular factors thought to be important in nonradiative energy
              dissipation in order to reveal the detailed molecular mechanism by which it
              takes place in vivo. The factors to be explored include xanthophyll
              composition, state of aggregation, pH, phosphorylation, position of the energy
              levels, and the oxidation potentials of the pigments. The question of the
              involvement of the xanthophylls as direct or indirect quenchers of chlorophyll
              fluorescence will be examined. The hypotheses that xanthophylls quench
              chlorophyll fluorescence by energy transfer or electron transfer mechanisms
              will be tested. The experiments are important in enlarging our view of how
              photosynthetic organisms protect themselves from excessive light energy
              absorption and respond to varying environmental conditions while maintaining
              efficient energy flow essential for survival.

Xanthophylls are familiar to
              anyone who has observed the bright orange and yellow colors of Autumn leaves in
              New England. However, unbeknownst to most observers, these eye-catching
              photosynthetic pigments do more than provide aesthetic beauty to our lives.
              They are critical components in a biological protection system that prevents
              chlorophyll, the most essential plant pigment, from breaking down under high
              light stress. In a way that is not yet fully understood, xanthophylls are able
              to be converted from one form into another and back again in the so-called
              "Xanthophyll cycle." The molecular components of this cycle appear to be
              capable of harmlessly deactivating excess excited state energy before it
              catalyzes the destruction of chlorophyll. Interestingly, the same components
              may also regulate the flow of absorbed solar energy between photosynthetic
              proteins. This research will investigate precisely how the protection and flow
              regulation are accomplished. Protein preparations from several higher plant and
              algal systems will be systematically investigated. A combination of
              biochemical, molecular biological, and spectroscopic tools will be used. The
              overall goal of the research is to elucidate the molecular details of how the
              Xanthophyll cycle works. A better understanding of how plants convert solar
              energy into chemical energy and withstand stress under bright solar conditions
              is expected to be obtained from this work.
 


