Title       : Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical Transfers Among Terrestrial and Aquatic
               Biospheres and the Atmosphere in Forests and Pastures of Eastern Amazonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9816399

Award Number: 9816399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Markewitz Dmarke@smokey.forestry.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1043,1325,1524,1584,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Daniel Markewitz
 DEB-9807633

In tropical forests growing on
              highly weathered soils, a significant fraction of ecosystem stocks of essential
              plant nutrients exists in the vegetation. Deforestation removes these nutrient
              stocks, perhaps leaving a nutrient-poor soil incapable of supporting
              sustainable agricultural practices or vigorous forest regrowth. On the other
              hand, many properties of tropical soils and vegetation, including pH-dependent
              variable charge, large effective rooting depths, and mycorrhlzal associations
              that can extract soil nutrients at low concentrations, may render these
              ecosystems resilient to disturbance. The objectives of the proposed research
              are to study these biogeochemical fluxes in a mosaic of primary and secondary
              forests and productive and degraded cattle pastures that is typical of the
              eastern Amazon Basin.

The project group have already measured nutrients in
              soils, vegetation, rain water, soil solutions, and stream water, and emissions
              of gases from the soils of these land uses. While addressing many of the
              changes in biogeochemical fluxes, this research has also raised new questions:
              Where does the nitrogen come from to support secondary succession when degraded
              pastures, which have depleted soil pools of plant-available N, are abandoned?
              Many of these degraded pastures arc being "reformed" by fertilizing with P and
              replanting in new varieties of pasture grasses, but where do the grasses obtain
              N to support their vigorous productivity? What are the rates of symbiotic and
              associative N fixation in these ecosystems? Is most of the fertilizer P taken
              up by the grasses, adsorbed onto iron and aluminum oxides in the soil, or lost
              to stream water? Can native pioneer successional species extract soil pools of
              P other than those identified as "plant-available" by agronomic soil test
              indices? Pasture and secondary forest soils that receive ash inputs following
              forest clearing and burning arc eventually reacidi~ed, but by what mechanisms
              and over what time scales?

These collaborative investigations will link
              mechanistic studies of nutrient loss and accumulation with field measurements
              of biogeochemical fluxes of plant macronutrients. Hydrologic investigations,
              including well transects, piezometer nests, soil moisture measurements, and
              energy balance calculations in each land use, will quantify flow paths of water
              through soil profiles and to the stream. Measures of stream water discharge and
              estimates of groundwater flow and unsaturated flow will be combined with
              measures of solution concentrations to calculate nutrient fiuxes within soil
              profiles and between the terrestrial and aquatic systems. Rates of biological
              nitrogen fixation will be estimated in field plots planted in grasses and in
              secondary forest pioneer species using an innovative combination of ~sN pool
              dilution and xsN mass balance. Changes in the isotope ratios of ~4N:~sN will
              provide a sensitive measure of atmospheric inputs to these systems. A mass
              balance of a greenhouse bioassay of P availability will identify the
              extractable P pools of soils sampled from various depths that are taken up by
              growing seedlings. In addition, the abundance of these physio-chernical pools
              of soil P will be compared to plant demands by measuring biomass P pools in
              regrowing vegetation in the field. 

These investigations of key mechanisms
              of nutrient accumulation, loss, and retention will help explain  field
              observations of nutrient distributions and transformations. Coupling these
              ecological studies to investigations of hydrologic flow paths and flow rates
              will permit quantification and improved understanding of the biogeochemical
              fluxes in this complicated landscape of changing land use.

