Title       : Quantitative Analysis of Fracture Surfaces Using Sterological Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9816618

Award Number: 9816618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun M. Gokhale arun.gokhale@mse.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9816618
Gokhale

The objectives of this research program are: (1) to develop
              new quantitative fractographic, stereological, and digital image analysis
              techniques for characterization of microstructures and fracture surfaces: (2)
              to develop image analysis and microstructure modeling techniques to incorporate
              detailed quantitative microstructural information in the finite elements-based
              simulations of mechanical response of complex microstructures; and (3) to apply
              the new techniques in the study of deformation, damage evolution, and fracture
              behavior of materials.  The analytical theoretical work involves applications
              of stochastic geometry and global analysis.  New stereological and quantitative
              fractographic relationships are derived for efficient, unbiased estimation of
              geometric attributes of microstructures and fracture surfaces in
              three-dimensional space from measurements performed on lower dimensional
              manifolds such as two dimensional sections and projections.  Under development
              are digital image analysis techniques to link microstructural length scales for
              finite elements-based simulations of deformation and fracture.  Image analysis
              techniques are used to create large area high resolution "montages" of
              fractographic SEM images and stereo-pair images to quantify spatial arrangement
              of features (for example, voids, inclusions, etc.) on fracture surfaces. 
              Experimental work on monolithic and composite materials involves stereological
              and fractographic measurements that demonstrate the applications of the
              techniques developed in the above tasks.
%%%
The study of microstructures is
              central to materials science and numerous other disciplines where microscopy is
              used to characterize internal structure.  Apart from materials science, the
              results of this research are also relevant and useful in a variety of different
              disciplines such as anatomy, neuro-science, cell biology, plant physiology,
              stochastic geometry, and global analysis.
***

