Title       : Dissertation Research: Personality Traits of Captive Lion Tailed Macaques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9816165

Award Number: 9816165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8693               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Sussman c41874rs@wuvmd.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Personality traits of captive lion-tailed macaques will be investigated in this
              study.  Because each social group is a unique constellation of individuals,
              understanding differences in personality is important for a better
              understanding of primate social behavior, groups, and species.  In laboratory
              tests, knowing how personality contributes to the different responses of
              animals under the same conditions will enable researchers to interpret results
              more clearly.  Human personality research will also benefit, because prototypes
              of human traits can be studied through nonhuman primate models when human
              testing would be difficult or unethical, such as when studying the biologic
              basis of personality.  Social and environmental conditions of nonhuman primates
              can also be manipulated to explore their influence on personality as well.  In
              this study, personality traits will be assessed by observing the behavior of 52
              captive macaques in 8 groups, kept in different social groupings and/or types
              of housing.  A principal components analysis, a statistical technique used in
              human personality research, will group behaviors that occur together to
              determine major factors of personality.  Two personality profiles will be
              developed for each animal:  one based on the frequency of behaviors and a
              second using personality factors from the principal components analysis. 
              Individual profiles will be averaged to form a female and a male species
              profile for both behavioral frequency and for personality factors.  In
              addition, the effect of sex, dominance rank, ratio of males to females in the
              group, and spatial density of housing (square feet/animal) on personality will
              be explored.  The method used in this research can integrate the results of
              many different investigators, because it is divided into specific traits, each
              defined by commonly studied primate behaviors.  Because it facilitates research
              comparing primate groups and species, it should help untangle the complex mix
              of genetic, social, and environmental influences on both human and nonhuman
              primate personality.
