Title       : The Role of Norepinephrine in Plasticity and Motor Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9816865

Award Number: 9816865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula C. Bickford Paula.Bickford@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract
Proposal #:	IBN-9816865
PI Name:	Paula Bickford


The proposal
              seeks to address the role of Norepinephrine (NE) in motor learning and
              plasticity in the brain. Although it has been established that NE can modulate
              motor learning processes, a question that remains unanswered is the site of
              NE's effect on motor learning. The cerebellum has been implicated because
              selective cerebellar depletions of NE have similar effects to what is observed
              with whole brain depletions of NE. The preliminary data included in this
              application demonstrates that propranolol, a beta-adrenergic blocker, infused
              into the paramedian lobe of the cerebellum impairs learning. The proposed work
              will narrow the site of NE's effect by continuing to perform local infusions of
              propranolol into the cerebellar cortex and interpositus nucleus and studying
              rod-running motor learning behavior. 

The proposed work also addresses the
              control of the molecular events associated with the long-term synaptic changes
              produced by NE in motor learning. The PI will investigate the mechanism of
              induction of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). The role of NE in tPA
              activation will be studied by examining tPA expression using in situ
              hybridization techniques in cerebellar samples from subjects that have
              performed the rod-running motor learning task with and without propranolol
              treatment. 

Taken together, the work proposed would determine the molecular
              mechanisms that are important in the ability of NE to influence motor learning
              and synaptic plasticity. This information will be of significance to a wide
              range of neurobiologists studying numerous systems. In addition, it will be
              useful for understanding aging and age-related declines in motor learning.
              
	
	

