Title       : Optimal Operation of Electric Arc Furnaces to Minimize the Generation of Air
               Pollutants at the Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9816804

Award Number: 9816804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109910             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Fred Ramirez fred.ramirez@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9223,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Ramirez - 9816804    The manufacture of steel by electric arc
              furnaces (EAF) is continuing to increase in usage in the United States with
              current production estimated to be over 63 million tons per year.  The steel
              industry has long been known for its contributions to air pollution in this
              country.  The reduction of emissions from steel producers has been slow for two
              main reasons:  the need to maintain or increase current production levels and
              the lack of understanding and control of the steel-making process.  The EAF
              holds a three-phase system of liquid (molten steel), slag (metal oxides), and
              gas with both mass and heat transfer taking place amongst the three.  The
              furnace operations, or controls, include carbon injection, oxygen lancing,
              burner operation, and air infiltration.  The controls are used to produce the
              appropriate grade of liquid steel at a requested temperature.    The PI has
              begun the development of a dynamic model of the electric arc furnace consisting
              of melting, equilibrium chemistry, and material balance sub-models.  The EAF
              model includes all of the furnace operations involved in an industrial furnace.
               Preliminary investigations into the control of the furnace minimize carbon
              monoxide emissions have shown that the system is extremely sensitive to carbon
              injection and burner oxygen controls.  These results show great promise for the
              improvement of furnace performance, which includes environmental impact and
              energy consumption.    With the collaboration of four industrial companies,
              including two steel producers, the investigator plans a three year research
              program which includes model verification and calibration, the addition of NOx
              chemistry to the model, and dynamic optimization of the process using dynamic
              programming and the calculus of variations.  This addresses the EPA's Common
              Sense Initiative toward finding better environmental production methods for the
              steel industry.  The final result of the research will be a closed-loop optimal
              control system that  can minimize environmental impact and energy consumption
              while maintaining profitability.  This project will lead to operational
              policies for electric arc furnaces that allows for pollution prevention by
              minimizing the generation of air pollutants at the source.
