Title       : Mobility and Disorder in Protein NMR Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2001  
File        : a9816072

Award Number: 9816072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $755000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerhard Wagner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract                                                                        
                                  Wagner    9816072


		
The objectives of this project
              are to systematically study protein mobility with NMR and relate mobility to
              amino acid sequences and to protein function. The proposal has three major
              aspects. (i) A descriptive part is focused on characterizing structure and
              mobility of three protein systems: the methyl transfer protein ada and its
              complex with DNA, the histone acetyl transfer (HAT) domain from the tetrahymena
              protein p55, in the complex with CoA, and the CD2/CD58
              receptor/counter-receptor pair. This aspect also contains an effort to develop
              and apply methods for deriving pictorial representations of internal motions,
              based on spectral density mapping, as well as new experimental approaches for
              deriving mobility data from relaxation experiments. (ii) A second aspect is to
              develop an understanding of the factors that make certain protein regions
              mobile or rigid. This will be pursued with site directed mutagenesis in vitro,
              and with computer simulations. (iii) The third aspect is to investigate whether
              and why protein mobility might be important for protein recognition function.
              This will be pursued with experimental measurements of protein interactions and
              free energy perturbation calculations of wild-type and mutant proteins.

Most
              biological processes are controlled by interaction of proteins with other
              macromolecules or smaller biologically important molecules. The specific
              recognition of the correct partners is governed by complementary surface
              structures. However, surfaces of proteins have been found to be generally quite
              mobile. This research is focused on describing and understanding the importance
              and implications of mobility for protein interactions. The three systems on
              which research will be carried out are from the fields of DNA repair,
              transcriptional regulation and immune cell activation. The results will shed
              light on basic mechanisms of biological function.
 

