Title       : Global Transcriptional Activator of Multidrug Transporters in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9816872

Award Number: 9816872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Neyfakh neyfakh@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
A typical bacterial genome encodes multiple multidrug transporters, membrane
              proteins which actively extrude structurally diverse toxic compounds from the
              bacterial cell. One of the most enigmatic questions associated with the
              phenomenon of multidrug transporters is whether they have evolved for
              chemoprotection, or for performing specific functions which are part of normal
              bacterial physiology. Frequently the natural function of a protein can be
              inferred from the regulatory mechanisms controlling its expression. Preliminary
              results indicate that the expression of two multidrug transporters of Bacillus
              subtilis, Bmr and BIt, is controlled by two alternative regulatory mechanisms:
              specific regulators BmrR and BItR, and the newly discovered global
              transcriptional activator Mta, which directly interacts with the promoters of
              both transporter genes. This project is investigating the physiological role of
              the Mta-mediated regulatory response.  This goal is being achieved by pursuing
              two largely independent specific aims. The first aim is to identify other
              genes, in addition to bmr and blt, which belong to the Mta regulon. The nature
              of these genes should indicate the function of Mta and, consequently, of
              multidrug transporters controlled by this protein. The search for additional
              Mta-regulated genes, which has already brought some interesting results, will
              be conducted mostly by genetic methods, using sequence pattern analysis, direct
              in vitro selection of B. subtilis DNA fragments binding to Mta, and screening
              transposon-generated libraries of lacZ transcriptional fusions for activation
              by Mta. The second aim is to identify the growth conditions under which Mta
              becomes activated and, eventually, to identify the inducer molecule(s) to which
              Mta responds. Two hypotheses will be tested here. According to the first
              hypothesis, the Mta inducer(s) are molecules produced by B. subtilis itself, as
              part of either a normal physiological process, or of a stress response. The
              activity of the Mta regulon under different physiological and stress conditions
              will be assessed by using a lacZ transcriptional fusion. To identify the
              inducer mutants of B. subtilis with a constitutively active Mta regulon will be
              selected and those mutations not linked to the mta gene itself will be mapped
              and characterized. Since such mutations, if selected, are likely to cause
              accumulation of the Mta inducer in the cell, the nature of the mutated genes
              will provide a strong clue as to the identity of the inducer. The second
              hypothesis postulates that the inducer of Mta is an exogenous toxin present in
              soil, the natural habitat of B. subtilis. Colonies of soil microorganisms and
              plant extracts will be screened for the ability to induce the Mta regulon in B.
              subtilis. If identified, these sources of the inducer will be used to purify it
              and characterize its chemical identity.  By understanding the nature of the
              Mta-mediated regulatory response it will possible to learn, for the first time,
              the physiological role played by complex systems of multidrug transporters in
              bacterial cells.

