Title       : Quantutative MHD Modeling of the Solar Transition Region Using Realistic
               Transport Coefficients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9816335

Award Number: 9816335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick C. Bruhweiler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ATM9816335abs

The investigators will continue the development of a
              magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model of the solar transition region.  The transition
              region separates the solar chromosphere and the solar corona.  It is a thin
              interface, a discontinuity, between the cooler, partially ionized chromosphere
              and the much hotter fully ionized corona.  A large part of the extreme
              ultraviolet solar spectrum comes from the transition regions.  In order to
              determine how the transition region is heated, it is necessary to combine
              observations with models that predict energy dissipation and thermal energy
              transport rates in the region of parameter space that describes the transition
              region.  In an MHD model, this means that realistic expressions for the
              transport coefficients that determine resistive and viscous dissipation rates
              and thermal energy flux must be used, and evaluated, in the ranges of
              temperature, density, velocity, and magnetic field that characterize the
              transition region.  Due to current limitations in computer speed,
              multi-dimensional, time dependent MHD simulations cannot use even remotely
              realistic values of these transport coefficients.  The investigators will make
              modifications to an existing MHD model to include viscous effects, separate
              energy equations for electrons and protons, and a parametric representation of
              the net radiative loss in terms of electron temperature and density.  The model
              will help resolve the controversy as to what degree the transition region is
              heated by in situ viscous dissipation, and dissipation of conduction and
              thermoelectric currents, as compared to the flux of thermal energy from the
              overlying corona

