Title       : Diffusion and Binding in Polymerized Bicontinuous Cubic Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9816826

Award Number: 9816826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144961             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9816826
David O'Brien
U. of Arizona

Natural and synthetic
              polar lipids can form a variety of hydrated nonlamellar phases, including the
              inverted hexagon (HII) and inverted bicontinuous cubic (QII) phases.  Lipids
              that readily form one or more of these nonlamellar phases are sometimes termed
              polymorphic lipids.  Appropriately designed polymerizable polymorphic lipids
              can be successfully used to form either of these nonlamellar phases and
              stabilize them via crosslinking polymerization.  The bicontinuous cubic
              morphologies consist of curved lipid bilayers that separate interpentrating
              water channels.  The principal investigator's has introduced a successful
              strategy for the polymerization of these nonlamellar phases, that retains their
              morphology and stabilizes the assembly in a manner that enhances both the
              temperature range and resistance to organic solvents.  Thus the lipid domains
              can be converted to poly(lipid) with a wide range of polymer properties, while
              leaving the water domains unperturbed for further elaboration.  The
              interpentrating networks of the polymerized QII phases suggests potential
              applications of these organic zeolites, which take full advantage of the lipid
              membrane surface for the localization of reagents, the immobilization of
              antibody fragments or abenzymes, or the incorporation of proteins for chemcial
              or biological conversions, diagnostic, and/or separation applications.  The
              objective of this proposal is to characterize the effect of molecular size on
              the diffusion of water-soluble macromolecules within the water channels of
              polymerized QII phases.  Macromolecular diffusion will be experimentally
              determined using pulsed field gradient NMR techniques.  The materials for the
              formation and stabilization of QII phases will come from a family of readily
              synthesized polymerizable lipids.  

This is a terminal grant for one year.

