Title       : Sodium Channel Differential Sialylation Throughout Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9816685

Award Number: 9816685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Bennett esbennet@com1.med.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Eric S. Bennett
IBN-98 16685


Our body runs on electricity produced by the
              movement of ions across the cell membrane. Voltage-gated sodium channels are
              regulated conduits for the movement of sodium across this membrane. Channels
              are quiescent at the cell's negative resting membrane potential. Following a
              membrane depolarization, channels somehow "sense" this change in membrane
              potential and activate by forming an aqueous pore through which sodium moves
              into the cell. Thus, the electrical signal known as the action potential is
              initiated and propagated.

Any change in the membrane potential sensed by the
              sodium channel will affect channel activity, and thus the overall excitability
              of the cell. Large numbers of carbohydrate typically are attached to the
              extracellular portions of transmembrane proteins. For example, about 30% of the
              total mass of the mature sodium channel protein are carbohydrate, of which 40%
              are negatively charged sialic acid residues. This sialic acid may contribute to
              negative surface charges that alter the membrane potential sensed by the
              protein, and thus alter channel activity.

A diversity of sodium channel
              types is expressed throughout the body and throughout development, producing a
              range in the levels of sodium channel sialic acids. As the levels and/or
              locations change, the impact of this differential sialylation on sodium channel
              function may also vary, serving as a means by which channel activity is
              regulated. Determining the mechanism and physiological impact of this
              differential sialylation is the major focus of the project.

Studies of
              skeletal muscle sodium channels throughout development will be used as a model
              system. Adult skeletal muscle expresses a very heavily sialylated channel,
              while embryonic skeletal muscle expresses a second type of sodium channel that
              is much less sialylated. In addition, a second, heavily sialylated subunit, ~,
              is apparently expressed only in adult tissue. Thus, the overall levels of
              sialic acid attached to the embryonic versus adult skeletal muscle sodium
              channel vary considerably. Through direct comparison of these two channel types
              in an isolated system, one can determine the mechanism by which this
              differential sialylation impacts channel flinction. The physiological impact of
              this differential sialylation will be determined by studying sodium channel
              activity in developing myocytes.

