Title       : Molecular Studies of a Mitochondrial Ion Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9816950

Award Number: 9816950
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen W. Kinnally   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1132,1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Protein translocation across membrane barriers is important in many cellular
              functions including signaling, secretion, biogenesis of organelles,
              compartmentalization, and programmed cell death.  A much studied yet poorly
              understood example is the process by which precursor proteins are imported into
              mitochondria.  A complex set of proteins in both the inner and outer membranes
              of this organelle recognizes, sorts and selectively translocates precursors to
              their final destinations.  A water-filled proteinaceous pore called the
              multiple conductance channel (MCC) of the inner membrane is postulated to play
              a key role in this process.  This project has three objectives related to its
              main goal of determining the physiological role of the MCC in protein import
              and the molecular basis of its action.  The hypothesis that the MCC is the
              import pore predicts that interfering with other components of the import
              apparatus will change the properties of the MCC.  Therefore, treatment with
              antibodies and proteolysis of the hetero-oligomeric import apparatus of the
              inner membrane will be used to test for effects on MCC activity as monitored by
              electrophysiological techniques.  MCC may function in tandem with its outer
              membrane counterpart, a channel called PSC (for peptide-sensitive channel).  If
              the outer and inner channels interact during protein translocation, then
              structural changes made to the outer membrane complex may also affect MCC
              activity.  Therefore, similar antibody and proteolysis treatments of the outer
              membrane complex will be analyzed for effects on MCC activity.  Biochemical
              reconstitution of MCC activity from genetically manipulated mitochondria will
              be used to identify protein components of the MCC.  These components will then
              be analyzed by mass spectrometry to determine their amino acid sequences. 
              Together the studies will provide fundamental new information on the mechanisms
              of protein import into mitochondria.
