Title       : RUI: Antibodies to Flowering Plant Sperm: Development and Specificity of
               Epitopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9816945

Award Number: 9816945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darlene Southworth southworth@sou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Oregon University
	      1250 Siskiyou Boulevard
	      Ashland, OR  975205001    503/482-3311

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In flowering plants, the process of fertilization underlies production of seeds
              and fruits.  Although structural events of double fertilization have been
              described, the molecular mechanisms by which sperm and egg recognize each
              other, adhere and fuse are unknown.  Plant sperm are embedded in pollen grains
              and move down growing pollen tubes.  Near the egg, a pollen tube releases two
              sperm:  one fuses with the egg to form the embryo, the other fuses with the
              central cell, adjacent to the egg, to form endosperm that supports growth of
              the developing embryo.  A major unanswered question in plant reproduction is
              how sperm recognize eggs and central cells, adhere, and fuse.  The goal of this
              proposal is to characterize molecules on sperm cell membranes.  In Dr.
              Southworth's laboratory, three antibodies that bind to Brassica sperm cells
              have been identified.  One anti-sperm antibody, BRSP1, has been partially
              characterized with regard to species specificity, presence of carbohydrate in
              the epitope, and molecular weight.

The specific objectives of this proposal
              are (1) to characterize Brassica sperm membrane epitopes with regard to (a)
              timing of expression in the anther, (b) tissue-specific expression, (c)
              species-specificity of antibody binding, (d) molecular weight, and (e) location
              in the cell and (2) to involve undergraduates in research.  Sperm and the cells
              leading to their development will be isolated from anthers, microspores,
              pollen, or pollen tubes and antibody binding will be determined by
              immunocytochemistry and by immunoblotting.  The results will further knowledge
              of basic developmental mechanisms that function in plant reproduction and will
              lead to understanding of fertility and sterility: producing hybrids from
              incompatible crosses and preventing fertilization where male sterility is
              needed to prevent self-crossing.  The identity of sperm-specific membrane
              molecules will be useful in future genetic studies.  Undergraduate students
              will gain valuable insight into active research.  By solving problems and
              assisting in attainment of goals, they will gain experience in terms of
              understanding the approach to research and in development of technical skills
              which will facilitate their development as scientists.



