Title       : SGER: The Opto-Mechanical Effect in Glass - A Novel Phenomenon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9816402

Award Number: 9816402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Himanshu Jain hj00@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9816402
Jain

Currently, the conversion of an optical signal into mechanical
              signal has required working with the combination of electro-optic and
              piezo-electric type cross effects. The necessary intervention of electronics
              has meant both a loss of signal quality and additional expense. Recently,
              researchers at the University of Cambridge in the UK reported an
              opto-mechanical effect (OME) in glassy 50% arsenic-50% selenium films, which
              transforms an optical signal directly into mechanical strain.  It is an
              exciting discovery, which has opened a new area of materials research. It has
              instantly led to the conception of many novel applications such as optical disk
              drive heads, nano-actuators or switches, nano-transducers, sensors,
              super-sensitive spectrophotometers, etc.  However, for OME's exploitation in
              devices there is an urgent need to establish its origin and various
              characteristics, and to determine how its magnitude may be enhanced.  This
              project focuses on the understanding and development of the new phenomenon in
              collaboration with the group at Cambridge.  The properties and structure of
              semiconducting glasses based on chalcogens (e.g. Se, sulfides or selenides of
              Ge, Sb or As, etc.) are known to be sensitive to the light.  The photons may
              affect the volume, amorphization/ devitrification, mechanical (e.g.,
              plasticity), rheological (e.g., viscosity), optical (e.g., darkening,
              birefringence, luminescence),electrical (e.g., conductivity, dielectric
              constant), or the chemical (e.g., etching, dissolution) properties of the
              glass.  These photo-induced changes may be classified into three categories
              depending on their stability: (a) permanent changes which cannot be recovered
              without destroying the sample, (b)changes which can be reversed by heating the
              sample to the glass transition temperature, and (c)changes which can be
              reversed simply by removing the light source, or exposing the specimen to
              appropriate light subsequently.  The OME is a class (c) vector phenomenon which
              exhibits analog relationship between optical input signal and mechanical
              output.  The complete orientation relationship between the polarization
              direction and stresses resulting from OME will be measured, along with the
              temperature dependence and kinetics.  The relationship between the wavelength
              of inducing light and the magnitude or kinetics of OME will be determined. The
              electronic structure will be characterized and the surface composition of the
              glass will be monitored using high-resolution x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
              (together with Auger spectra, as needed). 
%%%
The recent discovery of an
              opto-mechanical effect in chalcogenide glass films has opened up new
              opportunities in the area of advanced photonics by possibly enabling direct
              conversion from an optical signal to a mechanical signal.  Currently, this
              transformation occurs by 2 intermediate steps, which require expensive
              electronics and result in a loss of signal.  Professor Jain, an expert in
              glasses, will collaborate with the researchers who discovered the
              opto-mechanical effect to study the basic characteristics and limitations of
              the effect so that it can be utilized in new devices. This project is funded as
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research because it is preliminary work on a novel
              idea and because of its high-risk/high-payoff nature.
***

