Title       : Improved Semiclassical Dynamical Methods and Their Application to Condensed
               Phase Vibrational Relaxation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1998  
File        : a9816040

Award Number: 9816040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Herman mherman@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Michael Herman is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program  to continue his development of improved semiclassical
              dynamical methods for treating vibrational relaxation in condensed phases.  A
              series of studies will be undertaken to improve the accuracy and flexibility of
              semiclassical propagator methods for systems displaying quantum chaos.  Herman
              has developed new integral conditioning methods that analytically account for
              the local phase cancellation inherent in semiclassical approaches.  Further
              improvements in the approach will be developed for problems involving
              transitions between molecular quantum states.  Applications involve
              semiclassical treatments of vibrational energy relaxation in condensed phases
              and clusters.    Systems to be treated include a number of small molecules such
              as diatomic iodine anion in various solvents and in carbon dioxide
              clusters.

Since most chemical reactions of commercial importance occur in
              the condensed phase, it is important to understand the effect that solvation
              has on these processes.  The theoretical treatment of such systems is
              complicated by the large number of degees of freedom involved, and any approach
              to treating such systems needs to be based on some level of approximation. 
              Herman has developed a semiclassical approach for treating the dynamics of such
              systems that provides important molecular insights into the influence of
              solvation.

