Title       : Negative Regulation of the DPP Signaling Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9816881

Award Number: 9816881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Rushlow chris.rushlow@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Drosophila decapentaplegic gene product (Dpp) is a member of the
              transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) superfamily of secreted growth and
              differentiation factors.  TGF-bs mediate their functions via a signal
              transduction pathway that results in the transcriptional activity of specific
              genes, and eventually leads to specific cellular responses.  The pathway is
              partially elucidated and includes transmembrane receptor kinases that
              phosphorylate cytoplasmic molecules called Smads, which then translocate to the
              nucleus.  Smads have been implicated as transcriptional activators of
              pathway-target genes in several organisms.
Dpp acts in a
              concentration-dependent manner to influence the fates of many cells.  During
              early embryonic development, high levels of Dpp instruct the dorsal-most fate
              (squamous epithelial cells of the amnioserosa), while lower levels instruct
              more lateral fates (hair cells of the epidermis).  Even the lowest levels of
              the Dpp gradient directs patterning (edge denticles of the ventral epidermis). 
              Thus, the expression and activity of Dpp must be highly regulated to ensure
              proper patterning of the dorsal region.

Several genes are known to influence
              Dpp activity by a variety of mechanisms.  They positively or negatively
              regulate either Dpp transcription, Dpp binding to its receptors, or downstream
              components of the pathway, for example at the level of Smad activation.  It is
              a broad goal to understand how the Dpp pathway is regulated, and in turn, how
              the pathway regulates downstream gene expression.  Recently, a new kind of
              negative regulator was discovered to be encoded by the brinker gene. brinker is
              just as important as the well-characterized inhibitor, Sog, in setting up the
              Dpp gradient.  Genetic data indicates that brinker acts cell autonomously and
              downstream of the Dpp receptors, unlike Sog, which acts extracellularly to
              inhibit the Dpp ligand.  Brinker was recently cloned and shown to encode a
              novel protein.  In all embryonic and larval tissues where Dpp is expressed,
              brinker is expressed in a reciprocal pattern, suggesting that it may be a more
              general inhibitor than Sog of Dpp.  Two possible mechanisms for Brinker protein
              function are:
as an inhibitor of Smad nuclear localization or activity, and as
              a direct transcriptional repressor of downstream target genes, including Dpp
              itself.  The experiments in the proposal are designed to specifically determine
              1) where Brinker fits into the Dpp pathway and whether it can function
              independently of the Smads, 2) whether Brinker interacts with Smads and/or
              other transcription factors, and 3) whether Brinker can act as a
              transcriptional regulator in both Drosophila and mammalian systems.


