Title       : Analytical Applications of Nonlinear Infrared Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9816829

Award Number: 9816829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wright wright@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project by Professor John Wright of the University of Wisconsin is
              predicated on recent key experiments that have demonstrated that resonance with
              vibrational transitions can enhance the nuclear polarizability sufficiently to
              exceed the nonresonant electronic polarizability, and that mode coupling is
              sufficiently large that multiple resonances can multiplicatively enhance
              nonlinear optical processes.  These experiments demonstrate the feasibility for
              a new family of multiresonant vibrationally enhanced nonlinear optical
              spectroscopies.  These spectroscopies are analogous to 2-dimensional NMR
              methods and they are uniquely sensitive to intra- and intermolecular
              interactions.  From a biological perspective, they can be considered as a two-
              color stain that allows visualization of molecular interactions and
              identification of the functionalities involved in the interaction.  This
              analogy might become important in the future as the spatial imaging
              capabilities of the new technology are developed.  The project seeks to apply
              these new approaches to central problems in biochemistry where interactions
              play a central role.  There are many different molecular interactions but this
              proposal will focus on applying the new method to study of the spectral
              correlations that are induced by the hydrogen bonding in a biomolecule
              structure.  The correlations will be evidenced both in the relative intensities
              of cross-peaks in the 2-D spectra, thus reflecting the interactions between the
              two resonances, and in the line position shifts in line-narrowed
              cross-peaks.

At the molecular level, the structures of biomolecules depend
              to a large degree on the interactions known as hydrogen bonding.  Although
              hydrogen bonding may be understood in relatively simple systems, the nature and
              extent of hydrogen bonding in a complex three-dimensional biomolecular
              structure is far more difficult to characterize.  The spectroscopic experiments
              to be completed under the auspices of this project provide a sensitive and
              direct means to complete that characterization.  With the role of hydrogen
              bonding better understood, complex biomolecular structures may be modeled and
              perhaps even predicted for synthetic analogs of natural molecules.


