Title       : U.S-Korea Cooperative Science: Cooperation on Design of Quiet Supersonic Ludwieg
               Tube with Boundary Layer Removal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9816258

Award Number: 9816258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27051              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans G. Hornung   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9816258
Hornung
This award provides funds to permit Dr. Hans G. Hornung,
              Graduate Aeronautical Laboratories, California Institute of Technology
              (Caltech), to pursue with Dr. Chung-Hwan Chun, Department of Mechanical
              Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), for 36
              months, a program of cooperative research on the design of a quiet supersonic
              Ludwieg tube with boundary layer removal.  The Ludwieg tube principle is
              recognized as one of the prime candidates for producing supersonic flow with
              low free-stream noise in the laboratory.  This is necessary for the study of
              the important problem of transition from laminar to turbulent flow in the
              supersonic regime.  In order to achieve this high flow quality, special
              measures have to be taken to prevent the boundary layer in the supply tube from
              entering the accelerating nozzle.  Experiments performed recently at POSTECH
              have pointed the way to how this can best be done.  Once operational,
              facilities at both institutions will be used in teaching laboratory courses and
              for graduate student research.

Joint interests and ongoing projects to
              design and construct quiet supersonic Ludwieg tubes at Caltech and at POSTECH,
              and the complementary competence and expertise of the Caltech and POSTECH
              collaborators have led to the development of this project. Both institutions
              have separate support for the construction of their respective facilities. 
              This award will support travel of the PI and a graduate student to Korea in
              order to benefit from the exchange of information, in particular for using
              results from existing and new work done at POSTECH and Caltech in the designs. 
              This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative
              Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
              and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on
              problems of mutual benefit.  Korean participation is supported by the Korea
              Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
***


