Title       : SGER: GFP-Based Imaging for Cryobiological Research: A Cryosurgical Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1999   
File        : a9816734

Award Number: 9816734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84214              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. McGrath mcgrath@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9816734
McGrath
The short-term objective of the research is to demonstrate
              that a recently developed class of fluorescent molecular probes can be used as
              in situ tissue viability probes.  Specifically, green fluorescent protein (GFP)
              fluorescent probes developed by molecular biologists will be used in
              conjunction with an animal skin flap window chamber to allow continuous,
              dynamic, three-dimensional, in vivo tissue/tumor observations and measurements
              of fluorescence related to cellular viability.  It is expected that the
              successful demonstration of the feasibility of this approach would allow for
              exciting and novel subsequent research that would provide an unprecedented
              level of detail regarding freeze/thaw damage at the cellular and tissue level. 
              It is anticipated that the method will be especially productive when applied to
              issues related to vasculature injury, which are precisely the issues which
              state-of-the art research defines as one of the most important to address at
              this time.  Successful completion of this exploratory research is also expected
              to lead to an improved understanding of the another major shortcoming in our
              current knowledge: the mechanisms of freeze/thaw injury at "slow" freezing
              rates for isolated cells as well as for tissues in vitro and in vivo.  Finally,
              future developments of the method using GFPs and transfected
              immunologically-significant cells could lead to an improved understanding of
              certain aspects of cell-mediated cryoimmune responses, another important issue
              in cryosurgery and tissue freezing in general.

The long term goal of the
              research is aimed at developing cryosurgical devices and procedures which would
              make cryosurgery a cost effective, minimally invasive method for selectively
              killing tumors while avoiding injury to surrounding normal tissues and to do so
              for as many cancers as possible.  The current state of the art limits the
              optimization of existing cryosurgical devices and processes as well as the
              development of new devices and procedures that could extend the use of
              cryosurgery to other applications.  The limiting factor is that the mechanisms
              by which the freezing and thawing kill the cancerous tissue is not understood
              well enough.  Part of the reason that these mechanisms remain unknown is
              related to the relatively crude means currently used for assessing viability in
              tissues in vivo. 

This research grant will support a woman mechanical
              engineering graduate student who is conducting research on this topic for her
              Ph.D. thesis.  She intends to pursue an academic career in the field of
              biomedical engineering.  The research has already attracted two female
              undergraduate engineering students who are beginning to get involved with it
              and who have expressed interest to pursue graduate study as a part of the
              research group as a result.


