Title       : Mathematical Prediction of the Physical Properties of 
Materials and Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9816802

Award Number: 9816802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar P. Bruno bruno@ama.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The mathematical investigations to be conducted under the present 
award, which
              relate to theoretical and computational aspects of Partial 
Differential
              Equations (PDE), constitute a natural continuation of Dr. Bruno's
recent
              efforts on PDE problems in materials science, plasma physics 
and
              electromagnetism.  The proposed work in computational electromagnetism
              
involves generalization of high-order scattering solvers introduced recently
              
to a variety of complex three-dimensional systems arising in applications --
              
including deformed or eroded bodies, rough surfaces and oceans as well as
              
general surfaces and heterogeneous bodies in three dimensional
              space.
Further generalizations of related complex-analytic approaches to
              theoretical 
and computational aspects of plasma physics are also envisioned.
              
In the area of materials science, on the other hand, the work to be 
carried
              out relates mainly to problems of elasticity in metallic alloys, 
ceramics and
              other systems whose behavior is determined by an underlying 
microscopic
              structure. Specifically, Dr. Bruno will seek methods to compute 
the effects
              of microscopic inhomogeneous deformations and other microscopic 
misfits on a
              macroscopic body. These methods will then be used to study 
phenomena such as
              shape memory effect in polycrystals, thermal shatter in 
polycrystalline
              ceramics, hardening in magneto/electro-rheological fluids, 
microfracture at
              grain boundaries, etc.

The mathematical research that will performed with
              this award has applications 
that include radar, sonar, remote sensing,
              clutter removal in remote sensing 
applications, amongst others in the area of
              electromagnetism, as well 
as design of modern materials, toughened ceramics,
              smart structures,
actuators and sensors in the area of materials science.  The
              novel approaches 
that will be studied, developed and applied have been
              successfully
tested in a variety of configurations. They have already lead to
              theoretical 
advances and computational capabilities well beyond those
              available previously 
in the general areas of electromagnetic scattering and
              materials science and
will now be extended to more complicated situations and
              a wider class of materials
and media.  This work is to be pursued in
              collaboration with colleagues and 
postdoctoral associates in academia and
              industry in addition to graduate students. 
The students' participation will
              be designed to provide a sound general 
education in applied mathematics,
              including substantial expertise in design of 
state-of-the-art simulation
              capabilities.  Students will be involved in concrete 
applications in fields
              related to those mentioned above, and, in addition, 
by direct interaction
              with scientists from industry or national labs. 
Dr. Bruno will prepare
              researchers for careers in a wide range of areas of 
applied mathematics,
              ranging from the more theoretical to the engineering-oriented, 
and will
              provide them with a solid theoretical background, with a talent for
              
simulation, and with a strong commitment to applications in science and
              engineering.


