Title       : Evolution of Double Fertilization and Endosperm Development in Basal Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9816107

Award Number: 9816107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269598             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Friedman ned@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1118,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              FRIEDMAN
9816107

Along with the origins of vascular plants and seed plants,
              the origin of flowering plants (angiosperms) represents one of the three most
              significant evolutionary radiations of land plants during the last 450  million
              years. With over 250,000 extant species, angiosperms are the largest and most
              diverse group of plants to have evolved.  Paradoxically, we know less about the
              origin and early evolutionary history of flowering plants than we do about many
              considerably older groups of land plants.  Indeed Darwin's "abominable mystery"
              of the origin and early evolution of flowering plants, continues to challenge
              evolutionary biologists.  For 100 years, a "double fertilization" process that
              yields a diploid embryo and a triploid embryo-nourishing tissue called
              endosperm has been considered a defining feature of angiosperms.  Although
              endosperm is known to be a ubiquitous feature of angiosperms, the participation
              of a sperm in a second act of fertilization to produce endosperm has been
              carefully documented in only a relatively small number of derived monocot and
              eudicot taxa.  It is clear from recent phylogenetic analyses of basal
              angiosperms (and a survey of the plant fertilization biology literature) that a
              second fertilization event, long assumed to be an important and defining
              feature of flowering plants, has yet to be conclusively documented and
              characterized in any putatively basal angiosperm.  This presents an enormous
              gap in our knowledge of the most basic aspects of fertilization biology that
              characterize "primitive" angiosperms.   The proposed research seeks to
              determine whether a second fertilization event is associated with the
              initiation of endosperm tissue in basal angiosperms; or whether endosperm
              tissue in some basal angiosperms is strictly maternal in origin.  Modern cell
              biological approaches will be used to study and document the presence or
              absence of double fertilization in a broad cross section of basal angiosperm
              lineages.  If it is discovered that double fertilization is not a synapomorphy
              of angiosperms (and is instead a synapomorphy of a subset of angiosperms), this
              will have a significant impact on hypotheses of endosperm evolution, and ideas
              concerning the possible adaptive value (key innovation status) of this unique
              embryo-nourishing tissue in flowering plants.  A second component of the
              proposed research seeks to determine the developmental basis for the
              diversification of endosperm developmental patterns during the early
              evolutionary radiation of flowering plants.  Three typological categories have
              been used to circumscribe endosperm structure (e.g. free nuclear, cellular,
              helobial) for the past century.  However, there has never been an analysis of
              the developmental basis for transformations of one pattern into another.  Thus,
              little is known about key character transitions and the associated
              modifications of basic aspects of development (i.e. relationship of mitosis and
              cytokinesis, polarity, symmetry, and cell autonomous fates). Study of endosperm
              development across the phylogenetic spectrum of basal angiosperms will lead to
              new paradigms for the interpretation of the diversification and evolution of
              endosperm.  A concerted effort to understand comparative and evolutionary
              aspects of fertilization biology and endosperm development in "primitive"
              flowering plants has never been before been attempted.  As a consequence,
              virtually nothing is known of the early evolution and diversification of
              patterns of reproduction among angiosperms.  This comparative analysis of
              reproductive features from key basal angiosperm lineages will address important
              issues of character distribution and evolution associated with the remarkable
              evolutionary radiation of flowering plants; and will mark the first explicit
              attempt to circumscribe the most basic aspects of fertilization biology and
              endosperm development in the earliest angiosperms.

