Title       : RUI: Site-Directed Mutagenesis Studies of Firefly Luciferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1999   
File        : a9816898

Award Number: 9816898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Branchini brbra@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Branchini
MCB 9816898

The long-term goal of this project is to identify the
              major structural features of the bioluminescent protein firefly luciferase that
              enable the extraordinary biochemical process leading to the emission of visible
              light ranging in color from blue to red. Bioluminescence--the emission of light
              by living organisms--is a fascinating natural phenomenon that has enchanted
              children, challenged those who have tried to understand it, and provided the
              basis for an important research tool which has been applied in ways beneficial
              to human health. Examples of bioluminescence can be found throughout nature in
              bacteria, mushrooms, jellyfish, earthworms, clams, fish and beetles, including
              approximately 2,000 species of fireflies. The processes by which organisms
              convert chemical energy into visible light are diverse from a biochemical
              standpoint and appear to have many evolutionary origins. Generally, a
              luciferase enzyme, an organic luciferin substrate, molecular oxygen and various
              other cofactors combine to produce light. This study is designed to identify
              the functions of specific active site amino acid residues within the known
              primary sequence of the luciferase protein from the common North American
              firefly Photinus pyralis. Experiments will be carried out to identify amino
              acids involved in substrate binding and/or catalytic function leading to the
              highly efficient generation of light emission in the firefly. Recombinant DNA
              techniques will be used to create new luciferases by substituting different
              amino acids for the targeted ones. Amino acids selected for mutation comprise
              two groups, although their functions may be interrelated. The first group of
              amino acid residues are very likely at or near the luciferin binding site and
              may be involved in bioluminescence color determination. The other group of
              residues are invariant among a large group of enzymes which, like luciferase,
              catalyze the formation of adenylates from a diverse group of carboxylic acid
              substrates. Preliminary work has enabled the selection of the first targets for
              mutagenesis studies. This study should contribute to a better understanding of
              the relationship between the structure of the luciferase protein and its
              catalytic functions. Furthermore, results so obtained will be applicable to a
              basic understanding of firefly bioluminescence and the fundamental process by
              which living organisms convert chemical energy into light. The elucidation of
              firefly luciferase structure-function properties is important to fundamental
              biochemical processes with significant practical applications extending beyond
              the realm of bioluminescence. Moreover, the project will be carried out at a
              liberal arts college providing a very positive climate for the effective
              training of undergraduate students. Previous bioluminescence work has been
              highly appealing to students and should continue to be so. All of the student
              and professional participants will be involved in modern mainstream
              bioluminescence research and will contribute positively to increasing the
              numbers of well prepared graduates for entry into graduate programs and
              professional scientific careers.

