Title       : Dissertation Research: Another unique (sub) species? The Distribution of
               Morphological Variation Within and Among Species and the Pleistocene Hominid
               Fossil Record
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1999   
File        : a9816223

Award Number: 9816223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11733              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Delson delson@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The systematic position of the extinct human group known as the Neanderthals is
              a question which lies at the core of a major current paleoanthropological
              debate on modern human origins. Are these early people members of a species
              distinct from our own. Homo sapiens, or are they a subspecies or even a "race"
              of the sane species as living people? On order to approuch as answer to this
              longtime controversy, in the course of this research the PI will develop models
              of variation in cranial morphology within and between species. These models
              will be based on living primates, including geographic populations of modern
              humans, as well as geographic populations and species of chimpanzes, baboons
              and macaques. They should shed light on how morphological varitions is
              distributed at different hierarchical levels both within and among species. The
              measures of human populations from Western Eurasia and modern humans from the
              same geographic range, with the purpose of resolving the problems of the
              taxonomic position of Neanderthals and earlier European fossils human groups
              within the genus Homo. The temporal and occipital bones, where many proposed
              specialized neanderthal traits are located, will be studied quantitatively with
              the help of a three-dimensional digitizing system. Data will be collected in
              the form of three dimensional landmark and ridge curves coordinates and will be
              analyzed using an array of multivariate statistical techniques. The proposed
              Neanderthal traits will be evaluated for their distribution and variability in
              the fossil groups studie, as well as in recent humans. Predictive hypotheses
              about the taxonomic rank of Neanderthals and the earlier fossil human
              populations of Europe, as well as hypotheses about the relationships between
              these fossil group and modern Europeans, will be tested based on the models of
              variation.
