Title       : Regulation of the Gene for the L1 Cell Adhesion Molecule by Homeodomain and Pax
               Proteins in Response to Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9816896

Award Number: 9816896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Jones fjones@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9816896;  JONES, Frederick    Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) play an
              important role in organizing cells and their interconnections during
              development of the nervous system.  Alterations in the expression of CAMs
              accompany a number of developmentals abnormalities.  Understanding factors that
              regulate the genes for these molecules would further define their role in
              neural development.  A rich network of regulatory controls is responsible for
              neural patterns of CAM expression.  In this proposal, Dr. Jones will examine
              the expression of a particular CAM called L1.  Mutations in the L1 gene produce
              aberrant brain development linked to syndromes that include X-linked spastic
              paraplegia, X-linked hydrocephalus and mental retardation, and agenesis of the
              corpus collosum.  In preliminary experiments, the regulatory region of the L1
              gene including its promoter was identified and characterized.  The two DNA
              regulatory elements that were critical for its expression in the nervous system
              were determined.  These include a neuron-restrictive silencer element (NRSE)
              which prevents L1 expression in non-neural tissues and a binding site (HPD) for
              transcription factors of the homeobox and Pax families which is necessary for
              expression of L1 in the central nervous system.  The HPD is also necessary for
              induction of L1 expression by an important family of growth factors, the bone
              morphogenetic proteins (BMPs).  In this proposal, the nature of the protein
              factors that bind to the HPD and control L1 expression during neural
              development will be determined.  Specific factors that are responsible for
              regulation of L1 expression by BMP2 and BMP4 in neural and non-neural cells
              will be identified and it will be determine whether the NRSE and its binding
              factor REST/NRSF impede BMP activation of L1 expression in non-neural cells. 
              Finally, the role of the HPD during neural development will be examined in a
              number of ways.  The expression patterns of L1 transgenes containing and
              lacking the HPD will be compared in different transgenic mice.  BMP2, BMP4,
              their receptors (BMPR-I and BMPR-II) will be localized along with the
              particular homeobox and Pax transcription factors that bind to and regulate L1
              expression via the HPD.  Such experiments will help provide insight into the
              cellular contexts in which BMP signaling and transcriptional control by
              homeobox and Pax proteins regulate L1 expression in vivo.  Overall, the results
              from these experiments should provide a connection between an important family
              of extracellular signalling molecules, transcriptional regulators that are
              known to control regional patterns of neural differentiation, and the process
              of neural cell adhesion. 
