Title       : Kinetics and Mechanism of Main-Group Redox Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a9816471

Award Number: 9816471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Stanbury Stanbdm@mail.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9198,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David Stanbury, Department of Chemistry, Auburn University, is supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry
              Division for research into main-group electron-transfer reactions. The kinetics
              and mechanisms of selected chemical reactions will be probed in a series of
              redox reactions of simple main-group molecules in aqueous solution.  The
              reactions have been designed so that the rate limiting step is outer sphere
              electron-transfer. The systems include halogen, hypochloride, nitric oxide, and
              ozone reduction, plus thiol, thiocyanate, and bromite oxidation, which have
              been selected because they can contribute broadly to the understanding of the
              electron-transfer process. As several of the reactions appear to violate the
              prediction that there is a simple correlation between the reaction rates and
              the energy required to distort the molecules to a compromise geometry between
              the oxidized and reduced structures, Marcus Theory will be tested. 
              

Electron-transfer is one of the most basic reactions and is of importance
              in many areas of chemistry. This investigation will center on systems that are
              involved in chemical processes occurring in the environment and in biological
              systems. The details of how electrons are transferred to or from a molecule
              will be determined. This is of significance because several of the processes of
              interest to this project do not appear to follow predicted behavior or are ones
              that are unstudied. In order to understand the role of these compounds in the
              environment or biological systems, their fundamental behavior must be
              understood.	



