Title       : Regional Cooperative Activities in Support of Global Change Research in the
               Countries of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9816004

Award Number: 9816004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Banus   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerardo Kuntschik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U N Development Programme
	      1 UN Plaza
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal supports the development of global change  research capacity in
              eighteen countries in the Americas, and  represents a contribution of the
              United States Government to  a project grant from the World Bank's Global
              Environment  Facility (GEF) that is administered through the United  Nations
              Development Programme (UNDP) and executed by the  Inter-American Institute for
              Global Change Research (IAI),  an initiative to stimulate global change
              research among the  scientific institutions of the Americas.  The eligible 
              countries are: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,  Costa Rica,
              Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Jamaica, Mexico,  Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay,
              and Venezuela.  The proposal will support the training of specialists in the 
              use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) as tools for  conducting for global
              change research, using equipment  bought by the project and software donated by
              both the  Government of Brazil and the European Centre for Medium-  range
              Weather Forecasting (ECMWF).  The project will support  the purchase of
              reference materials for research, and the  purchase of a limited number of
              LANDSAT scenes for training  and research on global change issues.  The project
              will  support a small number of graduate students through a  scholarship
              program, and provide the backbone for a data and  information system for the
              exchange of global change data  resulting from IAI-sponsored research between
              members of  research teams in the Americas, including the USA and  Canada. 
              This project will specifically give US researchers  access to data sets from
              the rest of the Americas that have  previously been inaccessible.  The National
              Science  Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry  out U.S.
              responsibilities within the IAI.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
