Title       : Sedentarization and Resource Intensification in the Southwestern Lake Titicaca
               Basin: 5000-3200 BP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9816313

Award Number: 9816313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Aldenderfer m.aldenderfer@ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mark Aldenderfer will conduct two
              seasons of archaeological fieldwork in the Lake Titicaca Basin region of
              highland Bolivia. He will focus on the period between 5,000 and 3,200 years
              ago, a time interval during which populations abandoned a nomadic hunting and
              gathering way of life, developed a subsistence based on domestic plants and
              animals and established increasingly large settled villages. In the course of
              past research in the region Dr. Aldenderfer has conducted magnetometer surveys
              and located buried sites which span this time period. He will excavate three of
              these. In the process he will expose large horizontal areas which will allow
              determination of both group size and social organization. Analyses of both
              botanical and faunal remains will provide insight into the shift from wild to
              domesticated species. The team will employ new techniques in which
              identification of starch grains on stone tools used to prepare food compensate
              for the lack of macrobotanical remains characteristic of many archaeological
              sites.

The 'Neolithic Revolution", the shift from hunting and gathering to a
              more settled way of life based on domestic food species constitutes the most
              significant change in human prehistory. It provided the foundation which led to
              the rise of states and civilization. Archaeologists recognize that this
              transformation occurred independently, at roughly the same time, in many parts
              of the world and therefore believe the cause rests not in historical accident 
              but rather a more fundamental process. Through the comparison of individual
              independent cases it is hoped that causal mechanisms will be revealed. In Old
              World centers of domestication such as China and the Near East, both plant and
              animal species were transformed. In the New World, with one exception, only
              plant species were involved. In the Andes, including the Titicaca basin,
              camelid species as well as plants were domesticated and therefore the region
              provides a potentially important comparative case. Archaeologists have
              postulated various causes responsible for this worldwide shift and currently,
              it is not possible to choose among them. Dr. Aldenderfer believes that as the
              result of his proposed work in the Andes, a selection can be made.

This
              research is important because it addresses a highly significant anthropological
              question. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and result in
              the training of graduate students.

