Title       : Development of Perceptual Categorization in Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9816641

Award Number: 9816641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Quinn pquinn@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Jefferson Col
	      
	      Washington, PA  15301    412/222-4400

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The use of categories - for example, dog, animal, chair, furniture - is central
              to human cognition, underpinning the ability to perceive, remember, and reason.
               Questions concerning when and how categorical representations emerge in
              infancy is therefore  central to the study of perceptual and cognitive
              development.  The aim of this project is to further our knowledge about the
              development of complex, perceptually-based categorical representations in young
              infants.  The results will help us to understand how children learn, and should
              have relevance for issues concerning early childhood education, and
              developmental disabilities.

A series of experiments using the
              familiarization-novelty preference procedure will be conducted to study the
              categorical representations formed by infants at superordinate (e.g., animal,
              furniture), basic (e.g., dog, chair), and subordinate (e.g., German Shepherd,
              living room chair) levels across the first year of life. Specific experiments
              are planned to examine: (1) the ages at which infants first develop
              representations for superordinate, basic, and subordinate categories;  (2)
              whether representations for superordinate categories precede those at the basic
              and subordinate levels;  (3) whether methodological factors such as the number
              of exemplars presented to the infant underlie apparent differences in previous
              findings on the development of representations for superordinate and basic
              categories; and (4) what surface attributes of the stimuli (e.g., overall
              shape, particular parts, color, texture, etc.) infants extract when forming
              category representations at different levels.

