Title       : Drug Discovery, Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9816821

Award Number: 9816821
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua P. Rosenthal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NIH, Fogarty Intl Ctr
	      9000 Rockville Pike
	      Bethesda, MD  20892    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9816821  Rosenthal   Through this interagency transfer of funds, NSF supports
              the joint NSF and NIH program of International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups
              in its second cycle of activities. Six projects are anticipated for support, in
              Africa, Asia, and Latin America, each with three interwoven components: drug
              discovery, biodiversity conservation, and economic development. The loss of
              biological resources and critical habitat is widely acknowledged to be of
              global significance, undermining economic growth, degrading quality of life,
              and threatening human health. The problems are especially acute in developing
              countries, often those least capable of addressing the causes or mitigating the
              impacts of biotic degradation. Among the complex causes of environmental
              decline, the inadequate valuation of diverse biological resources is a
              significant contributing factor. Inadequate valuation stems from our poor
              understanding of the role of biodiversity in promoting human health and in
              sustaining viable ecosystems. Furthermore, biological resources must benefit
              indigenous populations if the resources are to be conserved. Consequently, the
              sustainable economic potential of biological resources, such as pharmaceuticals
              and agrochemicals from natural products, offers hope for biodiversity
              conservation by providing general benefits to local economies. Each of the
              funded projects in the ICBG program will implement surveys of biotic resources
              (species and habitats), along with screening programs for natural
              pharmaceutical products (and in many cases, for natural agrochemicals), and
              accompanied by local-community efforts in conservation and economic
              development. NIH-Fogarty Center for International Studies will administer this
              cooperative research program for the two agencies, under terms of the
              interagency agreement.
