Title       : Upgrade and Installation of Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer for Research in
               Chemistry of Radical-Cations and Undergraduate Instruction in Mass
               Spectrometric Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9816485

Award Number: 9816485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise Guinn dguinn@regis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen F. Cartier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Regis University
	      3333 Regis Blvd
	      Denver, CO  802211099    303/458-4100

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
              (CRIF)/Junior Faculty Program will allow the Department of Chemistry at Regis
              University, a primarily undergraduate institution, to upgrade and install a
              triple quadrupole mass spectrometer.  Stephen F. Cartier, a junior faculty
              member, will use this instrument to pursue fundamental research in the field of
              radical cation chemistry and introduce modern mass spectrometric techniques to
              the undergraduate chemistry curriculum.  His group will investigate diazoalkane
              and carbene radical cation systems using electrospray ionization-mass
              spectrometry.  Student research assistants will learn the fundamentals of
              electrospray ionization-triple quadrupole mass spectrometry and participate in
              data acquisition and analysis.  The department will also incorporate the mass
              spectrometer into upper level laboratory courses by adding several new
              experiments to the curriculum, including investigations of peptide sequencing,
              ionic transition-metal complexes, fullerenes and their derivatives, organic
              electrochemistry, and trace chemical detection.  

Mass spectrometry (MS) is
              a technique used to probe intimate structural details and to obtain the
              molecular compositions of a vast array of organic, bioorganic, and
              organometallic molecules. The addition of the technique of electrospray extends
              the range of MS to protein and nucleic acid molecular weights far beyond any
              other technique. The use of electrospray ionization in combination with high
              resolution provides one of the most powerful tools available for the
              characterization of compounds. The acquisition of this capability in mass
              spectrometry is essential for carrying out frontier research in many fields of
              chemistry.


