Title       : Mini Conferences on Harmonic Analysis, Real Analysis, and Related Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9816480

Award Number: 9816480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geraldo Soares de Souza desougs@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack B. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since 1984, faculty in the Department of Mathematics at Auburn University have
              organized a total of 25 one- and two-day conferences in harmonic analysis, real
              analysis, and related areas. The main purpose of these meetings was to enable
              mathematicians and mathematics students in the universities in the Southeast to
              interact with each other and with mathematicians and students from outside the
              region who have also been attending the conferences and to provide a forum for
              presentation of recent mathematical research. The National Science Foundation
              began regular support of these biannual meetings in 1986. The current award 
              will be used to continue this conference activity for the period 1998-2001.
              Three Miniconferences on Harmonic Analysis and Related Areas will be held at
              Auburn University during the fall semesters of 1998, 1999, and 2000. Three
              Miniconferences on Real Analysis and Related Areas will be held at Auburn
              University (spring 1999), University of Louisville (spring 2000), and
              California State University at San Bernardino (spring 2001), respectively. 
              Each meeting will feature hour talks by the (usually 2 or 3) Invited Principal
              Speakers plus contributed 20-minute talks and problem sessions. All of the
              funds provided by the grant will be used to pay expenses of participants
              attending the miniconferences.  Expenses for Principal Speakers are paid in
              full and local housing, local transportation, and some meals will be provided
              for all participants. Additional support in the form of additional food
              allowances and some travel support is provided for student participants. There
              are no registration fees.

These conferences have been effective in
              stimulating research activity of "professional research mathematicians" in the
              areas of mathematics represented.  Speakers have been attracted from over 30
              states and as many as 14 foreign countries in the past 13 years.  Possibly of
              more importance is the impact this activity has had on the faculty and students
              at the institution where the conferences are held as well as on faculty and
              student participants from other universities in the state and region.  Such
              participants usually make up about half the total who attend.  For the meetings
              held at Auburn, participants regularly come from UA Tuscaloosa, UA Birmingham,
              Troy State U, U West Ala, Jacksonville State U, U South Ala, Spring Hill Coll,
              U Mobile, U Montevallo, Ala State U, AU Montgomery, and Tuskegee Institute, as
              well as from institutions in the neighboring states of Florida, Georgia,
              Tennessee, and Mississippi.  For many of these  participants, especially the
              students, this opportunity for contact with mathematicians and mathematics
              students from other parts of the country is the most intellectually stimulating
              experience of the year.  The meetings to  be held in Kentucky and California
              are expected to yield similar regional benefits.

