Title       : Developing Statistical Methodology and an Analytical Framework for Evaluating
               Environmental Justice via a Longitudinal Study of Metropolitan New York City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9816560

Award Number: 9816560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299803             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. Fricker Ron_Fricker@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Naihua Duan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904072138    310/393-0411

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This three-year study will conduct basic methodological research into
              longitudinal and semiparametric statistical techniques applicable to the
              general problem of environmental justice.  In the process it will demonstrate
              methodological applicability on data from metropolitan New York City.  The
              overall goal is to define and disseminate statistically sound methods for
              studying the issues of environmental justice, including methodology that: (1)
              utilizes the geographic nature of the data, (2) evaluates and accounts for the
              social-economic status (SES) of the population in addition to racial variation,
              and (3) incorporates important temporal information.  The larger issue in this
              research is attempting to get beyond the reliance on association for causal
              inference commonly encountered in simple cross-sectional models.  In the past,
              a significant amount of this type of analysis has been conducted under the
              banner of environmental justice or environmental equity.  However, these
              studies fail to answer the true question of interest: Were minority populations
              unfairly imposed upon by design?  That is, did society place hazardous,
              polluting, or otherwise environmentally unfriendly sites in minority
              neighborhoods because they were minority neighborhoods?  A key element of the
              problem is the question of who was there first, the site or the minority
              community?  Secondarily, if the minority community was there first, was that
              community unfairly imposed upon at that time in relation to the rest of the
              region?  These questions must be adequately answered first before environmental
              injustice can be claimed.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
