Title       : Collaborative Research: S-Methylmethionine: A Central Intermediate in Higher
               Plant Sulfur and Methyl Group Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  2000   
File        : a9816075

Award Number: 9816075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Hanson adha@mail.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1168,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Our understanding of sulfur metabolism in plants lags far behind that of
              nitrogen and carbon metabolism.  Sulfur metabolism can now be explored via
              molecular-genetic approaches, which have recently shown how plants reduce
              sulfate and synthesize the essential amino acid methionine (Met).  There has
              been less progress in understanding plant sulfur metabolism from Met onwards. 
              This area is a hub of metabolism because sulfur-and one-carbon pathways
              intersect at the level of Met and its metabolites S-adenosylmethionine and
              S-methylmethionine (SMM).  It is also central to environmental biochemistry
              because Met and SMM are the starting points for the synthesis of
              dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), a compound that protects plants from salt
              stress and is of major significance to the biogeochemical sulfur cycle and
              global climate.  The lack of understanding of sulfur metabolism from Met
              onwards is the rationale for this project, which addresses two related
              problems: the functions of SMM, and the biosynthetic pathway of DMSP in
              flowering plants.  By clarifying the functions of SMM we will advance knowledge
              of how plants control their contents of Met, an essential amino acid in human
              and animal nutrition.  By show how some plants have evolved a novel pathway to
              convert SMM into the protective compound DMSP we will advance understanding of
              basic mechanisms of stress resistance and of the biochemistry of the sulfur
              cycle.  Two postdoctoral students and a Ph.D. student will be trained. 

