Title       : Collaborative Research: Bentho-Pelagic Coupling on the West Antarctic Peninsula
               Shelf: The Impact and Fate of Bloom Material at the Seafloor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9816049

Award Number: 9816049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313636             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. DeMaster Dave_DeMaster@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              OPP98-15823  P.I. Craig Smith
OPP98-16049 P.I. David DeMaster

Primary
              production in Antarctic coastal waters is highly seasonal, yielding an intense
              pulse of biogenic particles to the continental shelf floor.  This seasonal
              pulse may have major ramifications for carbon cycling, benthic ecology and
              material burial on the west Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) shelf.  Thus, we propose
              a multii-disciplinary program to evaluate the seafloor accumulation, fate and
              benthic community impacts of bloom material along a transect of three stations
              crossing the Antarctic shelf in the Palmer LTER study area.  Using a seasonal
              series of five cruises to our transect, we will test the following hypostheses:
               (1) A substantial proportion of spring/summer export production is deposited
              ont eh WAP shelf as phytodetritus or fecal pellets.  (2) The deposited bloom
              production is a source of labile particulate organic carbon for benthos for an
              extended period of time (months).  (3) Large amounts of labile bloom POC are
              rapidly subducted into the sediment column by the deposit-feeding and caching
              activities of benthos.  (4)  Macrobenthic detritivores sustain a rapid increase
              in biomass and abundance following the spring/summer particulate organic carbon
              pulse.  To test these hypotheses, we will evaluate seabed deposition and
              lability of particulate organic carbon, patterns of particulate organic carbon
              mixing into sediments, seasonal variations in macrofaunal and megafaunal
              abundance, biomass and reproductive condition, and rates of particulate organic
              carbon and silica mineralization and accumulation in the seabed.  Fluxes of
              biogenic materials and radionuclides into midwater particle traps will be
              contrasted with seabed deposition and burial rates to establish water-column
              and seabed preservation efficiencies for these materials.  The project will
              substantially improve our understanding of the spring/summer production pulse
              on the WAP shelf and its impacts on seafloor communities and carbon cycling in
              Antarctic coastal systems.

