Title       : Homeobox Gene Control of Skeletogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9816631

Award Number: 9816631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Lufkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term goal of this program is to understand the molecular mechanisms
              controlling chondrogenic differentiation and skeletogenesis and to characterize
              the genes involved in embryonic skeletal patterning with the belief that such
              basic knowledge will give us a fundamental understanding of the developmental
              control of skeletogenesis.

In Drosophila, certain of the major mesodermal
              lineages are specified by the bagpipe homeobox gene, which is a DNA-binding
              transcriptional regulator.  We have recently isolated from mouse a homologue of
              the bagpipe gene designated Bapx1.  We have mapped murine Bapx1 to the proximal
              end of mouse chromosome 5. Bapxl encodes a predicted protein of 333 amino acids
              and expression of Bapx1 RNA is first detectable in E8.0 embryos in the mesoderm
              of themost newly formed somites in the group of cells corresponding to the
              presclerotome, the precursor of the vertebrae.  Thus Bapx1 is one of the
              earliest developmental markers for the sclerotome portion of the somite.  Bapx1
              continues to be expressed well into organogenesis in essentially all
              cartilaginous condensations which will subsequently undergo endochondral bone
              formation of the axial, appendicular and facial skeleton.  The expression
              pattern of Bapx1 suggests that there are evolutionary conserved mechanisms of
              mesoderm specification and differentiation and that the mammalian Bapx1 gene
              has likely acquired an important developmental role in chondrogenesis and
              skeletal patterning.

To investigate the developmental role of the Bapx1
              gene, we will undertake the following specific aims:  (I) To complete the
              characterization of the genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and
              embryonic expression pattern of the Bapx1 homeobox gene in mouse.  (II)  To
              investigate the developmental role of the Bapx1 gene in chondrogenesis and
              embryonic skeletal patterning, by generating a loss-of-function null mutation
              (gene knockout) of the Bapx1 gene in mice.

