Title       : Function of Acoustic Signal Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9816708

Award Number: 9816708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Greenfield greenfie@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Snedden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Many male animals produce rhythmic songs that attract females for mating. Males
              are often aggregated and structured choruses result where males either
              alternate or synchronize their calls with those of neighbors. Several
              hypotheses have been forwarded to explain chorus structure, suggesting, for
              example, that males cooperate so as not to confuse females. These ideas have
              not proved true and an alternative, that males compete to jam competitors
              calls, has been supported. This competition is driven by a widespread
              (including humans) precedence effect whereby females respond to only leading
              calls. Males, then, compete to produce leading calls. We do not currently know
              how these precedence effects and male signaling strategies function in natural
              choruses and what benefit females derive (i.e. better genes) by mating with
              leading callers. Advances in digital technology will allow recording of large
              choruses in nature and analysis of relative call-timing strategies.
              Multi-speaker playback experiments utilizing computer-simulated choruses will
              be used to examine female mating preferences under natural conditions.

The
              findings of this study will increase our understanding of the operation of
              sexual selection in nature and the evolution of animal communication systems.
              Determination of the variance in, and the effects of density etc. upon, female
              preferences and male signaling will help us understand better the mechanisms
              that maintain genetic variance in populations, an issue important to both
              evolutionary and conservation biology.

