Title       : WORKSHOP: The 2nd Workshop on Enabling Technologies for Peta(fl)ops Computing to
               be held February 15-19, 1999 in Santa Barbara, CA at the Doubletree Hotel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9816114

Award Number: 9816114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Sterling tron@cacr.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Pflops-2 workshop, unlike its predecessor, will be a conference style
              meeting involving a large attendance (approximately 200) of experts in related
              fields.  Attendance will be open and a call for papers will be issued and
              disseminated widely.  There will also be invited participants and recognized
              leaders within their respective disciplines including technologies,
              architecture, system software, applications, and algorithms.  Findings from
              previous in-depth workshops and studies will be summarized.  Focus groups will
              provide detailed descriptions of complete systems approaches and the issues
              requiring resolution prior to implementation.  The call for papers will invite
              presentations on all aspects of petaflops-scale computing.  There will be
              invited talks on the areas that have been studied since the February 1994
              workshop.  In addition, presentations will be solicited in a few areas not yet
              considered by the Petaflops initiative, as well radically new approaches such
              as Quantum Computing , Quantum Dots, Nanotechnologies, Continuum Computing, and
              Metacomputing.  While these are incipient in development, their potential for
              future very high performance computing warrants attention.  Participants will
              work together to assess the relative risk and opportunities of alternative
              approaches and expose additional possible problems.  One area to be discussed
              will be reliability for systems of sufficient complexity to achieve a petaflops
              and will involve reliability enhancement, fault tolerance, and packaging
              issues.  

Pflops-2 will be held in Santa Barbara, California.  A formal
              report will be developed by the workshop leaders and editorial staff shortly
              after the conclusion of the workshop.  This workshop will concluded the formal
              Petaflops workshop series will provide a strong foundation of information for
              the computer science community and government program managers to establish new
              directions in high end computing research.

