Title       : Hydrogen Tunneling in Enzyme Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a9816791

Award Number: 9816791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith P. Klinman klinman@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9816791
Dr. Klinman's work has been focused in two directions: expansion of the
              data base of proteins that utilize quantum mechanical behavior to accelerate
              the cleavage of C-H bonds and understanding the role of protein structure in
              this process.  Increasingly the data point toward a revised view of enzyme
              catalysis in which we must move beyond a "classic" view of enzyme active sites.
               Such a "classic" picture depicts the protein catalyst as a "scaffold" for the
              presentation of multiple functional groups (cofactors, metals, amino acid side
              chains) to substrate;  these groups then participate in a reduction in the
              height of the free energy barrier  for the bond rearrangement steps.  This
              picture must now be revised to include a role for proteins in modulating
              barrier width, as well as height, i.e.;  the entire barrier shape is subject to
              modification as a means of providing rate acceleration.  A second feature of
              "classic" catalysis is treatment of the enzymatic reaction barrier as a static
              entity.  Increasingly there is evidence that  a role for protein dynamical
              modes must be incorporated in modulating reaction barrier shapes  and, hence,
              catalytic rate accelerations.

Studies of the relationship between protein
              structure and function are fundamental to future advances in modern
              biochemistry and molecular biology.  For example, use of mutagenesis to alter
              enzyme specificity and efficiency requires detailed understanding of the
              underlying paradigms for catalysis.  The chemical industry has also begun to
              benefit from the emergence of designed catalysts which have the potential to
              expand reaction types and stereoselectivities beyond those found in naturally
              existing protein catalysts.  Principles learned from studies of protein
              structure and function are directly applicable to the de novo  design of
              biomemetic systems.
 





