Title       : Collaborative Research, RUI: The Evolution of Sex Ratio and Gender in Selfing
               vs. Outcrossing Clarkia spp. (Onagraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a9816256

Award Number: 9816256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79277              (Estimated)
Investigator: Veronique A. Delesalle delesall@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Delesalle
9816256

Flowering plants have evolved a variety of mechanisms that
              ensure pollination.  Many species are "outcrossing", relying on insects to
              transfer pollen, while others are self-fertilized (each flower pollinates
              itself).  The evolution of self-fertilization from outcrossing ancestors has
              often had similar outcomes.  For example, animal-pollinated outcrossers often
              produce larger flowers and higher ratios of pollen to ovule production per
              flower than closely related self-fertilizing species.  

This study asks: 
              Does natural selection operate as predicted to generate more subtle genetic
              differences between selfing and outcrossing species?  Several predictions will
              be tested, including that outcrossers are more likely than selfers to exhibit
              an inverse relationship between the allocation of resources to male vs. female
              function.  Three pairs of closely related outcrossing and self-fertilizing
              species in the wildflower genus Clarkia  will be compared with respect to
              genetic variation in, and genetically based correlations among, male and female
              reproductive traits.  Greenhouse and field experiments will be conducted to
              examine constraints on the independent evolution of floral traits in
              outcrossers vs. selfers.

Ten to twelve undergraduate students and one
              post-doctoral researcher will receive training in evolutionary theory, plant
              breeding and reproduction, statistical analysis, and the presentation of
              results.  This study will contribute to our understanding of both the potential
              and limits of natural selection to effect evolutionary changes associated with
              mating system.

