Title       : U.S.- Korea Cooperative Research in Solar Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9816267

Award Number: 9816267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34008              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Goode pgoode@tesla.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale E. Gary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeong W. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Haimin Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jongchul Chae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9816267
Goode
This award provides funds to permit Drs. Philip R. Goode, Haimin
              Wang, Dale E. Gary, and Jeong Woo Lee, Department of Physics, New Jersey
              Institute of Technology, to pursue with Drs. Hong Sik Yun, Astronomy
              Department, Seoul National University, and Gwang-Son Choe, Tongmyong University
              of Information Technology, Pusan, for 36 months, a program of cooperative
              research in solar physics.  The scientific objectives of this research are to
              understand (1) the magnetic field configuration of the sun and how its
              evolution is associated with the formation, activation, and eruption of
              prominences, (2) the physical connection between prominences and flares, (3)
              the magnetic field changes associated with solar flares and (4) the energetic
              electrons in solar flares.  These investigations will contribute to
              understanding the role of magnetic fields in two big solar mysteries:
              prominences and flares.

The U.S. solar group at New Jersey Institute of
              Technology operates two major solar observatories: Big Bear Solar Observatory
              (BBSO) and the solar array at Owens Valley Radio Observatory (OVRO).  BBSO
              provides high-resolution observations of the photosphere and the chromosphere
              through the combined tools of photometry and polarimetry which will complement
              ongoing US Space missions which image the corona and the transition region. 
              The solar array at OVRO offers imaging spectroscopy at microwave wavelengths
              which provide key parameters of solar flares and active regions. The Korean
              solar astronomers will participate in aspects of data reduction and analysis of
              the large database gathered at these observatories using their expertise in
              radiative transfer applied to solar spectral lines, and modeling of solar
              filaments.  This project will strengthen collaboration between highly respected
              U.S. and Korean research teams.  This project is relevant to the objectives of
              the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean participation is supported
              by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
***

