Title       : Small Molecule Activation and Materials Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a9816134

Award Number: 9816134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $572300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Wolczanski ptw2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports studies of bond-making and bond-breaking events in organometallic and
              solid state compounds by Dr. Peter T. Wolczanski of the Chemistry Department,
              Cornell University.  Sterically demanding pi-donors, such as
              tributyl-substituted silyl groups, will be attached to reactive low-coordinate
              metal complexes, particularly those containing tungsten (III-VI). These
              compounds will be used to investigate the mechanism and selectivity of
              activation of C-H, C-C and C-N bonds.  A mechanistic assessment of
              beta-elimination of heteroatoms, a difficulty in Ziegler-Natta
              copolymerization, will provide information needed for prediction of
              functionality-tolerant systems.  Emphasis will be placed on extending the scope
              and potential applications of a new class of solid state materials containing
              "covalent, metal-organic networks" (CMON).  Titanium based 2- and 3-dimensional
              compounds will be explored as designer solid-state catalysts, since these have
              already shown some potential in olefin oligomerization.  

New soluble metal
              complexes will be synthesized and their reactivity in small molecule catalysis
              will be determined.  In addition to obtaining fundamental knowledge important
              in organometallic chemistry, the results are relevant to catalysis in the
              petroleum industry and solid state chemistry.  Students involved in the project
              will learn skills in manipulation of air-sensitive compounds, spectroscopic
              characterization, structure determination, computer simulation of mechanistic
              investigations, and computational modeling.
