Title       : Positional Cloning of a Lepidopteran Gene Conferring Resistance to a Bacterial
               Toxin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a9816056

Award Number: 9816056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Gahan glinda@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Heckel  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Certain strains of the gram-positive sporulating bacterium Bacillus
              thuringiensis (Bt) produce protein toxins with insecticidal activity against
              Lepidoptera (the insect Order containing butterflies and moths). After binding
              to specific sites on the midgut epithelium of larvae, the toxins insert into
              the lipid bilayer to create pores, which eventually lyse the epithelial cells
              and kill the insect. Although Bt toxins have received a great deal of study
              because of their potential use in biological control of insect pests, little is
              known about the toxin binding targets in the insect membrane, or their
              molecular interaction with toxin that leads to pore formation. Toxin-resistant
              strains of lepidopteran species that are normally susceptible offer unique
              opportunities for studying the toxin mode of action.
The noctuid moth
              Heliothis virescens is typically highly susceptible to the Bt toxin Cry1Ac, but
              the laboratory selected YHD2 strain is up to 10,000-fold resistant.
              Approximately 80% of the resistance can be accounted for by a single locus,
              BtR-4, which has been mapped on Linkage Group 9 of H.virescens.  BtR-4 is the
              most potent Bt-resistance gene known in any insect. Moreover, the resistant
              YHD2-type allele at the BtR-4 locus is present in field populations of
              H.virescens at the surprisingly high frequency of 10-3. Yet in no insect
              species is the identity, protein product, or normal physiological function of
              any Bt resistance gene known.

          The long-term goal is to use a
              genetic approach on Bt-resistant insect strains to study the mechanism of toxin
              action.  Techniques of positional (map-based) cloning will be used to isolate,
              sequence, and characterize the BtR-4 gene. The specific objectives are to 1)
              localize BtR-4 to within a 0.5 cM region of Linkage Group 9 by fine-scale
              mapping, 2) assemble a contig of BAC (bacterial artificial chromosome) clones
              spanning the BtR-4 region, 3) isolate and sequence expressed sequences within
              the contig, and 4) confirm one of these candidates as the actual BtR-4 gene by
              sequence comparison and experimental approaches.

This project will produce
              the first Bt resistance gene cloned from any species, an advance that will
              enable a more detailed molecular characterization of the mechanism of Bt toxin
              action.  In the process, it will serve as a pioneering illustration of the
              feasibility of the map-based cloning approach in a nondipteran insect. The
              location and identity of the other expressed sequences within the contig
              covering the BtR-4 region will comprise one of the first detailed physical maps
              of a chromosomal region from a Lepidopteran. The physical and genetic maps
              resulting from this project, along with the vast data available for Dipteran
              species such as Drosophila melanogaster, will enable the first comparison at
              this level of genomics between two Orders within the insects.

