Title       : Children's Math Worlds: Developing Children's Mathematical Understanding in
               English and in Spanish from Kindergarten through Grade 3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a9816320

Award Number: 9816320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark Saul                               
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen C. Fuson fuson@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9816320
FUSON

This project for instructional materials development presents
              plans to create supplementary materials focusing on number and computation for
              grades K-3 (and beyond), in support of the Mathematics Equity Pedagogy (Fuson,
              1997).  The project will consist of two sets of supplementary materials that
              could be used independently but will link together consecutively.  Each set of
              materials will consist of a teacher's guide, a children's book (consumable),
              and a book for parents that could be used independently of the other books. 
              One set tentatively entitled "Developing Numerical Patterns and Strategies"
              will function at kindergarten and grade 1 (and at grade 2 and later for those
              children who still need rapid and accurate sums and differences to 18).  This
              set will develop children's understandings and use of patterns for small
              numbers under ten, counting on and counting up, the prerequisite skills
              necessary for the ten-structured strategies used so effectively by East Asian
              children.  Activities will be set within word problem settings so that language
              competence is also developed.  These materials should enable all children to
              add and subtract rapidly and with understanding using all single-digit numbers
              by the spring of Grade 1.

The second set of books is tentatively titled
              "Multidigit Thinking, Calculating, and Problem Solving."  Current performance
              data indicate that multidigit addition and subtraction continue to be a concern
              both with traditional textbooks and with reform approaches (e.g., 2-digit
              subtraction in spring of Grade 2 is only 38% correct).  The materials will use
              hundred-boxes, ten-sticks, and dot drawings to help children build place-value
              meanings as they develop multidigit addition and subtraction strategies.  This
              second set of materials can begin to be used in late first grade and will be
              able to be used to introduce or review these areas in grades 2 through 5 (where
              some children still are making errors). Differentiated directions will be given
              according to whether the teacher is teaching initially or reviewing the topic
              in later grades.  The project materials will be published in English and
              Spanish.  The project materials address the current severe under-representation
              in mathematics and science occupations of Latinos and other minority groups.
              




