Title       : The Role of HCF in Transcriptional Activation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9816856

Award Number: 9816856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angus C. Wilson wilsoa02@popmail.med.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wilson

Host cell factor (HCF) was first discovered as a cellular cofactor
              required by the herpes simplex virus transactivator VP16 to activate the viral
              immediate-early promoters. HCF is a large multidomain protein and is expressed
              ubiquitously. Recent analysis of a cell line (tsBN67) with a
              temperature-sensitive point-mutation in HCF has revealed an essential role in
              promoting progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. These cells grow
              normally at the permissive temperature but undergo a G1/G0 arrest when
              incubated at the non-permissive temperature. The tsBN67 mutation in HCF does
              not alter protein stability but prevents association with VP16. This suggests
              the virus has targeted a critical surface on HCF required for cell cycle
              progression, providing a mechanism to link the control of viral replication
              with the proliferative capacity of the host cell. A strong candidate for the
              cellular equivalent of VP16, is a ubiquitous basic-leucine zipper protein known
              as LZIP.  Like VP16, LZIP is an extremely potent transcriptional activator and
              recent work from this laboratory has shown that this activity is largely
              dependent on recruitment of HCF. This suggests that HCF functions as a
              coactivator or bridging factor connecting LZIP to other components of the
              general transcription apparatus. This proposal addresses the mechanism by which
              HCF augments activation domain function using a combination of in vitro and in
              vivo approaches. Experiments will be performed to identify additional
              coactivator proteins that function in concert with HCF and to determine whether
              HCF facilitates their recruitment to LZIP through direct protein-protein
              contacts. Domains in HCF involved in coactivator function will be mapped using
              a battery of HCF mutants. Finally, the LZIP-coactivator complex will be
              reconstructed using defined components and the role of enzymatic functions such
              as histone acetyltransferase activity will be examined to determine whether HCF
              may facilitate the recruitment or processivity of RNA polymerase . Overall,
              these studies will significantly enhance our understanding of the cellular
              function of HCF and provide deeper insight into the molecular mechanisms that
              underlie transcriptional activation and the regulation of the cell
              cycle.

The control of gene expression during development, differentiation
              and normal cell physiology is governed by a complex array of sequence-specific
              transcription factors. Exactly how these proteins stimulate the process by
              which specific target genes are copied into RNA (transcribed) remains unclear.
              An important layer of complexity not anticipated by earlier studies of
              bacteria, involves a heterogeneous class of accessory proteins that modulate
              the activity of individual transcription factors. The proposed research will
              focus on understanding the mechanism of action of host cell factor (HCF), a new
              and interesting example of this important class of regulatory protein. HCF is
              an essential player in the initiation of a cascade of gene expression leading
              to replication of herpes simplex viruses and also for cell cycle progression in
              mammalian cells. The long-term goal of these studies is to understand the
              molecular mechanisms by which HCF regulates gene expression and cellular
              proliferation.

