Title       : Investigation of Krasnyi Yar, Kazakhstan: A Possible Locus for Early Horse
               Domestication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9816476

Award Number: 9816476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210240             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Olsen olsens@carnegiemuseums.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Sandra Olsen and her colleagues
              will conduct three seasons of excavation at the archaeological site of Krasnyi
              Yar located near the city of Kokshetau in Kazakhstan. The goal of the research
              is to trace the origins of horse domestication. This is one of the least
              understood aspects of Eurasian prehistory and yet the impact of that innovation
              changed the world enormously. To date, prehistorians do not know with any
              precision when or where incipient horse domestication arose. The forest-steppe
              and steppe zones East of the Ural mountains were prime habitat for wild horses
              after the end of the last ice retreat and the adaptive success of wild horses
              over any other large game in the West Siberian Plain of Russia and northern
              Kazakhstan led to heavy dependence on horses as a source of hunted food by
              local cultures. During the Neolithic period in the fourth millennium B.C.
              between 40% and 90% of faunal assemblages at archaeological sites consist of
              horse. This intensive hunting may have set the stage for horse domestication by
              providing indigenous cultures with access to plentiful wild herds and the
              opportunity to gain an intimate knowledge of equine behavior. The large
              Neolithic site of Krasnyi Yar is virtually intact and consists of over a
              hundred pithouse dwellings. Sites of this type are rich in well preserved
              faunal remains as well as stone and bone artifacts. Over the course of three
              field seasons Dr. Olsen and her colleagues will excavate three of these houses
              and test outlying areas. The analysis will focus on the faunal remains and
              include an intensive metric study, demographic profiling, determination of
              season of death and a detailed study of butchery practices. Evidence of
              domestication will be sought primarily in the careful reconstruction of herd
              demography and in assessment of the distribution of skeletal elements. Analysis
              of other features at the site will be directed toward reconstructing
              subsistence, mobility and connections with more distant groups. 

The
              question of horse domestication is of far reaching historical and
              anthropological significance. Domestication and subsequent use of horses for
              transport enabled people to exploit much broader territories than ever before
              possible. Their use for carrying both people and objects transformed steppe
              dwellers into a powerful mobile force who had an impact far beyond the
              boundaries of the central steppe and provided new vectors for the movement of
              resources, finished goods and cultural traditions across vast distances into
              western Asia and Europe. This research will shed new light into the origins of
              this process.

