Title       : Poly (3-Hydroxybutyrate)/Polyphosphate Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9816053

Award Number: 9816053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosetta N. Reusch RNREUSCH@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ion channels are macromolecular pores in membranes that permit transfer of
              selected ions through the lipid bilayer.  Most of these channels are composed
              of proteins or peptides.  However, a non-proteinaceous calcium-selective
              channel, composed of two simple linear homopolymers (poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)
              and inorganic polyphosphate), has been discovered in Gram-negative and
              Gram-positive bacteria.  Both polymers are ubiquitous components of prokaryotic
              and eukaryotic cells, and each has unique physical-chemical properties relevant
              to ion conduction.  The two polymers associate to form channels in lipid
              bilayers in vitro that exhibit voltage-activated conductance, are selective for
              divalent over monovalent cations, are permeant to Ca, Sr, and Ba, and are
              blocked by transition metal cations.  These studies will define the structural
              determinants and basic molecular mechanisms that give rise to these properties.
               The polymer components, either isolated from bacteria or prepared
              synthetically, will be incorporated into lipid bilayers, and single-channel
              currents will be examined by voltage-clamp techniques under different defined
              conditions.  Studies are designed to determine how factors that influence
              bilayer fluidity affect conductance, permeance, selectivity, and
              voltage-gating.  Additional studies will determine the influence of pH on
              cation selectivity, the way Mg and other cations block Ca conductance, and the
              possible effects of agents known to be agonists and antagonists of protein
              calcium channels.  These studies of a simple but apparently ubiquitous
              prokaryotic channel should provide insights into the general mechanisms of ion
              transfer across bilayers.  The channels may be a model for a 'minimalist'
              calcium channel that was the progenitor during evolution of the protein calcium
              channels of eukaryotes.

