Title       : Houston Urban Learning Initiatives in a Networked Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a9816227

Award Number: 9816227
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14998790           (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn E. Stripling jmache@houstonisd.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              ROD E. PAIGE  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert R. Stockwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Houston Indept Sch Dist
	      3830 Richmond Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770275864    713/623-5261

NSF Program : 7358      URBAN SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Houston Independent School District (HISD) proposes to advance significantly
              the educational system in mathematics science and technology for all its
              students through the Houston Urban Learning Initiatives in a Networked
              Community (HU-LINC). HU-LINC will accomplish this task through a challenging
              curriculum based on the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) required by
              state law. The TEKS curriculum carefully develops concepts and skills across
              grade levels and focuses on constructing knowledge using hands-on inquiry and
              concrete models culminating in relevant applications of the knowledge and
              skills. To ensure that the District's instructional workforce, support staff,
              and the community at large understand every objective of TEKS, HISD has begun
              the development of Project CLEAR (Clarifying Learning to Enhance Achievement
              Results). The need to develop Project CLEAR was based on a key finding that
              multiple interpretations exist among administrators, teachers and parents
              regarding what should be taught through the state-mandated curriculum. District
              administrators and teachers are developing the document in conjunction with
              consultants from institutions of higher education and the statewide systemic
              initiative (SSI). Project CLEAR will assist all K-12 teachers of mathematics
              and science in determining the knowledge, skills, content, assessment, and
              equipment and materials necessary to implement a standards-based mathematics
              and science program for all students.

HU-LINC intends to provide
              professional development and other support activities to administrators,
              counselors, teachers, students, and parents to ensure that Project CLEAR
              occasion full implementation of the goals and objectives of TEKS. To ensure
              full implementation of TEKS, HISD has adopted district-wide policies that
              effect school and district accountability, resource allocations, and increased
              graduation requirements relative to the teaching, learning, and achievement of
              mathematics and science. Special efforts have also been undertaken to garner
              and maintain support from the community to promote educational reforA and help
              sustain support and enrichment for all students.

To accomplish the goals of
              the new strategic plan, HU-LINC established three goals to meet the challenges
              facing the District. The goals are to: (1) significantly improve teaching and
              learning that leads to high achievement in challenging science and mathematics
              by all students, enabling significantly more students to pursue careers in
              science, mathematics and technology; (2) establish and expand a unified system
              of coalitions that link students, teachers, families, and community members in
              Houston's educational institutions with the city's vast and diverse resources
              in meaningful ways; and (3) establish an infrastructure that aligns the
              district's policies, procedures, organizational structures, curricula,
              professional development and evaluation systems, and resources in order to
              sustain the highest quality of student learning of rigorous science,
              mathematics, and technology.

