Title       : Manipulation of Cell Division with Static Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9816986

Award Number: 9816986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Valles valles@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly L. Mowry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              While many aspects of mitosis and cytokinesis have been elucidated, a vast
              amount of ongoing work focuses on these fundamental processes showing that much
              remains for discovery and resolution. Advances in microscopy and
              immunocytochemistry and techniques for the mechanical, optical and biochemical
              manipulation of cells and their components have traditionally led and continue
              to lead to substantial progress in this field. Valles and coworkers recently
              discovered that early cleavages (cell divisions) of embryos of the frog,
              Xenopus laevis, align with a large static magnetic field. The reorientation of
              cleavages depends systematically on field strength and orientation and does not
              depend on field gradients. This novel discovery presents opportunities for
              dissecting interactions between cells and magnetic fields and potentially
              developing a new tool for manipulating cells and studying cell division. The
              two specific objectives address these opportunities.

Specific Objective 1:
              Determine the cleavage plane reorientation mechanism- While some systematics of
              this effect have been established, the mechanism has not. To achieve this goal,
              they will subject sets of frog embryos to magnetic fields during different
              periods of their cell cycle to identify when the influence of the magnetic
              field is strongest. They will use immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy
              techniques to image the orientation and morphology of the microtubules of
              embryos exposed to the magnetic field to determine the influence of the
              magnetic field. 

Specific Objective 2: Determine whether microtubules in
              vivo align with a magnetic field -Cellular structures that are likely to be
              involved in the reorientation by magnetic field are those composed of
              microtubules. Microtubules comprise a major portion of the mitotic apparatus
              and recent measurements have shown that individual microtubules align in vitro
              in a magnetic field. Because of the importance of microtubules to the cleavage
              plane reorientation effect and to many other cell processes, the second goal is
              to image the microtubules in magnetic field exposed frog embryos to discern
              whether or not they are tending to align with the field direction.
              Immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy techniques will be used to image
              the astral microtubules in field exposed, Xenopus embryos and compare the
              observed microtubule shapes to those calculated using the known properties of
              microtubules. If the microtubules do align then the possibility exists that
              other microtubule dependent cell processes can be manipulated with magnetic
              fields. If they do not, then the microtubules in living systems have properties
              that differ from their in vitro counterparts. Examining the source of such
              differences can provide insight into in vivo processes.

Together, these
              experiments should provide fundamentally new insight into the interactions
              between magnetic fields and matter that might lead to general rules about those
              interactions and the potential for "magneto-manipulation" as a viable research
              tool.

This project is jointly supported by the Cell Biology Program in the
              Division of Molecular Biosciences, Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO)
              and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) in the Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).

