Title       : Biogenesis and Function of Cortical Granule Contents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9816683

Award Number: 9816683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Wessel rhet@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cortical granules are secretory vesicles unique to eggs and oocytes. At
              fertilization they secrete their contents to form both a permanent block to
              polyspermy and to provide protection for early embryonic development. In this
              application we will address three questions: What is in the cortical granule?,
              What does it do?, and How does it get in there? We will use sea urchin eggs and
              oocytes to answer these questions because in this animal we can obtain
              approximately 106 eggs and 1 ~ oocytes per female, and because the
              approximately 15,000 cortical granules in each oocyte are synchronous in
              biogenesis, in translocation to the surface, in docking to the plasma membrane,
              and in secretion in response to sperm or parthenogenic activation. This system
              offers a unique opportunity to examine the molecular mechanism of cortical
              granule biogenesis and flinction. The sea urchin oocyte is also the only oocyte
              in which 1) cDNA clones have been isolated that encode content and membrane
              proteins specific to the cortical granules; 2) the cortical granules can be
              isolated in a fimctional form; and 3) in vitro culture and maturation of
              oocytes and direct visualization of cortical granules is possible. In addition
              to the synchrony of vesicle biogenic steps, cortical granules are different
              from most other secretory vesicles in that they are nonrecycling, and contain
              over a dozen different proteins that are specific to cortical granules and are
              subcompartmentalized within the vesicle. Three specific aims are
              proposed:

1.	Identify the contents of the cortical granules. We will focus
              on the cDNA cloning of the three fertilization envelope proteins: proteohaisin,
              p90 and p63. These are major envelope proteins that must quickly interact with
              each other and with the vitelline layer to form an impenetrable layer within
              seconds of fertilization.

2.	Characterize the function and regulation of the
              cortical granule proteins. We will determine the mechanism of fertilization
              envelope construction, a specialized extracellular matrix, by identiiying
              domains of cortical granule protein interactions that are responsible for
              envelope construction. We will then use this information to examine the
              hierarchy, and identity of interactions with the vitelline layer to understand
              the molecular mechanism for the rapid condensation of the fertilization
              envelope.

3.	Determine how the contents are packaged selectively into
              cortical granules. We will make use of the newly identified cDNA clones to
              determine the mechanism of cortical granule biogenesis. Selective protein
              targeting into cortical granules will be studied using recombinant, tagged
              cortical granule proteins. The tags will include the myc epitope and the green
              fluorescent protein, and we will follow the fates of wild-type and modified
              cortical granule protein sequences during cortical granule biogenesis. We will
              also use these tagged proteins, in conjunction with biotinylated amino acid
              markers, to assay cortical granule biogenesis. Because of our recent success
              with in vitro maturation of sea urchin oocytes, we will also be able to study
              cortical granule protein function in vivo.

