Title       : GOALI Retention Processes in Gas-Liquid and Reversed-Phase Liquid
               Chromatography. A Molecular Simulation Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9816328

Award Number: 9816328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joern Ilja Siepmann siepmann@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Schure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9162,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project is
              supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  The work of Professor Siepmann and the work of
              Dr. Schure is a collaboration between the University of Minnesota -- Twin
              Cities and Rohm and Haas on an extremely important area of analytical
              application.  This study of the basic retention mechanisms in gas
              chromatography and reverse phase liquid chromatography will provide an ability
              to predict retention times based on a molecular-level understanding of
              partition.  Professor Siepmann and his students at the University of Minnesota
              will work in collaboration with Dr. Schure at Rohm and Haas to systematically
              model the adsorption and partition properties of classic systems studied in
              separation science, such as the interactions of linear and branched alkanes
              with a non-polar hydrocarbon-based stationary phase.  This work will be
              extended to studies of homologous series of alkanes, alcohols, and
              alkylbenzenes.  Students involved in this research project will be exposed to
              the impact and development of separations science within a major chemical
              company.  Mentoring of these students by industrial scientists will be
              invaluable to them as they make career decisions, and provide them with an
              added perspective beyond the university.  The area of separations science in
              general, despite its predominance in the industrial setting, is
              under-represented in academic research programs.  Students working with
              Professor Siepmann and Dr. Schure will gain especially valuable professional
              expertise.

The ability to separate two compounds by gas chromatography or
              reverse phase liquid chromatography is based on differences in adsorption of
              the sample molecules onto a stationary support.  Understanding of this process
              at the molecular level is incomplete.  This collaborative project between
              Siepmann (academic) and Schure (industry) will increase the level of
              understanding, and allow prediction of the extent of separation between sample
              molecules by gas chromatography.


