Title       : Evolution of Sex Chromosomes in the Genus Silene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9816864

Award Number: 9816864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah R. Grant sgrant@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In contrast to animals which usually have two sexes, male and female, a number
              of reproductive strategies coexist in the higher plants. The majority of higher
              plants are hermaphrodites which can reproduce by self-fertilization, but some
              have evolved means to favor outcrossing. The moneoecious and dioecious species
              produce male and female flowers instead of hermaphroditic flowers. In dioecious
              plant species, individuals produce either only male or only female flowers.
              Genetic differences distinguish the sexes and structurally distinct sex
              chromosomes control sexual differentiation in several dioecious species.
              Because plant species with divergent reproductive strategies are often closely
              related, even within the same genus, the evolutionary changes required to
              evolve a new reproductive strategy can be studied by comparison of gender
              determination mechanisms in closely related plant species. The evolutionary
              strategy used by the plant genus Silene will be investigated by comparison of
              the organization of chromosomes in species with different sexual modes. Silene
              is an excellent model for studies of the evolution of reproductive strategy
              because it includes species that are true hermaphrodites, gynodioecious
              (hermaphroditic and female individuals coexist) or dioecious (males and females
              coexist). Phylogenetic studies indicate that the Silene evolved from a
              gynodioecious population. However, truly hermaphroditic species are found in at
              least two distinct sections and closely related dioecious species exist in two
              other sections, the Elisanthe and the Otites. Dioecious species in both
              sections have sex chromosomes. Because all Silene species have 2n = 24
              chromosomes, the sex chromosomes of each dioecious species most likely evolved
              from an autosome pair. However, both molecularly and morphologically based
              phylogenies indicate that the Otites and the Eilsanthe diverged independently.
              Thus their sex chromosomes may have evolved from different autosome pairs.
              Comparison of chromosome structure in plants of this genus provides a unique
              opportunity to identify the evolutionary changes that lead to a switch in
              reproductive strategy and the evolution of sex chromosomes.  The major goals of
              this research are: 1) Compare the positions of low copy sequences linked to the
              Lisene latifolia Y chromosome to the positions of homologous sequences on the
              chromosomes of a broadly distributed sample of other Silene species 2) Identify
              additional sex chromosome-linked makers to extend the comparison of chromosomal
              positions 3) Use FISH to characterize Y-linked sequences deleted in sex
              determination mutants of S. latifolia and 4) Identify sex chromosomes of S.
              otites and compare gene organization of those chromosomes to the sex
              chromosomes of S. latifolia.

These studies will lay the groundwork for a
              molecular characterization of evolution of sex chromosomes in plants. The
              results can be compared to data available on evolution of sex chromosomes in
              Drosophila and mammals in order to reveal the general constraints that guide
              the evolution of sex chromosomes. 

