Title       : Molecular Specificity of Pheromone/Receptor Interactions for Mating in
               Schizophyllum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9816659

Award Number: 9816659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlene A. Raper craper@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      The overall aim of this research is to understand how a
              simple
eukaryote distinguishes itself from many other nonselves in
              regulating
mating and development.  A specific objective is to elucidate the
              molecular
mechanism by which the B mating-type genes trigger sexual
              development in
the wood rotting mushroom Schizophyllum commune.   The B genes
              are in two
linked loci, Ba and Bb, each of which has nine different versions,
              or
specificities, in the world-wide population.  A mating pair must
              be
different at either Ba or Bb to be compatible.  Analyses of  two
              specificities of
each locus has revealed genes for pheromones and pheromone
              receptors similar
 to those found in other fungi.  Each locus contains a
              single pheromone
receptor gene and several pheromone genes.  This multiplicity
              of pheromone
and receptor genes appears to be unique to the higher
              basidiomycete fungi.
Molecular analyses to date indicate that as few as one or
              two amino
acid changes in either a pheromone or receptor molecule can be
              correlated
with a switch in mate recognition and signaling of sexual.  The
              proposed
research is divided into three parts:  1) A comprehensive comparison
              of
sequence and function for a variety of natural and previously
              generated
mutant variants of pheromones and receptors to identify amino acid
              residues
in positions relevant to pheromone/receptor interactions.  2) Test
              the
effects of substituting various amino acids at specific sites that could
              be
relevant to pheromone/receptor recognition for each type of molecule,
              using
the methods of site-directed mutagenesis and DNA-mediated transformation
              in
S. commune.  3) Exploit a recently assembled
              heterologous
pheromone-response reporter system in the yeast Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae to
generate new mutant variants of S. commune pheromones and
              receptors and
efficiently characterize their effects on ligand/receptor
              interaction.     

