Title       : Collaborative Research: Melanopsin - A Novel Deep Brain Opsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9816071

Award Number: 9816071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Annabell Segarra                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26240              (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Hayes hayesw@cua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Environmental light levels can be detected by systems other  than the eye
              in non-mammalian vertebrates.  These extra-retinal  photoreceptors often are
              used by non-mammalian vertebrates to  synchronize biological rhythms, and to
              control rapid changes in  skin pigmentation for camouflage.  The photopigment
              in the retina  of the eye in vertebrates includes proteins called opsins, but
              the  photopigments for this extra-retinal light sensitivity are  unknown. 
              Recently a new opsin protein molecule in the brain, skin  and eye of frogs has
              been found, and is named melanopsin because  it was isolated from the pigment
              cells in the skin called  melanophores.  This collaborative research project
              uses techniques  of gene expression and molecular biology along with microscopy
              and  immunochemistry to see how light interacts with the expression of  the
              melanopsin in frogs.  Tests will show whether melanopsin  expression is
              required for the camouflage response of pigment  dispersion in the
              melanophores, and whether melanopsin expression  is required for light to
              suppress the output of the hormone  melatonin from the pineal gland of the
              brain, which is important  for photic control of biological rhythms. 
              Transgenic tissues will  be tested to see whether those that over-express
              melanopsin are  hypersensitive to light while those with under-expression are 
              insensitive to light.     Results will be important for understanding how
              animals respond  to light without relying only upon the eyes, and will have a
              broad  impact not only on neuroendocrinology and sensory biology, but on  cell
              phyisiology and behavioral biology, and comparisons of  molecular structure
              could be important to evolutionary biology.
