Title       : Natural Products Chemistry of Marine Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a9816169

Award Number: 9816169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Fenical wfenical@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. John Faulkner  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the investigation of the sources of marine natural
              products for which a symbiont origin has been claimed by use of novel methods
              developed for the study of symbiotic associations. In addition to three studies
              in progress that involve lithistid sponges, pyridoacridine alkaloids in sponges
              and jaspamine, six related studies will be carried out involving either
              specific metabolites or general classes of chemicals that were selected for
              potential impact on marine biology and biotechnology.  Further chemical
              investigations of lithistid sponges are expected to yield new cyclic peptides
              and glycopeptides with molecular weights in the 1500-2000 Da. range.  Molecular
              genetics will be used to determine the relationships between symbiotic
              filamentous bacteria that produce different cyclic peptides.  Novel chemical
              structures from marine invertebrates will also be identified.

With this
              renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
              the research of Dr. D. John Faulkner of the Marine Research Division of the
              University of California, San Diego Scripps Institution of Oceanography. 
              Professor Faulkner will carry out chemical studies of marine invertebrates that
              will provide unique opportunities to discover new natural products and to
              investigate their ecological and evolutionary roles.  A basic hypothesis that
              guides this research is that secondary metabolites have contributed to the
              evolutionary success of the organisms that produce and/or use them.  This
              research will probe areas of marine natural products chemistry that may impact
              marine biology, ecology and biotechnology.
