Title       : GOALI: Metal Complexes as Artificial Peptidases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9816522

Award Number: 9816522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nenad M. Kostic nenad@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray Bakhtiar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bart Holmquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Nenad Kostic of Iowa State University is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division
              and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, under the Grant
              Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program to produce new
              catalysts designed to cleave proteins at specific predetermined points along
              their molecular backbone. New metal complexes will be tested for their ability
              to split short artificial proteins, using the proteins' sulfur atoms to
              "anchor" the catalyst. Methods will be developed to suppress interference with
              efficient catalysis by aggregation of the catalyst and by reactions of the
              products. Specifically designed proteins (and artificially produced variants of
              native proteins) will be used to investigate the influence of several levels of
              protein structure on the efficiency of catalysis. The influence of folding of
              the protein on the rate of catalytic cleavage will be examined.

The ability
              to split protein molecules at predetermined molecular locations will be
              important in biotechnology, and in developing further understanding of the
              functioning of complex biological systems. This program will produce new
              synthetic catalysts for important biochemical reactions. Discovery of such
              artificial enzymes will be useful in biotechnology and in the production of
              pharmaceuticals, as well as in experiments leading to control of the
              functioning of genetic information in developmental biology. Two pharmaceutical
              companies (BioNebraska and Merck) are collaborating in this research. Graduate
              students will be trained in state-of-the-art mass spectrometry techniques in
              industrial laboratories.



