Title       : Endophytic Nitrogen Fixation by European Beachgrass (Ammophila Arenaria)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9816583

Award Number: 9816583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Dalton david.dalton@reed.edu                   Ext. 7473  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,1305,9109,9178,9229,BIOT,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


Some grasses appear to be able to obtain fixed nitrogen through
symbiotic
              relations with various bacteria.  This project deals with a new
symbiosis
              involving European beachgrass (Ammophila arenaria) and
nitrogen-fixing
              bacteria living within the shoots and rhizomes of the host
plant.  The primary
              objective is to determine the extent of nitrogen
fixation (acetylene
              reduction) activity in this grass in order to confirm
if the rates are
              significant.  Additional objectives are to characterize
the microorganisms
              involved in the Ammophila symbiosis, to determine the
natural abundance and
              distribution of these microorganisms, and to
determine if a similar symbiosis
              might be present in or introduced into
other species of grasses (including
              crop species).  Inoculated and axenic
seedlings will be used in greenhouse and
              field trials to determine if
Ammophila benefits from its bacterial symbiont. 
              The rates of nitrogen
fixation in the field and the effects of environmental
              variables will be
measured by acetylene reduction assays.  The precise
              location of
endophytic bacteria will be determined using immunological
              techniques at
both the light and electron microscope level with existing
              antibodies.
The bacteria will be characterized with regards to the genes
              involved with
nitrogen fixation and the effects of oxygen and fixed nitrogen
              on nitrogen
fixation.  Other species of grasses will also be examined for
              similar
symbioses using acetylene reduction assays and immunolocalization by
              light
microscopy.  The Ammophila symbiosis is promising in that it
              involves
novel bacterial symbionts with unknown properties and host ranges in
              a
type of symbiosis previously thought to be largely if not
              entirely
restricted to tropical grasses.  In addition to providing insight
              into the
phenomenal success of Ammophila on bare sand, these studies might
              open
ossibilities for endophytic nitrogen fixation by grasses of
              agricultural
significance.



