Title       : Design of Adaptable Dynamic Wireless Network Architecture Using Intelligent
               Agent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9816633

Award Number: 9816633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ouri Wolfson wolfson@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clement T. Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with the design of highly mobile wireless  systems where not
              only end-users are mobile, but also the base  stations that serve these
              end-users are mobile. The mobility of  base stations introduces several
              challenging problems in the  design and development of such systems. In this
              project, highly  mobile wireless architectures with capability for intelligent 
              survivability and adaptive connectivity in an unpredictable  environments will
              be researched. Contributions will be made to the  foundation of intelligent
              highly mobile wireless network and  computing systems design, including network
              architecture, digital  information storage, intelligent distributed adaptive 
              reconfiguration, network routing, location management,  channel allocation, and
              information security. Intelligent agents  capable of taking autonomous
              decisions under uncertainty and  approximate knowledge, capable of adapting to
              changing operating  conditions (low bandwidth, changing topology and
              connectivity, and  node failures and mobility, etc.) will be researched. An 
              architecture and a set of relevant protocols will be designed  and tested on a
              simulation testbed. An extensive performance  evaluation and prediction will be
              conducted to evaluate, predict,  and optimize the performance of the developed
              architectures,  protocols, and algorithms.
