Title       : Purchase of High-Performance Computing Environment for Research in Theoretical
               Biophysical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9816497

Award Number: 9816497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73246              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hai-Lung Dai dai@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery G. Saven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program will
              allow the Chemistry Department at the University of Pennsylvania to purchase an
              Origin 2000 computer upgrade. Junior faculty Jeffery G. Saven, whose research
              focuses on the development of models of the kinetics and folding thermodynamics
              of proteins, and statistical theories for the combinatorial design of folding
              molecules, will be the primary user of the equipment.  

From both a
              fundamental and practical point of view, molecular folding is a very important
              area of research.  Combinatorial chemistry and molecular biology methods now
              make it possible to create a broad diversity of molecules that can be screened
              for signs of molecular folding.  Typically, the number of possible distinct
              molecules is intractably large.  Saven is developing theoretical and
              computational approaches that can focus combinatorial libraries and provide
              chemists with information on the composition of sequences that are likely to
              fold to a predetermined structure.  These theories also provide a framework for
              interpreting the results of combinatorial experiments in terms of molecular
              properties.  Given the conformational complexity of proteins and the huge
              number of possible protein sequences, high-performance computers are needed for
              these calculations.  Saven's research will advance our understanding of one of
              life's fundamental molecular processes, protein folding, and it will also have
              applications to pharmacology, medicine and biotechnology.  

