Title       : Analysis of the Condensational Growth in Marine Stratocumulus During the Second
               Aerosol Characterization Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a9816119

Award Number: 9816119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jefferson R. Snider jsnider@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Clouds are the main atmospheric constituent responsible for reflecting sunlight
              back to space, and thus are a crucial component in determining the climate of
              Earth.  Changes in cloudiness or cloud composition can be as important an
              element in climate change as the increase in greenhouse gases in the
              atmosphere.  For example, a cloud consisting of many tiny droplets is more
              reflective than a cloud having the same water content but with fewer and larger
              droplets.  The droplets form on water-soluble aerosol particles called cloud
              condensation nuclei (CCN).  Different air masses have widely different
              populations of aerosols, depending on the surface type, the wind speed near the
              ground, and the proximity to natural or anthropogenic sources of particulate
              matter.  An important link in the connection between aerosols and climate is
              the condensation process by which cloud droplets form and grow.  The purpose of
              this project is to improve our understanding of the relationship between the
              aerosol populations in different types of air masses and the concentration of
              droplets that form on them.  The approach makes use of data collected by
              aircraft during the Second Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-2), an
              international field program conducted north of the Island of Tenerife in the
              summer of 1997.  Measurements of CCN in the air below cloud base will be
              compared with droplet concentrations measured in the clouds to determine the
              extent to which the concentration can be predicted on the basis of known
              aerosol characteristics.  Airborne measurements of CCN are not standardized,
              and an important part of the analysis will be a comparison of CCN measured by
              several different instruments to specify the experimental uncertainty of the
              observations.  Results of the analysis will be applied to the questions of
              aerosol effects on cloud reflectivity and precipitation development through
              collaboration with specialists in radiative transfer and numerical modeling. 
              The study will provide a more solid foundation than we now have for
              understanding the complex relationships between aerosols, clouds, and climate. 
