Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Cytokinin Signaling in Abrabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9816914

Award Number: 9816914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jerry D. Cohen                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Kieber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cytokinins are a group of plant hormones that have been implicated in almost
              every aspect of growth and development.  The major goal of this research is to
              begin to unravel the molecular basis for cytokinin perception.  To this end,
              two different strategies will be employed. Firstly, mutants impaired in
              cytokinin signaling will be screened for using a simple seedling response. The
              second approach will focus on the role that IBC6 and its homologs play in
              cytokinin signaling. IBC6, which is similar to bacterial response regulators,
              is an Arabidopsis cytokinin primary response gene that has been identified
              using differential display.  A novel genetic screen has been developed that is
              based on the ethylene-mediated triple response morphology that etiolated
              Arabidopsis seedlings adopt in the presence of cytokinin. Previous work
              revealed that the elevation of ethylene biosynthesis in Arabidopsis seedlings
              in the presence of cytokinin is due to a post-transcriptional modification of
              ACSS, one member of the ACC synthase gene family, which encodes the
              rate-limiting enzyme of ethylene biosynthesis. Preliminary studies have
              demonstrated the feasibility of this screen for isolating cytokinin-insensitive
              mutants.  Additional mutants will be isolated that fail to adopt the triple
              response in the presence of cytokinin, and those that are defective in the
              induction of ethylene by cytokinin will be identified.  The mutants will be
              assayed for cytokinin responsiveness using classic cytokinin response assays
              (shoot initiation in vitro, retardation of leaf senescence, induction of
              anthocyanin accumulation), and will be tested for cytokinin-regulated gene
              expression in order to distinguish mutants disrupted in early steps of
              cytokinin signaling to ACS5 from those affecting ACS5 regulation more
              generally.  The phenotypes of these mutants will be assessed with regard to
              overall morphological changes, and the genes corresponding to those that are
              clearly affected in early steps in cytokinin signaling will be cloned.  These
              mutants should identify elements required for cytokinin signaling and may help
              to reveal the role of endogenous cytokinins.  A second, closely-related
              project, focuses on a number of cytokinin-regulated genes that were identified
              using differential display.  These genes will be extremely useful in the
              analysis of the cytokinin-insensitive mutations described above, and may also
              provide insights into the mechanism of cytokinin action.  In particular, one of
              these genes, IBC6, is rapidly and specifically induced by cytokinin and shows
              similarity to bacterial response regulators. This, coupled with previous work
              implicating the CKI 1 histidine kinase in cytokinin signaling, suggests that
              IBC6 may be involved in cytokinin signal transduction.  IBC6 is part of a small
              gene family in Arabidopsis; the response of these other gene family members to
              cytokinin will be assessed.  Expression of IBC6 in planta will be disrupted in
              a variety of ways to determine the role of this gene in cytokinin signaling. 
              These studies should help to begin to unravel how cytokinin is perceived and
              how it influences plant development.

