Title       : Retro-Bingel and Isomerization Reactions of Fullerene Derivatives via
               Electrochemistry: Synthesis, Mechanisms, and New Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a9816503

Award Number: 9816503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis Echegoyen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project from Prof. Luis Echegoyen at the University of Miami is focused on
              the electrochemical properties of substituted fullerenes, with the promise that
              electrodeposited thin layers of such materials will exhibit unique and
              exploitable properties.  The first area of research focuses on compounds that
              tether a crown ether moiety to the fullerene base.  As cations move into the
              crown ether, the electrochemical properties of the entire complex are changed. 
              A second part of the proposed research is the induced isomerization of malonate
              complexes of the fullerenes, with the promise that this isomerization reaction
              can be controlled to provide a synthetic route to otherwise inaccessible
              compounds.  Finally, controlled potential electrolysis of functionalized
              fullerenes is used to produce free fullerenes that are trapped within a
              molecular box framework.   Prof. Echegoyen's research group has an excellent
              record for the education of professional chemists from underrepresented groups,
              based on past record, and that tradition is expected to continue.

This
              project takes advantage of some recently discovered chemistry of "buckyballs",
              namely the ability to derivatize them and control their electrochemical
              reactivity, and the ability to trap species inside of the buckball cavity to
              accomplish the same goal.  The diversity of chemical groups that link to the
              buckyball substrate is broad, and so the range of reactive tunability is
              correspondingly large, allowing surfaces with specific properties to be
              devised.  Such a skill is useful in creating better electrode materials and
              better sensors for chemical analysis.

