Title       : Biomolecular Studies of Biomineralization Proteins: Triplet Motifs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9816703

Award Number: 9816703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Evans jse@dave-edmunds.dental.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              John Spencer Evans
MCB 98-16703

1. Technical

The biofabrication of
              mineralized structures, or biomineralization, is an
organism-directed process
              which leads to composite material formation. An
interesting class of
              biomineral-related proteins are the so-called "acidic"
proteins found in
              association with apatites and calcium carbonates. These
proteins, which
              contain significant amounts of Asp, Glu, and in some cases
phosphorylated Ser
              residues, can bind Ca (II) ions and initiate crystal
growth. Paradoxically,
              these same proteins may also bind stereospecifically
to the exposed surfaces
              of forming mineral crystals, thereby inhibiting
growth along specific
              crystallographic axes. But are all "acidic" proteins
created equal? Recent
              experiments have demonstrated that the resulting
mineral morphology is
              directly related to specific amino acid sequences in
specific proteins. What
              is most exciting is the possibility that sequence
repeats in these proteins
              could represent a diverse "library" of Ca (II)
recognition sites and folding
              mini-domains: by using similar or different
combinations of sequence repeats,
              a given "acidic" protein could "tailor"
its local structure to match a
              specific crystal morphology or create a
specific crystal morphology. This
              study will investigate the similarities
and differences within the known
              "acidic" sequence repeat library. By using
a multidisciplinary approach,
              specific sequence repeats will be examined
with regard to Ca (II) binding,
              conformational change, crystal growth
induction, and crystal morphology
              matching. These results will provide a
database that will not only advance our
              understanding of "acidic" protein
structure and function, but also provide the
              basis for the creation of
synthetic "peptidomimetics" and polymers that can
              generate novel or
important crystal morphologies, and, ultimately, novel
              composite materials.
As part of this project, an educational strategy
              involving participation
of high school, college undergraduate, and graduate
              students will be
implemented; independence, problem-solving skills and team
              cooperation will
be emphasized.

2. Non-technical

There are a number of
              naturally-occurring biological-based materials --
such as sea shell and
              plankton exoskeleton -- which are constructed by
organisms for protection and
              support. These bio-based materials are unique,
in that they combine inorganic
              solids (minerals) with polymers (proteins,
polysaccharides). The resulting
              materials are usually very strong, and, are
assembled by organisms under
              biological conditions. Hence, "bio-inspired"
materials offer a new strategy--
              namely, using self-assembly and molecule -
molecule recognition as "building
              techniques" -- for creating unique
materials for aerospace, industry, and
              medicine. To do this successfully,
it is important to understand how proteins
              and polysaccharides recognize
and bind to inorganic solids. This research will
              explore the issue of how
"acidic" proteins, such as those found in sea shells,
              bones, and teeth,
participate in the assembly of composite inorganic - organic
              materials. A
combination of physical techniques will be employed to study the
              structure
of sequence repeats found in "acidic" proteins. The results obtained
              from
these studies will be used to create a molecular "blueprint" for
              "acidic"
proteins, wherein important and unimportant regions for mineral
              recognition
can be identified. Eventually, this information will be used to
              create
"designer" proteins or polymers which can perform specific functions
              during
bio-inspired material assembly. This research project will also serve
              as a
teaching tool for the training of high school, undergraduate, and
              graduate
science majors, wherein problem-solving skills and
              cross-discipline
training will be featured.

