Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Studies of Trapping and Cooling in a Far Off
               Resonance Optical Trap Using Circularly Polarized Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9816280

Award Number: 9816280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Wieman cwieman@jila.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9816280
Wieman

This award provides funds to permit Dr. Carl E. Wieman,
              Department of Physics and JILA (Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics),
              University of Colorado, to pursue with Dr. Donghyun Cho, Department of Physics,
              Korea University, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research involving
              construction and use of an optical trap based on the theory of the analogous
              Zeeman effect.  According to the theory, when the laser light is circularly
              polarized and properly detuned, it can induce an AC Stark shift that is in the
              form of a pure Zeeman shift.  An optical trap built in this way will behave
              like a magnetic trap except without the troublesome magnetic field gradient. 
              It will hold a spin-polarized sample of atoms that will be useful in many areas
              of physics.  The collaborators will develop ways to load atoms from a magneto
              optical trap to such an optical trap efficiently, and also plan to study
              spectroscopic and thermodynamic properties of trapped atoms.  They also will
              study properties of an optical trap built with circularly polarized light in
              general to find a new cooling scheme in such a trap.  Specifically, they plan
              to use the tensor polarizability of an atom to develop a Sisyphus cooling
              mechanism.  This will have implications in achieving Bose-Einstein condensation
              in an optical trap.

This project will strengthen. collaboration between
              highly respected U.S. and Korean research teams and will provide an
              international research experience for a U.S. graduate student.  This project is
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
              seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean
              participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation
              (KOSEF).
***


