Title       : Mixed Messages in Caterpillar Saliva: Disruptive and Deceptive Signals for Plant
               Defenses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9816934

Award Number: 9816934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Felton   (Principal Investigator current)
              J.   Brad Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert Eichenseer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1145,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Saliva of blood-feeding arthropods injected into their vertebrate hosts contains
              many chemical compounds used to prevent the clotting of blood, which are
              important in evading host detection.  Although both plants and animals produce
              diverse defenses against their parasites, and in stark contrast to the blood
              feeding arthropods, very little is known about how the saliva of caterpillars
              interfere with host plant defense responses. This project will determine if
              caterpillar saliva assists in evasion of plant defenses by observing whether
              caterpillar saliva: 1) attenuates the enzymatic defenses of the host plant
              ingested by caterpillars, and 2) disrupts plant signaling pathways involved in
              defense induction. Experiments are designed to test the ability of saliva and
              the predominant salivary enzyme in the corn earworm, glucose oxidase, to affect
              transport and activity of the defense signal peptide, systemin, and
              biosynthesis of jasmonic acid in plants.  Both systemin and jasmonic acid are
              known to mediate increased production of  oxidative enzymes and insect
              resistance.  The ability of salivary glucose oxidase to induce salicylic acid
              production, required for the expression of systemic acquired resistance against
              plant pathogens, inhibition of jasmonic acid synthesis, and subsequent insect
              resistance will also be tested.  Several caterpillar-plant combinations will be
              used to test the importance of these mechanisms.  Completion of these
              objectives will provide a conceptual framework for the comparison of
              adaptations plant-feeding arthropods use against their hosts to those of blood
              feeding arthropods.  These experiments may furnish the first evidence that
              herbivore saliva plays a role in suppressing host enzymatic defenses and
              disrupting defense signal pathways used by plants to resist herbivore attack.  
