Title       : Prediction of Bioavailability of Riverine Dissolved Organic Matter from Bulk
               Measures of Geochemical Composition Accross Landscape and Continental Gradients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a9816130

Award Number: 9816130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109928             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Michael Perdue michael.perdue@eas.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,4444,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9816130
Perdue

	Land-use change, urban development, and climate change are
              altering the magnitude and nature of riverine inputs of organic matter and
              inorganic nutrients to the coastal zone and oceans throughout the world.  Such
              long-term, and probably irreversible, changes in riverine inputs can be
              expected to trigger corresponding changes in both global and coastal carbon
              budgets and in coastal food webs, eutrophication, and anoxia and species
              diversity.  A mechanistic understanding of these changes requires a substantial
              improvement in our ability to treat quantitatively the transformation of
              organic matter during riverine transport.

	In our prior separate research,
              we found that the bioavailability of DOM in a southern river is related to the
              aliphatic carbon content of the DOM, as indicated by its average elemental
              composition.  We further found with a bioenergetic model that the rate and
              efficiency at which many simple organic substrates are oxidized and
              incorporated into microbial biomass are closely related to the degree of
              reduction of those substrates, as deduced from their elemental composition. 
              Preliminary joint research showed that these two predictors of bioavailability
              of DOM are strongly correlated (as expected from theory) and about equally
              successful.

We plan to address 3 research questions:
1. How does the
              bioavailability of riverine DOM vary in stream and rivers?
2. Can we predict
              the bioavailability of DOM from simple measures of bulk composition?
3. Can
              bioavailability of DOM be predicted from a simple measurement of chemical
              oxygen demand?
With the use of our bioenergetic model of microbial growth and
              techniques to describe the degree of substrate reduction of labile and bulk DOM
              pools, we will examine relationships between the composition and utilization of
              bulk and labile pools.  Our goal is to test our model that was developed for
              known labile DOM pools to predict the rates of bulk organic matter utilization
              and microbial growth from simple measurements of the composition of the bulk
              DOM pool.  This is a successful model of organic matter utilization that
              provides a causal, mechanistic understanding microbial  processes on the basis
              of simple measures of chemical composition.

	Our work to date is preliminary
              since DOM samples were collected from only a few sites, a systematic approach
              to investigate a spectrum of DOM sources was not employed, and the techniques
              to perform the experiments as well as the theories regarding bioavailability
              were under development at the time.  We are now in a position to rigorously
              test our models and propose to do so by conducting experiments in streams and
              rivers of greatly contrasting characteristics.  We will measure organic matter
              composition (aliphatic, aromatic and excess carbon and degree of substrate
              reduction) and bioavailability (microbial growth, growth efficiency and organic
              matter oxidation). Based on our models, a strong correlation should be observed
              between DOM bioavailability and aliphatic C content and degree of substrate
              reduction of the DOM.	


This proposal was submitted to the EGB Program, and
               is being jointly funded by:

1. Division of OCE - (Rice)
2. Division of DEB
              - (Firth)
