Title       : Towards a New Historical Syntax of Latin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9816627

Award Number: 9816627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54015              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Baldi phb@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Baldi
98-16627

Abstract

This project addresses the historical syntax of
              one of the most securely known and intensely studied Indo-European languages,
              Latin.  Latin provides a continuous fund of linguistic information over an
              extended period, allowing a unique view of the syntactic evolution of a single
              language.  We approach the historical syntax of Latin utilising a holistic
              perspective on syntactic change which has a general applicability beyond
              Latin.

The approach we are proposing combines structural considerations of
              the traditional type with established functional and typological principles.
              The conceptual propositions underlying a functional/typological perspective are
              first, that cognitive principles are involved in grammatical organization; and
              second, that some crucial semantic notions are pervasively encoded in syntax.
              The elements forming the basis for a historical framework are not strictly
              grammatical entities, but include conceptual domains.  Examples of such domains
              are POSSESSION, COMPARISON, NEGATION, and QUANTIFICATION.  This approach
              contrasts with traditional structure-based methodologies of historical syntax,
              which tend to concentrate on the transmission of grammatical categories from
              one stage of a language to another.  But syntactic change does not operate with
              mechanical regularity, transmitting structural entities. In order to explain
              major changes, we need more than structural mappings in our analytical arsenal,
              and we need the methodological flexibility to look outside the structural
              expressions of a language in accounting for the development of conceptual
              categories from one stage to another. This approach provides an array of
              explanatory devices which far exceeds those of traditional methodologies, and
              promises far richer results in our understanding of syntactic change.


