Title       : Penguin-Krill-Ice Interactions: The Impact of Environmental Variability on
               Penguin Demography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9816616

Award Number: 9816616
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Z. Trivelpiece   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NOAA National Marine Fishe
	      8604 La Jolla Shores Drive
	      LaJolla, CA  920371508    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9816616  Trivelpiece  Long-term seabird research conducted at Admiralty Bay,
              which  is located on King George Island in the Antarctic Peninsula  region, has
              documented annual variability in the life  history parameters of the breeding
              biology and ecology of  the Adelie, gentoo and chinstrap penguins.  Twenty-year
               records acquired on these species, including survival and  recruitment,
              population size and breeding success, and diets  and foraging ecology have
              enabled scientists to test key  hypotheses regarding the linkage between these
              predator  parameters and variability in the Antarctic marine  ecosystem.  This
              project will focus on understanding the  linkages between the physical
              environment and the population  biology of penguins, in particular, sea ice
              coverage and its  impact on krill availability as a food source for penguins. 
              Krill is a key food web species in the Antarctic oceans and  accounts for
              nearly one hundred percent of the prey eaten by  dominant predators such as
              baleen whales, seals and  penguins.  Analysis of long-term data sets has
              suggested  that years of heavy winter sea ice favor krill recruitment,  as
              larval krill find refuge and food in the sea ice habitat.  It has also been
              observed that years of heavy sea ice favor  Adelie penguin recruitment and not
              that of chinstrap  penguins.  Aspects of the work include analysis of diet 
              samples, shipboard krill sampling, survival and recruitment  studies of
              penguins, satellite tracking of penguins during  the breeding season, and
              analysis of satellite sea ice  images.  Penguins are the key species used to
              monitor the  impact of commercial fisheries activities in the region, so  this
              study will provide useful information to the Convention  for the Conservation
              of Antarctic Marine Living Resources,  which is the part of the Antarctic
              Treaty System which  focuses on fisheries management.
