Title       : GOALI: Dynamic Behavior of Preferentially Adsorbed Block Copolymer Brushes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9816147

Award Number: 9816147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109399             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Michael Kilbey mike.kilbey@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor P. Thalacker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1414,1501,1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9816147
Clemson Univ./S. Kilbey

The work outlined in this
              proposal will investigate the properties of layers of multiblock copolymers
              that are preferentially adsorbed in a surface through one block, leaving the
              other block(s) non-adsorbed.  The primary objective is to understand how to
              manipulate the shear properties of these structure-forming layers in order to
              build polymer-modified surfaces with tailored frictional properties and wear
              characteristics.  Manipulating the frictional properties of polymer-modified
              surfaces directly impact areas of technology ranging from lubrication and
              colloid stabilization to novel applications for surface active polymers,
              including display devices, microvalves, and sensors.  The work described in
              this proposal forms a coherent plan to systematically investigate the impact of
              solvent quality, shear rate, and layer composition on the dynamic response of
              various polymer/solvent pairs.  The synthesis and characterization of the
              necessary polymeric materials will be handled through a collaboration with Dr.
              Jimmy Mays of the University of Alabama at Birmingham.  A modified Surface
              Forces Apparatus housed at Clemson University will be used to directly measure
              the forces required to slide two polymer coated surfaces laterally past each
              other.  These measurements are done on molecular length scales and therefore,
              provide  information on the molecular-level frictional interactions between the
              surfaces.  The accumulated data on how the dynamic behavior of these
              interfacial layers are impacted by changes in molecular weight, chain
              architecture, and solution properties are central to developing the capability
              to do predictive design of surfaces modified with amphiphilic macromolecules. 
              This work will also result in a more complete body of structure-property data
              of polymer brushes, which will be generally useful for the developing and
              engineering of surfaces modified by soft materials.  


