Title       : Molecular Origins of Specificity in Protein-Nucleic Acid Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9816578

Award Number: 9816578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jannette Carey jcarey@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Carey 
98-16578
Thr arginine repressor of E. coli, ArgR, is the
              transcriptional transducer of intracellular L-arginine concentration, and the
              master regulator of a large group of genes involved in arginine biosynthesis,
              the arginine regulon. ArgR is unusual among repressors because it binds DNA as
              a 98 kDa hexamer and functions as both a repressor and an accessory factor in
              resolution of plasmid ColE1 multimers by intramolecular recombination. Arginine
              binding increases the affinity and specificity of DNA binding by an unknown
              mechanism. ArgR is organized into a C-terminal domain (ArgRC) that houses the
              hexamerization and arginine-binding functions, and an N-terminal domain (ArgRN)
              which in isolation retains DNA-binding ability but is monomeric and
              arginine-independent. The structures of the two domains are known separately,
              and on the basis of these structures certain mechanisms of allosteric
              activation used by other regulatory proteins can be ruled out for ArgR. The
              separate structures of the domains, combined with biochemical and biophysical
              data obtained during the previous funding period on DNA binding by intact ArgR,
              were used to derive a model for the hexameric ArgR-DNA complex. This model and
              other recent progress clearly implicates subunit assembly, interdomain
              interactions, and conformational changes transmitted through the interdomain
              linker as key elements of the allosteric activation mechanism, and suggests
              that interactions between DNA-binding domains may confer cooperativity on the
              binding reaction. These hypotheses will be examined in this study with four
              specific aims. 1.  Stoichiometry and cooperativity of DNA binding. The current
              model implicates only four of the six equivalent subunits of ArgR in binding to
              typical operator sites, which contain four half-sites arranged as tandem
              palindromes.  The model thus implies that ArgR subunits may cooperate at
              pairwise or higher levels, and that a third pair of ArgR subunits is available
              to take up a third DNA palindrome. These features will be examined using mainly
              quantitative gel retardation with a set of short synthetic DNAs and cloned
              constructs containing various half-site arrangements to determine the
              stoichiometry and cooperativity of various binding modes for ArgR. The
              orientation of subunits on the DNA is crucial to their interactions, and will
              be examined following site-directed mutagenesis to permit disulfide bonding
              between two monomers. 2.  Subunit assembly equilibria and conformational
              changes. Subunit assembly will be examined for the wildtype protein in the
              presence and absence of L-arginine by using sedimentation equilibrium analysis
              in the ultracentrifuge.  In addition, a combination of sedimentation velocity
              and sedimentation equilibrium analysis will be used to probe possible global
              conformational changes upon L-arginine binding. 3. Role of interdomain
              interactions and linker in allosteric activation. Six superrepressor mutants
              were isolated that lie in the N-terminal domain or linker, at or near the
              interface with the C-terminal domain.  The superrepressor phenotype suggests
              that transmission of the L-arg binding signal from the C-terminal domain to the
              DNA-binding domain is affected by the mutations. Each of these mutants will be
              cloned, overexpressed, and purified, and characterized by a battery of
              quantitative biochemical and biophysical tools to assess their effects on
              allosteric activation by studying their DNA- and L-arginine-binding and
              multimerization equilibria.  4. Global regulatory function. Functional
              similarities to other systems suggest that ArgR may be a previously
              unrecognized global regulator and/or an activator. Database searching
              identified several putative operator sites in genes not previously recognized
              as part of the arg regulon, and selective DNA binding to three of these has
              been confirmed. The effects of ArgR on gene expression in these three systems
              will be examined using b-gal fusions in various ArgR backgrounds, and the
              details of DNA binding will be examined in vitro.

2. Non-technical	
Gene
              expression is controlled by regulatory proteins that recognize specific DNA
              sequences.  The mechanisms responsible for sequence-specific recognition are of
              fundamental interest to extend our understanding of molecular function, and
              also of potential practical interest for the prospect of influencing
              recognition events, for example in cases where expression of disease genes
              might be controlled.  Bacterial systems provide a good model for understanding
              specificity because metabolically related genes are often coordinately
              controlled by one master regulatory protein that must recognize a group of
              similar but not identical DNA sequences, while maintaining the ability to
              reject slightly more distantly related sequences.  Such systems often achieve
              enhanced specificity through interactions with small ligands that act as
              co-effectors.  The molecular mechanisms through which co-effectors confer
              specificity are quite varied, and many apparently unique examples are known. 
              In E. coli, the metabolism of arginine, a required amino acid, is controlled by
              the arginine repressor, ArgR.  Arginine itself serves as a co-effector: it
              binds to ArgR and increases the specificity of DNA recognition by an unknown
              mechanism.  Previous work by P.I. identified structural units within ArgR that
              house the various functions of the protein, and indicated that of six
              equivalent units, four cooperate in arginine-specific DNA recognition.  This
              cooperation requires communication among the protein's structural units.  In
              this study, the mechanisms of this communication will be examined.  The
              communication will first be described in quantitative terms by studying the DNA
              recognition reaction directly, using methods developed previously. 
              Interactions between units will be characterized by determining the size and
              shape of the molecule in solution under various conditions.  A crucial
              interfacial region of the protein has also been identified and will be probed
              by studying DNA recognition using proteins that are mutated in this region. 
              This work is expected to extend our understanding of the mechanisms leading to
              selective DNA binding.


