Title       : Processing and Characterization of Passive Films and Coatings Formed on Steel by
               Aqueous Electrochemical Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9816355

Award Number: 9816355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jude O. Iroh jiroh@uceng.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9816355
Iroh

This research involves a novel one-step aqueous electrochemical
              process for applying passive films and corrosion-resistant polypyrrole coatings
              on steel that has been developed.  It is expected that the structure of the
              underlying passive film will affect the structure and properties of the
              polypyrrole top coating.  The objective of the proposed study, therefore, is to
              systematically investigate the effect of process variables on the formation of
              passive films and coatings on steel during aqueous electrochemical
              polymerization of pyrrole (Py) and aniline (ANi).  Under investigation are the
              structure and properties of the passive films, of the coatings and of the
              passive films-PPy/PANi interface.  The composition, structure and orientation
              of the passive films and coatings are determined by Attenuated Surface
              Reflectance Infrared Spectroscopy (ATR) and X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometry
              (XPS).  These factors are correlated with the process parameters, such as the
              applied current, pH and monomer concentration.  The substrates are examined by
              a scanning electron microscope (SEM), equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray
              analyzer (EDAX) and XPS to determine the surface morphology, orientation and
              elemental composition of the passive coatings and passive coatings-PPy/PANi
              coatings interface.  Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic
              voltammetry (CV) are employed to determine the effects of process variables on
              the corrosion protection of the coatings.  The work of adhesion and toughness
              of the coatings formed on passivated steel is determined by dynamic contact
              angle analysis and the double cantelever beam test.
%%%
This research is
              important to understanding the relationships between the electrochemical
              process variables and the structure and properties of the coatings.  The
              results should provide information on the mechanism of in-situ passivation and
              coating of steel and the potential for corrosion prevention by electrodeposited
              conductive polymers, either as barrier coatings or by anodic protection.
***

