Title       : Antarctic Pack Ice Seals: Ecological Interactions with Prey and the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9816016

Award Number: 9816016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Langdon B. Quetin langdon@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin M. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9816016	
QUETIN
The pack ice region surrounding Antarctica contains at least
              fifty percent of the world's population of seals, comprising about eighty
              percent of the world's total pinniped biomass.  As a group, these seals are
              among the dominant top predators in Southern Ocean ecosystems, and the
              fluctuation in their abundance, growth patterns, life histories, and behavior
              provide a potential source of information about environmental variability
              integrated over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales.  This proposal was
              developed as part of the international Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) program,
              which is aimed to better understand the ecological relationships between the
              distribution of pack ice seals and their environment. During January-February,
              2000, a research cruise through the pack ice zone of the eastern Ross Sea and
              western Amundsen Sea will be conducted to survey and sample along six transects
              perpendicular to the continental shelf.  Each of these transects will pass
              through five environmental sampling strata:  continental shelf zone, Antarctic
              slope front, pelagic zone, the ice edge front, and the open water outside the
              pack ice zone.  All zones but open water will be ice-covered to some degree. 
              Surveys along each transect will gather data on bathymetry, hydrography, sea
              ice dynamics and characteristics, phytoplankton and ice algae stocks, prey
              species (e.g., fish, cephalopods and euphausiids), and seal distribution,
              abundance and diet. This physical and trophic approach to investigating
              ecological interactions among pack ice seals, prey and the physical environment
              will allow the interdisciplinary research team to test the hypothesis that
              there are measurable physical and biological features in the Southern Ocean
              that result in area of high biological activity by upper trophic level
              predators.  Better insight into the interplay among pack ice seals and
              biological and physical features of Antarctic marine ecosystems will allow for
              a better prediction of fluctuation in seal population in the context of
              environmental change.

