Title       : Single-Molecule Optical Probes of Protein Biophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9816947

Award Number: 9816947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Moerner wmoerner@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Moerner
MCB 9816947

1. Technical

As a result of the success of
              single-molecule optical detection and
spectroscopy, first at low temperatures,
              and more recently at room
temperatures, a particular opportunity exists to
              apply these methods to the
elucidation of important outstanding problems in
              the understanding of
protein dynamical and functional behavior. 
              Single-molecule methods
completely remove ensemble averaging, thus allowing
              direct observation of
heterogeneity that is normally hidden.  True
              distributions of measured
properties over members of the ensemble may be
              measured, allowing a
detailed picture of complex and inhomogeneous
              environments.  For
time-dependent processes, following individual proteins one
              at a time
through the enzymatic cycle removes the need for synchronization of
              the
ensemble.  Finally, since the single-molecule limit is a
              previously
unexplored regime, new and unexpected behavior is likely to occur,
              such as
the blinking and switching of single copies of green fluorescent
              protein
mutants observed recently. This study is an interdisciplinary effort
              to
invetigate several aspects of protein and enzyme dynamics and
              function
using optical single-molecule detection and spectroscopy with in
              vitro
techniques. The important advantage of the single-molecule regime is
              that
signatures of the conformational state which are normally buried in large
              N
(N = number of copies) experiments will become uniquely accessible
              to
study.  The principal biological problems of interest are the
              photophysical
dynamics of green fluorescent protein and its mutants, the
              mechanochemical
cycle of kinesin motor protein, and the protein association
              and enzymatic
behavior of cAMP-dependent protein kinase.  The stuidy
              utilizes
diffraction-limited confocal, total internal reflection, and
              far-field
optical microscopy and spectroscopy to explore the biophysical
              behavior of
single copies of proteins and enzymes, specifically to fully
              characterize
and understand the mechanism for the unexpected blinking and
              switching
behavior recently observed for single copies of green fluorescent
              protein,
and to apply single-molecule imaging, polarization, and energy
              transfer
methods to explore protein conformational states associated with
              the
mechanochemical behavior of motor proteins in the kinesin superfamily,
              and
utilize single-molecule optical spectroscopy and microscopy to detect
              and
characterize the enzymatic action and protein subunit association
              and
dissociation for cAMP-dependent protein kinase A. To accomplish these
              ends,
the PI's physical, chemical, and optical expertise will be combined
              with
the molecular biological and biochemical expertise of several
              talented
collaborators.  In the final analysis, owing to its
              multidisciplinary
organization, the fundamental research in this program will
              not only
generate new knowledge about the biophysical properties of
              several
important protein systems, but, in addition the advances in
              instrumentation
will provide novel groundwork for technology
transfer to
              other relevant disciplines, and the increased knowledge about
optically driven
              changes in state of fluorescent proteins like green
fluorescent protein may
              lead to the engineering of mutants capable of use
as optical recording and
              storage elements.

2. Non-technical

This study reaches into a new realm:
              that of observing and understanding
individual, single copies of proteins. 
              The methods utilized are optical,
i.e., using light to probe individual
              molecules, which allows us to probe
time-dependent, dynamical events as each
              protein copy performs its function
as an enzyme. A key difficulty encountered
              in most conventional experiments
which look at a huge number of protein copies
              at the same time, is that
synchronization of the different copies is not
              easily possible.  This means
that any inhomogeneity is obscured.  For an
              analogy, assume that many
people are in a room, all reading the same text such
              as the Bill of Rights,
but that they did not start together.  (In the protein
              world, this might be
an assembly of proteins each at different stages in the
              enzymatic cycle.)
Since all the individuals are marching to a different
              drummer, the net
effect is something like the cacophony that one hears in a
              crowded
restaurant.  By developing and using the new methods of
              single-molecule
spectroscopy, one is effectively able to listen to each person
              in the room
separately.  It will then be possible to discern different
              dialects that
might be spoken by the different individuals, or even to tell if
              some of
them are actually reading the Preamble to the Constitution
              instead.
Returning to the protein world, this study is expected to learn
              important
details about the exact cycle the protein follows to perform a
              useful
function, and in particular, if some individual copies are
              intrinsically
different due to the fold of the protein or to some other
              unforeseen
modification.


