Title       : Spatial Mechanism Design in a Virtual Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9816611

Award Number: 9816611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre M. Larochelle pierrel@fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides funding to develop a new and innovative approach to
              designing spatial mechanisms based on the use of virtual reality technology.  A
              virtual environment, which will include a variety of visual, audio, and haptic
              interactive devices, will be created and used to design novel spatial
              mechanisms.  New analytical techniques for spatial mechanism design, which
              fully utilize the capabilities of the virtual design environment, will be
              generated and incorporated into the design software.  Computer models of
              objects within the operational workspace of the mechanism will be displayed in
              the virtual environment and consideration of the interaction of the mechanism
              with these objects will become an integral part of the design process.  This
              development will be a testbed for the use of virtual reality in mechanical
              design.  Some of the major challenges in designing spatial mechanisms for
              practical applications include the need to specify design positions in
              three-dimensional space and verify the operation of these mechanisms in their
              operational workspace.       If successful, this research will result in a
              computer tool that utilizes novel spatial mechanism design methodologies to
              generate a three-dimensional design space in which the designer can synthesize
              spatial mechanisms and obtain a sense of the form and function of the devices. 
              This would enable spatial mechanisms to be incorporated into many products,
              including manufacturing and automation equipment and consumer products.  As a
              result of this research, new advancements in spatial mechanism design
              methodology and new knowledge pertaining to the use of virtual environments as
              a mechanical design tool are likely.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
