Title       : Regulation of Shoot Meristem Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9816760

Award Number: 9816760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Clark clarks@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Higher plants initiate new organs (e.g., leaves) throughout their
life. 
              Thus they face two problems.  Plants must maintain a pool of
undifferentiated
              cells from which to draw upon for organ initiation, and
must balance the
              proliferation of these undifferentiated cells and their
incorporation into
              organ primordia.  In other words, given a constant
number of undifferentiated
              cells, the cell division rate of the
undifferentiated cells must equal the
              rate at which these cells are
directed toward organ formation.  These
              processes occur at a structure
termed a meristem.  In the plant embryo, two
              meristems are established:
the root meristem, which will give rise to the root
              system, and the shoot
meristem, which will give rise to the above-ground
              portion of the plant.
At the growing tip of the shoot meristem, cells in the
              very center are
maintained in an undifferentiated state, while cells
              surrounding this
central region are directed toward organ formation.  The goal
              of the
proposed research is to provide a better understanding of the genes
              and
processes directing organ formation at the shoot meristem.  While
              the
proposed project is basic science, any applied projects to alter
              the
number, spatial patterning or identity of plant organs will require
              an
understanding of the shoot meristem.
     The CLAVATA loci (CLV1, CLV2,
              CLV3) function in the same pathway
to promote organ formation at the shoot and
              flower meristem based on
loss-of-function phenotypes.  The CLV1 and CLV2 genes
              have been cloned and
appear to code for receptors involved in signal
              transduction.  During the
previous funding period the CLV1 gene was isolated
              and its expression
pattern, which is tightly restricted to the shoot and
              flower meristem, was
determined.  CLV1 becomes ectopically expressed in
              mutants that develop
ectopic or enlarged meristems.  Constitutive expression
              of CLV1 by the 35S
promoter was not possible, apparently due to the toxicity
              of CLV1 during
early stages of development.  CLV1 could be expressed, however,
              under
control of the flower-specific AP1 promoter, and this rescues the
              clv1
mutant phenotype, but does not affect wild-type development.  It was
              also
determined that the primary defect in clv1 and clv3 mutants is in
              organ
formation, not cell division.  Analysis of clv2 mutants revealed that
              CLV2
regulates both meristem and organ development.  CLV2 functions in the
              same
pathway as CLV1/CLV3 to regulate meristem development, but in a
              separate
pathway to regulate organ development.  The requirement for CLV2 is
              very
sensitive to physiological conditions.  Mutations in a number of
              novel
regulators of meristem development were isolated.
     The goal in the
              current funding period is to generate inducible
ectopic activation of CLV1. 
              This will allow questions of CLV1 function to
be addressed, and will allow the
              characterization of potential targets of
CLV1 signal transduction.  The
              process of suppression of clv2 flower
phenotypes under short day photoperiod
              conditions will be investigated.
The investigations will determine whether
              this is a response to day length
or growth rates, and what genes are involved.
               CLV2 will be expressed
under various tissue-specific and inducible promoters
              to address questions
of CLV2 function.  Finally, a mutation in a novel
              regulator of meristem
development, corona (cor), will be studied.  The cor
              mutant was identified
as a strong enhancer of the clv1 organ formation defect.
               cor clv1-1
double mutants completely lose the ability to initiate new organ
              primordia
shortly after the transition to flowering.  Preliminary genetic
              evidence
suggest that COR promotes organ formation in a separate pathway from
              the
CLV loci.

