Title       : Experimental Investigation of Delocalization and Phase Diagram in Quantum Hall
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9705439

Award Number: 9705439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong-Wen Jiang jiangh@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705439  Jiang    This  experimental  research  project  focuses  on  the  2-D 
              electron gas in the quantum Hall effect regime, specifically  on  the  phase 
              diagram  and  a  localization-delocalization  transition  as  afffected by
              disorder .   Gated  GaAs/AlGaAs  devices  will  be  used  to gain control  of 
              the  effective  disorder  of  the experimental system.  High magnetic  field 
              transport  experiments  will be carried  out  to  study  the 
              magnetic-field-induced   delocalization  transition  and  to  determine  the
              phase diagram in the disorder-magnetic  field  plane.   Edge-state tunneling
              spectroscopy will be  used  to  probe  microscopic properties and low-energy 
              excitation  of  various electronic phases.  %%%  This  experimental  research
              project  is  devoted  to  basic  properties of a conducting electron system
              when confined  in  a  two-dimensional planar region.  Such a  confined  set  of
               electrons at low temperatures and with high magnetic  fields  exhibits a very
              unusual set of characteritics, which are  of  interest to theorists who wish to
              test and extend the  basic  thoery  of  electrons  in crystalline solids.   An 
              improved  theory then can be applied with more confidence to the  wide  range 
              of  metals and semiconductors which are of importance  in microelectronics and
              other technologies.  The experiments  in   this   project  are  focusing  on  a
               "metal-insulator"  transiton which ahs been observed and in particular  on 
              how  it appears in connection with disorder in the environment of  the
              electrons.  On the one hand the experiments will provide  new  basic 
              information about electrons  when  they  are  in  interaction in confined
              layers at low temperatures.  On  the  other  hand  the device structures which
              are used  in  these  experiments   are   similar  to  those  used   in  
              advanced  microelectronic   devices  in  the  Gas  technology.    This 
              research  will involve students who will be well trained  in  the  area  of 
              physics  and will also gain  familarity  w ith  semiconductor device
              technology, nd who will be  excellently  trained   for   employment  in 
              industry,   government,   or  education.  ***
