Title       : Representation Theory of Reductive Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9705645

Award Number: 9705645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Herb rah@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Herb    Professor Herb plans to continue her work in the field of
              representation theory and harmonic analysis on reductive real Lie groups and
              p-adic groups. In earlier work on character formulas for discrete series
              representations of real semisimple Lie groups, she introduced the notion of
              two-structures. She now proposes to extend this theory of two-structures to
              obtain discrete series character formulas on arbitrary semisimple real Lie
              groups via lifting from groups locally isomorphic to direct products of groups
              which are real forms of SL(2,C) or Sp(2,C).  She is also interested in
              investigating further properties of this lifting correspondence, and continuing
              to study induced representations for non-connected linear reductive p-adic
              groups.    The theory of Fourier series was developed, starting in the 18th
              century, to study periodic functions of a real variable.  The idea is to write
              an arbitrary periodic function as a sum of the well-understood trigonometric
              functions, that is expand a function in terms of its "harmonics."  This theory
              has many applications in the sciences, in engineering, and in mathematics. 
              Many of the basic ideas involved in Fourier analysis can be extended to analyze
              functions on any space with sufficient symmetry.  For a given space, the
              problem is to find a collection of especially nice elementary functions, and
              then study how to expand arbitrary well-behaved functions as a sum or integral
              (continuous sum) of these elementary functions.  These generalizations of
              Fourier series are known as representation theory or harmonic analysis.  One
              class of spaces of special interest in physics and mathematics is the class of
              semisimple real Lie groups.  Professor Herb plans to continue her work on the
              theory of two-structures for semisimple real Lie groups.  This theory can be
              used to reduce some problems of harmonic analysis on general semisimple Lie
              groups to understanding the two easiest examples.
