Title       : Multiple Imputation: Research for the Third Decade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9705158

Award Number: 9705158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240492             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Rubin rubin@stat.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Barnard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Multiple Imputation:  Research for the Third Decade    DMS-9705158    Donald
              B. Rubin and John Barnard   Harvard University     The third decade of multiple
              imputation begins with ever-growing   applications, even into areas not
              originally proposed  (e.g., environmental studies, chemistry), an increasing  
              availability of software, and an increasing amount of statistical   research
              work being conducted.  The expanded, almost routine, use   of multiple
              imputation means that many technical issues,   considered relatively minor in
              its early development, need   attention.  This research addresses several of
              the most important   issues, in particular:  (1) creating multiple imputations
              under   more general and flexible models; (2) creating "nested" multiple  
              imputations in data sets with large and highly variable fractions   of missing
              information; (3) using cross-match techniques to   analyze data sets having
              only a few multiple imputations but large   fractions of missing information,
              especially for obtaining valid   p-values; (4) analyzing data sets with nested
              multiple   imputations; and (5) conducting exploratory and diagnostic  
              analyses on multiply-imputed data sets.      Missing values are prevalent in
              many data sets and can be a  great hindrance in making inference.  Multiple
              imputation has   proven to be a useful mode of inference in the presence of
              missing   data.  The basic aim of multiple imputation is to allow users of  
              incomplete data sets, who typically have little information about   the
              missing-data mechanism, to reach valid statistical inferences   using only (1)
              standard complete-data analysis techniques and (2)   simple rules for combining
              the output of the complete-data   analyses.  Multiple imputation has been
              successfully used in many   contexts including in the social and economic
              sciences, the   history of science, and in biomedical applications.  This
              effort   extends the applicability and the ease of use of multiple  
              imputation, which enters its third decade where it  should become   an
              important tool in everyday statistical practice.
