Title       : Trajectory Planning and Coordinated Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9705312

Award Number: 9705312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226411             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clyde F. Martin martin@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The problems that will be proposed here have to do with one of the basic
              problem of applied control theory: the problem of designing trajectories for
              controlled systems.  These problems, as are discussed here, arose in response
              to the needs of air traffic control, but are more basic than any one
              application.  The most basic of the problems is to be given a controlled
              system,  The measurement y is to be thought of as measuring the position of the
              system.  A set of way-points in the form (yi, ti) that must be attained by the
              plant is assumed to be given.  The problem is to find a control law that will
              move the system in such a way that y(ti)=yi. For most systems there is no
              unique way of solving this problem so it is necessary to impose other
              conditions in order to ensure uniqueness.  For the air traffic control problem
              there are  d/dt x=f(x)+ug(x) with initial data x(O)=x-O and a measurement
              function y=h(x).  obvious constraints concerning the dynamics of the aircraft
              and passenger comfort.  One obvious condition that should be met is that the
              dynamics of x(t) be  should be smooth.  For passengers abrupt changes in
              velocity or acceleration are very noticeable and physically reality requires
              that x(t) be continuous.  The additional conditions that are imposed make a
              great deal of difference on the final behavior of the system as does the nature
              of the system itself.     The goal of this research is to develop a tool that
              will allow the design of trajectories that meet the needs within the context of
              general control design.  In order to do this we must reexamine the basic
              problem as posed above and extend it to other more complicated tasks.  The
              basic problem as posed here is intimately related to the construction of
              numerical splines.  To extend this to more general problems in control theory
              it is necessary to enter the area of hybrid systems.  Here the problem is
              related to the more general mathematical problem of Birkhoff splines and to a
              set of new problems which we choose to call problems  of coordinated control.
              in Section 2 the basic assumptions which we impose on the system will be set
              forth and the solutions that have been obtained to the basic problem will be
              described.  Here is outlined an elementary, but important basic procedure for
              solving this entire set of problems and will justify many of the assumptions
              which have been made.  Here will also be described the contents of the several
              papers that have been published on this problem and they will be related to
              other work that is ongoing on the problem of trajectory design.  In Section 3
              there will be presented a set of new problems that will be related to classical
              problems of Birkhoff splines.  These problems arise in aircraft control when it
              is desired to be able to set commanded velocities, accelerations, angular
              velocities etc.  So in fact we have a set of measurements yk(t) and at various
              points in time some, but not all, of these must have prescribed values and the
              control must be designed in order to attain the required values.  Here the
              problem is more basic than uniqueness and is related to the most basic of
              problems-existence.  In Section 4 will be discussed what is really new ground. 
              In many complicated systems the movement of the system is governed by
              subsystems that effect particular avenues of control.  The basic example of
              this research is the muscular control of the human body.  For the most part
              muscles occur in opposing pairs and only one of a pair can be active at any
              given time.  In order to execute a movement a muscle contracts and causes one
              particular movement.  To execute a complicated movement muscles are switched on
              and off in accordance with some higher control law and the body makes a smooth
              coordinated movement.  One only need watch a professional gymnast to see the
              superb coordination that must be maintained for the body to move smoothly and
              quickly through a complicated maneuver as, for example, one would see on the
              pommel horse.  There are no current plans to develop a control strategy for 
              such a complicated maneuver, but control strategies will be developed that will
              perform other simpler tasks.  Finally in Section 5 it is shown that there are
              basic problems in stability that must be considered with each of these
              problems.  The problem of stability for systems which are being switched is
              relatively new.  Here is discussed the current state of research and described
              a series of problems that must be solved to insure that the controls schemes
              that are being proposed are implementable.
