Title       : Experimental Evaluation of Software Coherence for Next-Generation Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a9705594

Award Number: 9705594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $794221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Scott scott@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandhya Dwarkadas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Efficiently supporting shared memory on top of commodity  hardware is one of the
              greatest challenges to widespread  acceptance of parallel computing.  Coherence
              is the central  problem: data in a large-scale system must be replicated and 
              kept near to the processors that use them, but changes must  be communicated to
              all of the copies.  This research  addresses this problem through a distinctive
              combination of  software and low-cost hardware, and through an active 
              integration of "behavior-driven" coherence protocols with  compiler-based
              program analysis.  Applications to be studied  include collaborative work with
              researchers in Economics,  Biology, Radiology, Genetics, data mining, computer
              vision,  and virtual reality.    The hardware base for the research is a
              cluster of eight  multiprocessors (32 processors total) acquired under a 
              collaborative agreement with Digital Equipment Corporation,  and connected by
              DEC's new Memory Channel network.  By  directly accessing remote memory, the
              network allows  processors to interact two orders of magnitude faster than 
              they can in comparable systems.  Software coherence  protocols can exploit this
              fast communication to maintain  directories, implement synchronization, and
              avoid  interrupting the work of remote processors.  The ultimate  goal of the
              research is to obtain supercomputer performance  for both traditional and
              emerging applications on networks  of commodity machines.
