Title       : Dissertation Research: Ceramic Use in an Agrarian Society: Ethnoarchaeology
               among the Gamo of Southwestern Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9705781

Award Number: 9705781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11827              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Brandt sbrabdt@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt, Mr. John Arthur will collect data for
              his doctoral  dissertation.  He will conduct extended ethnographic fieldwork
              among the Gamo people in Southwestern Ethiopia and supplement this with library
              research in Addis Ababa. The goal of this work is to study ceramic use among
              these traditional agriculturists and extract information which will be of
              archaeological value. Given the widespread penetration of western markets,
              there are very few places in the world today where groups still produce pottery
              on a local level by traditional techniques and rely on the products. The Gamo
              are interesting because they span an altitudinal gradient and the crops they
              grow are divided into several complexes which are segregated by height above
              sea level. Thus, within the context of a single `culture` significant clearly
              patterned variation in behavior can be observed. Mr. Arthur will focus on
              ceramic production, use and discard and to accomplish his goal he will conduct
              extensive research in three villages. He will collect basic demographic and
              social data and within this context carry out detailed observation on vessel
              context and use-alteration changes. He will observe daily ceramic use such as
              cooking practices. He will also conduct laboratory analyses on a sample of used
              ceramic vessels and abraders to gain insight into the structural nature of
              these materials and the alterations they undergo through repeated use.  Because
              pottery was widely used by prehistoric people in many parts of the world and
              because it is well and abundantly preserved in archaeological sites, it has
              provided a focus for scientific investigation. Archaeologists often recover
              large numbers of broken potsherds in their excavations and they attempt,
              through analysis, to reconstruct numerous aspects of the makers' and users'
              lifestyles. To do this effectively, it is important to understand how ceramics
              reflect human behavior and what analytic techniques can most effectively
              elucidate this relationship. It is extremely useful to examine these
              interactions in societies which still produce pottery by traditional methods
              and Mr. Arthur has located an ideal situation to do this.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will help develop analytic techniques of
              potential use in many archaeological situations. It will also assist in
              training a promising young scientist.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
