Title       : Nonlinear Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9705380

Award Number: 9705380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9705380  Jonathan Goodman       ABSTRACT OF PROPOSAL BY JONATHAN GOODMAN     
              APPLIED ANALYSIS AND COMPUTATION    This proposal covers several areas of
              applied mathematics, applied analysis,  and computational science.  One area is
              the mathematical analysis of nonlinear  waves and fronts, particularly
              multidimensional shocks.  Another area  is control of systems governed by
              hyperbolic partial differential equations  (wave propagation equations) and
              discrete ``lumped parameter'' approximations  to them that would be used in
              numerical computation of optimal controls.  Two main computational areas are:
              1: anisotropic adaptive refinement  methods for multidimensional approximation
              and finite element computation, and  2: Monte Carlo methods for computing
              quantum mechanical properties  of systems of interacting electrons.  Several
              other areas, including  the research of graduate students under my supervision
              are discussed.    There are several projects described here, most involving
              collaborations  with colleagues, postdoctoral trainees, or graduate students. 
              The project  on control of systems governed by hyperbolic differential
              equations   is about methods for removing acoustic noise from structures.  This
              has  applications in aircraft and submarine technology and in other places.  It
              fits in with a larger effort to design "smart materials" and "smart 
              structures".  Modern sensors, actuators, and computers are fast enough  to
              react to individual sound waves.  The mathematical problem is to design   good
              computational "control strategies" that use this ability effectively.    The
              existing mathematical theory of control was developed with smaller,   simpler
              systems in mind and does not apply directly to control of systems   where
              acoustic waves (sound waves) are propagating.  We hope that our theory   of
              control will apply to such problems.  A more computational project is the 
              attempt to compute the "electronic structure" of molecules from quantum  
              mechanics.  The equation to be solved (the Schrodin ger equation) has been  
              known since 1926.  Still in 1997, there is no reliable way to solve the 
              Schrodinger equation for systems involving more than one electron (an oxygen 
              atom has 8).  The ability to do this would have enormous scientific and  
              technological impact, with applications ranging from superconductivity  to drug
              design.
