Title       : Geometry of Measures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9705798

Award Number: 9705798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatiana Toro toro@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Most people agree that Euclidean space is flat and that the   Lebesgue
              measure in Euclidean space is doubling (i.e the  volume of the ball of radius
              2r is bounded above by the volume of the   ball of radius r). Toro will
              investigate the relationship between these   two notions: flatness and
              doubling. She  will show the extent to which these two concepts are deeply
              intertwined.  One of the main goals of this project is to show that there
              exists an  equivalence between the doubling properties of a measure and the
              flatness  of its support. Some of the questions discussed here fit naturally
              into the  framework of free boundary regularity problems with weak boundary
              conditions.    In order to address the questions described in this proposal
              tools  from partial differential equations, harmonic analysis and geometric 
              measure theory are needed. The ideas discussed here belong to a   larger
              project that intends to establish that weak notions of regularity   are for
              many purposes sufficient to answer basic questions in analysis   and geometric
              measure theory.      Free boundary problems arise naturally in physics and
              engineering. The   free boundary may appear as the interface between a fluid
              and the air, or  water and ice. In the filtration problem, which studies how
              water   filtrates from a dam made of a porous medium (say earth),   the free
              boundary separates the wet part from the dry part.  Many people are concerned
              with the question of the regularity of  the free boundary. In this proposal the
              investigator addresses the   question of the regularity of the free boundary
              for the obstacle   problem. This problem has been studied by Alt and Caffarelli
              among others.  Their hypothesis restrict the sort of obstacles that can be
              considered.  In this project a larger class of obstacles is allowed with the
              hope  that the potential results will cover a broader spectrum of physical 
              problems.
