Title       : Renormalization in Statistical Mechanics and Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9705095

Award Number: 9705095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70434              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans A. Koch koch@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705095    Koch    Professor Koch is investigating continuous-spin models near
              criticality,  quasiperiodic orbits for classical Hamiltonian flows, and lattice
              gases  related to aperiodic tilings and quasicrystals. The first two of these 
              projects involves the use, and further development, of renormalization  group
              techniques. In a previous renormalization group analysis of  ferromagnetic spin
              models, some fundamental questions were answered in a  simplified hierarchical
              setting. Ongoing work now deals with the problem  of restoring some of the
              ingredients that have been missing. The  investigation of quasiperiodic motion
              for Hamiltonian flows is based on a  new class of renormalization group
              transformations that was introduced in  a previous project. One of the goals is
              to develop these transformations  into tools for studying non-perturbative
              phenomena, such as the breakup of  smooth invariant tori. Other interesting
              questions concern the accumulation  of closed orbits at invariant tori and the
              interplay between renormalization  group transformations that correspond to
              different frequency vectors.  The third project deals with a promising but
              largely unknown class of  statistical mechanics models: Lattice gases with
              non-periodic Gibbs states.  The current investigation focuses on a few
              examples, based on aperiodic  tilings, for which the minimum energy
              configurations are well known.  The goal is to identify and understand the low
              temperature properties of  these models and to develop the appropriate methods
              for analyzing them.    Professor Koch's study of ferromagnetic spin models is
              part of a long-term  effort toward a mathematical foundation of the modern
              theory of critical  phenomena in condensed matter physics. One of the striking
              phenomena is that  there are observable quantities (critical indices) which
              seem to be  independent of the system considered, within large classes of
              different  systems. Starting from some basic assumptions, the current theory
              allows  an approximate computation of  these universal quantities. But it is
              still  an open problem to show that these assumptions hold, within a class of 
              reasonably realistic models. Ongoing investigations in this area use 
              computer-assisted proofs and involve further development of these techniques. 
              This includes validated numerics -- a technique which is of increasing 
              interest also in engineering and modern industrial design. Another critical 
              phenomenon investigated in this project is the loss of stability of quasi- 
              periodic orbits in classical Hamiltonian systems. In certain cases, this  loss
              of stability is believed to be associated with a significant increase  in
              "chaotic" motion. The process appears to be universal, in the sense  described
              above, but it is not yet understood. Interest in this problem stems  from
              celestial mechanics and plasma physics, where questions of stability  play an
              important role. And of course, the mathematics involved is  interesting in
              itself. The third project deals with statistical mechanics  models whose
              minimum energy configurations are non-periodic. Some of these  models are
              believed to describe quasicrystals, and others may have features  similar to
              spin glasses. They are unusual by current standards, but not  exceptional. In
              fact, non-periodicity is a generic property for ground  states in a standard
              class of statistical mechanics models. So far, almost  all investigations of
              such models have been limited to studying the zero  temperature state. The goal
              now is to obtain some useful information about  the behavior at positive
              temperatures, using a combination of (large scale)  numerical simulations and
              analytical techniques.
