Title       : University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the Mathematical
               Sciences: Rensselaer-Rockwell Senior Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9705051

Award Number: 9705051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62575              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Schwendeman schwed@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This award supports the initiation of a collaborative research  program
              between Dr. Barna Bihari of the Rockwell Science Center  and Professor Donald
              Schwendeman of the Department of  Mathematical Sciences at Rensselaer
              Polytechnic Institute.  The  research will be performed at Rensselaer during
              the academic  year, 1997-98, and the subsequent summer, with follow-up 
              collaborative activity planned.  The focus of the research  will be on
              multiresolution schemes for the numerical solution of  nonlinear conservation
              laws.  Specific tasks will include the  implementation of high-order
              multidimensional ENO schemes on  general curvilinear grids, the study and
              implementation of  high-order boundary conditions, the study and implementation
              of  error estimates and adaptivity, and the application of these  methods to
              highly relevant computational fluid dynamics (CFD)  problems to the industrial
              sponsor.  A wide range of research and  teaching activity is planned including
              the formation of a  research activity group on numerical methods for
              conservation  laws which will focus the research efforts of faculty and 
              students initiated by this award.  Through the interaction with  this research
              group and with other programs at Rensselaer,  such as the Scientific
              Computation Research Center (SCOREC), the  collaboration will have a broad
              impact.  In addition to bringing  new areas of active research to Rensselaer,
              this collaborative  program will enrich existing programs.  A benefit to the
              teaching  activity at Rensselaer will occur through the interaction with 
              students in the math department and with students involved in the 
              Computational Science and Engineering program.  Dr. Bihari's  collaboration
              will also enhance the ongoing effort to encourage  academic-industry
              interaction through programs such as the  Workshop on Mathematical Problems in
              Industry (MPI).  This award  includes significant cost sharing by Rockwell.   
              This project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OM A) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
