Title       : Quasiconformal Mappings, Doubling Measures and Subharmonic Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9705227

Award Number: 9705227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jang-Mei G. Wu wu@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wu    Abstract      Professor Wu shall continue her study of removable sets and 
               nonremovable sets for quasiconformal mappings.  She intends to   construct
              nonremovable sets which are simple in nature and can be   described without
              using mappings.  Such sets are known to exist   in the plane, the problem here
              is for higher dimensional space.    She also intends to study whether the
              lifting of sets from the   plane into the space will destroy the
              nonremovability.  Also   Professor Wu shall continue her work on null sets of
              dyadic   doubling measures: how easily a null set may be changed into a  
              non-null set under the multiplication by a positive number.  This   problem has
              a close connection with a question of P. Erdos on   universal sets. 
              Furthermore, Professor Wu shall continue to   investigate the growth of
              subharmonic functions in half space and   its influence on the size of the
              asymptotic sets on the boundary.    Professor Wu is working in the area of
              potential theory and   geometric function theory.  More specifically, she
              studies the   growths of the solutions of certain differential equations, the  
              geometry of the region where the equations are defined, and their   relations. 
              One of the equations under study is Laplace's   equation, which has a very
              important place in the study of   thermal conductivity, electrostatic potential
              and fluid dynamics.    Moreover, this equation is the root of a whole family of
                differential equations, called elliptic equations.  Elliptic   equations are
              interesting to mathematicians due to their origins   in physics.
