Title       : Algorithmic and Combinatorial Extensions of Continued Fractions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9705782

Award Number: 9705782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Bowman bowman@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bowman  9705782       The continued fraction algorithm is one of the most 
              important fundamental algorithms in mathematics.  It returns for  any given
              real number a sequence of rational numbers that in a  very specific sense are
              the best possible approximations to the  given real number.  As a consequence
              continued fractions have  applications throughout mathematics including, but
              not limited  to: finding units in quadratic fields, solving linear 
              congruences, identifying a rational number in a floating point  calculation,
              and factoring large composite numbers.  Part of this  investigation deals with
              finding other algorithms similar to the  continued fraction algorithm, but that
              give approximations that  are best in other senses.  One part of the research
              deals with the  problem of determining an algorithm to return best
              approximations  in some previously specified sense.  Another deals with 
              determining in what way some known algorithms are giving "best"  results.  In
              much of the research, computers are used to aid in  the discovery and analysis
              of algorithms -- and this is necessary  as many of the algorithms of interest
              are quite complex.  One way  of understanding these algorithms is through their
              combinatorial  properties.  Thus one avenue of research being studied is into
              the  combinatorics of the algorithms.  Applications of the  combinatorics of
              the algorithms to other areas of mathematics is  also considered.      
              Algorithms are recipes, descriptions of how to solve a  problem step by step. 
              They are the basis for programs that tell  a computer what to do.  The speed of
              an algorithm usually depends  on the size of the problem.  For instance, the
              usual algorithm for  solving a linear system of equations takes about 1000
              times  longer to solve a problem with 10 times more unknown variables; 
              algorithms for sorting a list of items may take 100 times longer  to sort a
              list that is 10 times longer.  For any significant  problem (modeling the earth
              or atmosphere, understanding the  security  of cryptosystems, protein folding,
              etc.) creating more  efficient algorithms is an important goal.  This project
              looks for  best possible algorithms for several kinds of problems.  Employing 
              such algorithms can make the difference between solving a problem  in five
              years or in five hours.
