Title       : Properties of Superfluid Three Helium in Novel Porous Media at Very Low
               Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2000   
File        : a9705295

Award Number: 9705295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $816340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeevak M. Parpia jeevak@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Reppy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705295 
              Parpia    This  Focused  Research  Group  grant  supports  a  comprehensive 
              experimental  and theoretical study of the effects  of  nanoscale  disorder  on
              quantum ground states, including superfluid  phases.  The  discovery that the
              phase diagram of mixtures of 3He and  4He  is  radically altered by a low
              density aerogel medium was rapidly  followed by studies of pure 3He in aerogel.
              These studies  reveal  that  the phase diagram of the superfluid phases is
              substantially  modified, altering the stability of the A and B phases as well
              as  creating  a  new  normal-to-superfluid transition  even  at  zero 
              temperature.  The role of aerogel as a collection  of  impurities  introduced 
              into the superfluid will be explored by altering  the  density and correlations
              of the aerogel. The PIs will also  study  effects  of  other disordered porous
              media on the  quantum  phase  diagrams.  Experimental  tools include  NMR, 
              heat  capacity  and  ultrasound   in  addition  to  sound  and  torsional  
              oscillator  measurements  to  characterize the nature of the superfluid.  The 
              PIs will design new aerogels specifically tailored for studies of  superfluid
              3He and mixtures of 3He and 4He. Very low temperatures  will  in  many
              instances be critical for the exploration  of  the  phase diagram of pure 3He. 
              %%%  This  Focused  Research  Group  grant  supports  a  comprehensive 
              experimental and theoretical study of the effects of atomic-scale  disorder  on
               the nature of quantum-mechanical states,  including  superfluid   states,  
              which  are  preferred  by  liquid   helium  (isotopes  of  mass three and four
              atomic units) at  temperatures  close to absolute zero. Superfluids flow with
              no resistance  from  the  surrounding  medium or container. In the  case  of 
              electron  superfluids,  i.e.,   superconductors  such  as  lead  below  its 
              transition temperature, this means electrical current  flow  with  no 
              resistance. Superfluid states a re found in nature  in  helium  isotopes  and 
              electron  systems at  low  temperatures,  and  are  believed  to  taken on by
              neutrons in neutron stars.  Superfluids  permit  classes  of  electronic 
              devices  called  Superconducting  Quantum Interference Devices (SQUID's) which
              are the world's most  sensitive  detectors  of  magnetic field.  SQUID's  are 
              used  in  advanced  medical practice in commercial electrocardiographs  and 
              magneto-   encephalographs,  which  permit,  respectively,   non-  invasive 
              detection  of  heart and mental  disorders.  Superfluid  helium  put into
              rotation acts like a gyroscope: it has  recently  been  demonstrated that such
              a gyroscope will allow detection  of  rotation  at an unprecedented level of
              sensitivity. The  research  carried out under the present grant explores the
              effects of  atom  scale disorder on such superfluid states, and may have
              beneficial  effects on technology involving sensor devices as mentioned,  and 
              more  broadly,  even  to include present and future  versions  of 
              microelectronic computer technology.  ***
