Title       : Problems in Dynamics of Phase Transitions and Numerical Analysis of Conversation
               Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9705723

Award Number: 9705723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Haitao Fan fan@math.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Haitao Fan    Abstract:    The long-range goal for the proposed  project is to
              understand the  dynamics of liquid/vapor phase transitions and its mathematical
               theories.  Liquid/vapor phase transitions are important phenomena in  science
              and engineering.  Traditional models for the  dynamics of phase  transition,
              exhibit gaps when compared with experiments.  We propose  to investigate the
              dynamics of liquid/vapor phase transitions through  an approach different from
              traditional models. The model is a system of  conservation laws with source
              terms (the system) based on equations for   two-phase reactive flows. Based our
              preliminary studies, this approach    promises to better fit experiment.  To
              accomplish our objective, the   following specific sub-objectives will be
              pursued:  1) Derive qualitative and quantitative  asymptotic models for the
              system.    2) Study issues such as basic wave patterns in the system and its
              asymptotic   models, e.g., traveling waves, admissibility criteria for  shocks
              and phase   boundaries, and the Riemann problem.    3) Develop algorithms to
              carry out numerical simulations on the system and  develop test problem to
              justify such computations.  Study issues related to  numerical schemes for the
              system   4) Study the well-posedness of the  system  or its simplified
              asymptotic   models.  The expectations are that, at the conclusion of the
              proposed period  of  support,  results will have been obtained  on qualitative
              and  quantitative behavior of the system, and numerical simulations will  have
              been carried out. Results on qualitative and  quantitative  behavior of the
              system  will be compared with experiments.  Based on  these comparisons, the
              adequateness of the modeling can be assessed,  and  the modeling can be further
              improved.  It is expected that the  results obtained will facilitate
              understanding of the dynamics of  liquid/vapor phase transitions.  Tools for
              numerical simulations of  such phenomena will also result from this work.   
              Most materials have four phase s: solid, liquid, vapor and plasma  phases. 
              Phase transition,  such as the change from water to vapor and  vice versa, is
              fundamental phenomena of materials that occur in  daily life and everywhere in
              our environment. Many manufacturing  processes, such as the growth of a single
              large crystal used in  semiconductor manufacturing, involve phase transitions. 
              Liquid/vapor  phase transitions happen during the flight of  airplane through
              clouds  and during underwater explosions.  Liquid/vapor phase changes also 
              occur at high speed moving parts of a vessel, such as the propeller of  a
              submarine, which consumes energy and makes noise detectable by  enemies' solar
              devices.  In summary, phase transitions are not only  fundamental scientific
              properties of materials but also vital to  industrial competitiveness and
              national security.  The proposed project  is to study the evolution of phase
              changes, in particular the rapid  liquid/vapor transitions induced by rapid
              moving body or waves.  The  objectives are to establish effective mathematical
              models for  liquid/vapor transitions that agree with experimental data, and to 
              develop numerical simulation tools for such phase transitions.
