Title       : Correlations, Disorder, and the Anderson-Mott Transition in the Bose Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1997     
File        : a9705513

Award Number: 9705513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kara M. Beauchamp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705513  Beauchamp    This  is  a Research Planning Grant for a new female
              faculty  to  study  the Bose glass.  The Bose glass is  a  system  of 
              superconducting vortices localized in a disordered  columnar  defect lattice,
              is described by the same Hamiltonian as  the  Coulomb  glass, a system of
              localized charge carriers  in  a  doped.   The ground state of these systems,
              which determines  whether  they  are conducting or insulating,  depends  in  a 
              complicated manner on the relative strengths of the particle-  particle  and
              particle-potential interactions.  In the  Bose  glass,  disorder can be
              controlled by creating the  columnar  defects  in  thin superconducting films
              using  electron-beam  lithography,  and  particle interactions can  be 
              controlled  simply  by changing the applied magnetic field.  Using  this  model
               Bose  glass  system, this proposed research  aims  to  elucidate  the effects
              of independent variation of  particle  interactions  and disorder on both the
              static  configuration  and the dynamic motion of the particles.  Since such
              control  over disorder and interaction is not possible in the Coulomb  glass, 
              the  results of this research will provide  valuable  feedback for the
              theoretical understanding of these systems.  Furthermore,  the results of this
              research will  deepen  our  understanding  of  vortex pinning in those high 
              temperature  superconductors   that  have  disordered   columnar   defect 
              lattices produced by heavy-ion bombardment.  %%%  Although  physicists have
              been successful  in  developing  a  detailed understanding of electronic and
              magnetic properties  of   a   wide  range  of  materials,  disorder  and  
              strong  interparticle interactions in some materials has  encumbered  such  a 
              detailed understanding.  The present research  will  focus   on   the   role  
              of   disorder  and   interparticle  interactions  in  a  system of magnetic
              flux  tubes,  called  vortices,  in  superconducting thin films with
              intentionally  fabricated  defects.   The  defects   will  be  created   and 
              controlled  using  electron-beam  lithography,  and   vortex  interactions 
              will  be  controlled simply  by  changing  the  applied  magnetic  field.   The
               effects  of  disorder   and  interparticle interactions on the vortex
              configurations  and  vortex motion will be measured.  Sincince such control 
              over  disorder   and  interactions  is  not  possible   in   other  disordered,
               interacting  systems,  the  results   of   this  research  will provide
              valuable feedback for the theoretical  understanding of these systems. 
              Furthermore, the results of  this research will deepen our understanding of
              vortex motion  in   high  temperature  superconductors.   This  a  Research 
              Planning Grant.  ***
