Title       : Finite Element Methods of Least-Squares Types
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9705793

Award Number: 9705793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pavel B. Bochev bochev@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,9216,9263,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9705793  P.Bochev        The main focus of this research is directed at the
              design of fast,   robust and accurate algorithms for the numerical solution of
              nonlinear   partial differential equations. To accomplish these objectives we  
              consider finite element methods based on application of least-squares  
              variational principles. Such principles offer significant computational   and
              theoretical advantages that are not present in other discretization   schemes,
              e.g., mixed Galerkin methods. Most notably, corresponding   least-squares
              methods are not subject to stability constraints, such as   the inf-sup
              condition, and lead to symmetric and positive definite   algebraic problems.
              The principal objective of the research will be to   develop, analyze and
              implement finite element methods that can fully  exploit the inherent
              advantages of the least-squares formalism,   especially in the context of
              realistic applications. Our efforts here   will be guided by the impact of both
              the mathematical structure of model   problems and the computational features
              of least-squares principles   upon the algorithmic design of the methods. The
              research will be carried   in the context of systems of partial differential
              equations that are   compact perturbations of linear elliptic operators.
              Least-squares   principles for these systems are obtained through minimization
              of    problem-dependent, norm-equivalent functionals. As a result,  
              discretization   of the associated Euler-Lagrange equations leads to systems of
              nonlinear   algebraic equations having symmetric and positive definite
              Jacobians.  These equations are solved using Newton linearization combined with
                robust continuation techniques. To address large-scale computations, at  
              each Newton step the linearized systems are solved using robust  
              preconditioned iterative methods implemented without assembly of the  
              discretization matrix. Design of efficient preconditioners for these  
              iterative solvers will exploit novel ideas, including the use of negative   
              norms in the least-squares functionals.    With the advent of new and more
              powerful digital computers numerical   simulation is emerging as a viable and
              cost-effective alternative to   expensive field experiments and tests. However,
              despite the increased   computational power there is still a real and existing
              need to develop   fast and robust computer algorithms for a wide range of
              industrial   applications. This is especially true for applications involving
              numerical   solution of the Navier-Stokes equations. The tremendous practical  
              importance of these equations stems from their fundamental role    in the
              modeling of fluid flows arising in such diverse applications as   atmospheric
              motions, flow of air around aircraft, and lubrication of ball   bearings. At
              the same time numerical solution of the Navier-Stokes   equations in realistic
              settings remains difficult and computationally   challenging. Indeed,
              large-scale solution of these equations in three   dimensions required in
              applications such as weather forecast, hurricane  tracking, and modeling of air
              pollution, continues to be an outstanding   problem which motivates this
              research project. Our principal goal is to   develop new, reliable and accurate
              numerical algorithms for the Navier-Stokes   equations that can be used for
              computations carried in realistic settings. To   accomplish this we explore
              alternative ways to discretize the model problem,   i.e., to replace this model
              by a set of equations that can be solved on a   computer. The research will
              focus on the development of novel discretization   techniques leading to
              equations that require less computational resources and   that are easier to
              solve than the equations obtained by standard methods. This   allows us to
              develop more robust, faster and easier to use codes. In addition   to fluid
              flow problems the research will also target numerical solution of  mathematical
              models arising in elasticity, electromagnetics and   reaction-diffusion
              applications, among others.
