Title       : Network Traffic Analysis and Multiresolution Schemes for Homogenization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9705665

Award Number: 9705665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Coifman coifman@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An NSF-Industrial Postdoctoral Fellow, Anna C. Gilbert, carries  out research
              jointly in the Department of Mathematics at Yale  University and AT&T
              Labs-Research.  The Faculty Mentor at Yale is  Ronald Coifman, Professor of
              Mathematics, and the supervisor at  AT&T is Dr. Walter Willinger.  We envisage
              two general areas of  research, both of which are of direct interest to AT&T:
              (1)  wavelet techniques for analysis and performance management of  network
              traffic, (2) wavelet techniques for homogenization of  differential equations. 
              The common element of these two areas is  the use of wavelets to decompose a
              problem into many scales and  to analyze which scales are crucial to solving
              the problem.    The research which will be conducted with Dr. Walter Willinger
              at  AT&T will include using wavelets to investigate the physical  model of
              Willinger, et al, at a basic level.  We want to model  and to tune queues,
              switches, and other component network  components in wavelet terms and then to
              derive the properties, in  wavelet terms, of the corresponding self-similar
              behavior.  There  are so many data sets available and in such detail that we
              want  to extract more detailed and more basic information than just the  Hurst
              parameter.  We want to build a structural model of the data  and the networks
              which produce that data.    The research which will be conducted with Prof.
              Ronald Coifman at  Yale University will include extending the methods developed
              in  Anna C. Gilbert's thesis.  We will construct multiresolution  methods for
              the reduction and homogenization of partial  differential equations.  We
              envision using these techniques in  many different applications.  In
              particular, we would like to use  these homogenization techniques to
              reconstruct a rough surface  off which electromagnetic waves are scattered.  We
              would also  compare the MRA homogenization methods for n-dimensional elliptic 
              PDEs with the classical theory.    Anna Gilbert completed her thesis under the
              supervision of I.  Daubechies at Princ eton University in June, 1997.  In it
              she  compares the wavelet techniques for homogenization with classical 
              analytical techniques, develops a wavelet method for homogenizing  nonlinear
              ordinary differential equations, and applies these  methods to a
              reaction-diffusion model.    This GOALI project is jointly supported by the MPS
              Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
