Title       : Systematics of Plant Parasitic Cyst Nematodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9705740

Award Number: 9705740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia R. Ferris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9705740  FERRIS    The microscopic plant parasitic cyst nematodes are a
              widespread and important group. Some kinds are destructive pests on important
              crops such as potatoes, soybeans, and cereal grains, whereas other kinds
              inhabit natural ecosystems and survive in small numbers on native plants.  Much
              is known about these nematodes on a global basis, but the information is
              largely restricted to knowledge about their shape and form and about their
              plant host preferences.  Because nematodes are an ancient group with a highly
              conserved morphology, it is suspected that gross similarities may mask
              important differences among geographical isolates and make it difficult to
              determine relationships among the different kinds.      In this research,
              Virginia Ferris will use DNA sequence data from highly conserved nuclear genes,
              plus data from more rapidly changing mitochondrial genes, to reconstruct the
              phylogenetic relationships among plant parasitic cyst nematodes.  Molecular
              data will be of great help in identifying the different kinds of nematodes
              found in all countries of the world, including many that cannot easily be
              separated from each other by microscopy alone yet may have important
              differences in behavior or ability to parasitize plants.  Moreover, molecular
              data can help us to establish relationships, and to determine where different
              kinds originated and how they spread.  This may help us to learn why it is that
              some cyst nematodes are destructive pests on important groups, whereas others
              seem to be natural components of undisturbed ecosystems.
