Title       : Experimental Study of the Magnetic Flux Line Lattice in Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9705389

Award Number: 9705389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva Y. Andrei   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705389 
              Andrei    This  experimental  research  project  focuses  the  interactions 
              between quantized magnetic flux lines threading through a Type II 
              superconductor. An ordered state of interacting  flux  lines,  as 
              theoretically  predicted  by Abrikosov, provides  the  conceptual  basis  of 
              the  experimental  work. The  influences  of  material  disorder,   thermal
              fluctuations, and the quantum nature  of  the  flux  line formation lead to an
              extremely complicated picture  in  the  area  of  parameters  where the 
              Abrikosov  lattice  becomes  unstable. There are questions relating to a glassy
              phase  of  the  flux   array,  among  others,   which  are  addressed   in  
              this  experimental project. The work on 2H-NbSe2  identified two states  of 
              the flux line lattice characterized by dramatically different  dynamics,  one
              being disordered and have pinning frequencies  two  orders  of  magnitude 
              higher  than  the  ordered  lattice,   and  accompanied  by  much higher
              critical currents. In  this  project  local  magnetization measurements will be
              made using an array  of  microscopic Hall sensors realized in the 2-D electron
              gas at  the  interface  of a GaAs/GaAlAs heterostructure. Other work  includes 
              DC  and  AC measurements of the shear modulus of the flux  array,  and
              measurements of transverse currents in dynamic fluxon states.  Portions of the
              work will be done in collaboration with  Dr.  Eli  Zeldov of the Weizmann
              Institute.  %%%  This experimental research project, is focused on the behavior
              of  Type  II  superconductors in a magnetic field. In this  case  the  magnetic
               field can penetrate the superconductor, in an array  of  quantized  flux
              lines. Under ideal conditions these  lines,  each  carrying  one  quantum of
              magnetic flux, arrange  in  an  ordered  array  or  flux lattice, as predicted
              theoretically by Abrikosov.  This  experimental  project  is devoted  to 
              measurement  of  the  motions  and  arrangements o f the flux lines in less 
              than  ideal  conditions when the flux lines may be in a disordered state or in 
              a  state  of motion somewhat like a liquid. The results  of  this  research may
              provide information of importance to the application  of  Type  II 
              superconductors including high temperature  cuprate  superconductors  in 
              improved  electrical  and  electromechanical  technology. This research project
              is interdisciplinary in  nature  and involves graduate students who will be
              excellently trained to  enter positions in industry, government or education. 
              ***
