Title       : High Pressure Experiments and Computer Modeling Studies of Relaxation Mechanisms
               in Nonlinear Optical Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9705800

Award Number: 9705800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194900             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Michael Hayden hayden@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705800  Hayden    Nonlinear optical (NLO) organic and polymeric materials have
              been  proposed for use in a variety of photonic systems.  Successful 
              implementation for frequency doubling, electrooptic (EO)  modulation, and
              photorefractive (PR) applications requires a  detailed knowledge of the
              connection between the structures of  these materials and their linear and
              nonlinear optical  properties.  This work is focused on determining the
              mechanisms  involved in relaxations in polymers and their effects on the 
              stability of the nonlinear optical properties of these polymers.  This work
              will utilize a new method to measure the pressure  dependence of the decay of
              the NLO coefficients at various  temperatures in poled NLO polymers by in-situ
              second harmonic  generation (SHG) and dielectric relaxation measurements on
              poled  and unpoled materials.  Previous studies found that the  relaxation of
              the second order NLO susceptibility in a guest-host  system is a function of
              the relative size of the dopant compared  to the sizes of the substituents or
              "beads" of the host.  It was  also found that below the glass transition
              temperature, Tg,  chromophore reorientation is coupled to secondary relaxations
              in  guest-host systems.  The coupling varies according to the  relative size of
              the chromophore and the side groups of the host.  This study will test the
              generality of these earlier results in  side-chain and main-chain NLO polymers.
               The most technologically  promising types will be studied: syndioregic
              polymers,  crosslinkable polymers, and high Tg guest-host systems based on 
              polyimides and polyquinolines.  In addition, the pressure studies  will be used
              to investigate new processing techniques useful for  achieving better
              stability.  In addition, detailed molecular  dynamics simulations of dopant and
              pendant chromophore  orientational kinetics will be performed.  The molecular
              modeling  will complement the experimental measurements in an attempt to 
              determine what the activation volume means on the mol ecular level  and hence
              solidify its usefulness as a parameter in the design of  more stable systems. 
              %%%  As the information age evolves, faster communication and  computing
              resources will be needed. Increasingly, these needs are  being and will
              continue to be met through the use and development  of optical device
              technologies.  The results of this work will be  useful in helping to design
              better materials for use in future  optical based communication, computing, and
              sensor systems.  ***
