Title       : Convergence and Oscillation in Ergodic Theory and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9705228

Award Number: 9705228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Rosenblatt jrsnbltt@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  9705228  Rosenblatt    This proposal is for research in  a number of
              new directions in harmonic analysis and ergodic theory.  The main principle at
              work here is that there are fundamental connections between classes of
              operators arising in harmonic analysis, ergodic theory, and probability theory.
               For example, there is a very strong connection between the behavior of
              martingales and the averages in ergodic theory.  This is clear where maximal
              functions are concerned, but it also is an important principle in regards to
              upcrossings of both processes.  Using estimates on the degree to which ergodic
              averages are a perturbation of suitable martingales, precise estimates on
              oscillation of ergodic sums can be analyzed.  There has been a good deal of
              success in this direction in the work of Jones, Kaufman,   Rosenblatt, and
              Wierdl, but additional studies of these properties are much needed .  In
              particular, it is proposed here to show that the best possible jump and
              upcrossing  inequalities in ergodic theory are the ones that can be obtained by
              relating the ergodic averages to martingales.  In this same spirit, the
              variational behavior of ergodic averages  is linked closely to the behavior of
              martingales. In recent work in ergodic theory, the importance of square
              functions for measuring the oscillation of general averages of ergodic
              transformations has become very clear.  This work has also led to obtaining
              estimates on the square function of the difference between ergodic sums and
              martingales.  Such analysis is yet in progress.However, the analysis of square
              functions of moving averages and of related operator sequences is not yet at
              all complete.  Also, other aspects of differences in ergodic theory, like
              unconditionality, and how they mimic the  behavior of martingale difference
              sequences, is well worth more investigation.      This grant is to fund the
              study of the long term behavior of dynamical systems and stochastic processes. 
              Many important physical phenomena, as varied as the beha vior of the stock
              market, lines in the supermarket, and data being received from a distant
              transmission source, exhibit locally erratic behavior which can be understood
              better by looking at the long term average behavior instead.  The study of such
              stochastic processes and their connections with one another, as well as their
              connections in terms of their fine structure with other less random processes,
              is a central one in modern mathematics.  It is only through such studies that
              we will be able to understand better and thus  be able to control or predict
              the evolution of the physical phenomena which this mathematics can model.
