Title       : Research in Manipulating Fractal Images and Fractal Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9705135

Award Number: 9705135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Shonkwiler (Shenk) shenk@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The world of networked computers has resulted in an explosion of  digital
              information.  This causes a problem in both transmission  and storage of this
              information.  Since "a picture is worth a  thousand words", much of this
              information is in the form of image  data.  However, pictures require much more
              data to store than  words.  Thus, it is necessary to reduce this storage
              requirement  somehow.    Many different ways of "compressing" this information
              have been  discovered, among them one that involves the use of fractals.  
              Fractals provide a convenient way of describing natural  phenomena, thus they
              have found many uses in various technical  fields.  Fractals have proven to
              provide an efficient scheme to  compress images, comparing favorably with other
              popular methods.    This project will take the next step -- using fractals as
              both a  compression tool as well as an analysis tool.  Given image data 
              comresses using the method of fractals, it is natural to try to  use the
              fractal description to analyze the image.  One would like  to extract parts of
              the image for processing -- say to recognize  a face in a picture. Another
              example would be to use the fractal  description of an image of a rock face to
              recognize the rock type  or to predict physical properties of the rock.    This
              research project will develop methods to use the data  from a fractal
              compressed image to extract further meaningful  information about the image.
              Use fractals to compress as well as  analyze information.    This GOALI project
              is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA)
              and the Division of   Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
