Title       : A Unified Approach to Characterizing Fracture-Flow Systems: Coupling Radar
               Tomography, Tracer Experiments, and Hydraulic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9705812

Award Number: 9705812
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Gorelick gorelick@geo.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9705812  Gorelick    Among the most pressing problems in hydrogeology is
              describing heterogeneity in fractured-rock systems.  Accurate 3D
              characterization of the hydraulic properties controlling fracture flow is
              required for predictive models of hydraulic head changes and solute migration. 
              The problem has been difficult because typically a single type of data (e.g.,
              hydraulic tests) has been used to deduce the complex pattern of fracture flow
              paths and flow barriers.  Individual analysis of data set may lead to "maps" of
              fractured rock geometry and hydraulic properties that are inconsistent with
              each other.  We suggest that simultaneous inversion of multiple types of
              information ranging from geophysical data (local and cross well radar) to
              hydraulic tests to tracer tests provides an approach that can identify
              fractured-rock aquifer heterogeneities including fracture zone geometry,
              connectivity, and transmissive properties.  Each type of data is analyzed with
              the appropriate physical simulation  models, including ones for wave
              propagation, hydraulic head changes, and solute migration.  We propose a
              coupled-inversion process based on a very flexible optimization procedure known
              as simulated annealing.  The method will yield images that are consistent with
              all the types of data (e.g., heads, concentrations, radar) and indicate
              fracture-zone geometry, hydraulic conductivity estimates, and spatially
              variable uncertainty estimates.  It will be developed and applied to both
              synthetic and field data.  Our past experience for sedimentary deposits has
              shown that synthetic data analysis exercises can promotes rapid development and
              testing of the "coupled" inversion approach.  Once the benefits and limitations
              of the proposed method are understood, application to complex field data
              provides a true test of the method.  The field data will be from the
              fractured-rock experimental site at Mirror Lake, New Hampshire.  To date, the
              USGS has collected radar tomography, seismic tomography, borehole geophysical
              log s, hydraulic test data and tracer test data.  In what we consider to be a
              unique opportunity, they are willing to make these newly collected data
              available to us.  The project will provide insight into the information that
              can be extracted from different types of data, the relative worth of data, and
              how joint analysis of different types of data can be used to deduce
              fracture-zone architecture.
