Title       : Postdoc: ECS Postdoctoral Associate: Design and Simulation of Algorithms and
               Mechanisms for Precision Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9705022

Award Number: 9705022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46119              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Y. Goldberg goldberg@ieor.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9192,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9705022  Goldberg, Kenneth Y.  University of California - Berkeley    CISE
              Postdoctoral Research Associates in Experimental CS: Design and Simulation of
              Algorithms and Mechanisms for Precision Assembly    (This award supports CES
              associate Karl Bohringer.)  Progress in miniaturization of mass-produced
              commercial products requires improvements and innovation in precision assembly.
               Products such as magnetic storage systems, palmtop and wearable computers, or
              telecommunications devices often require submicron-level assembly operations. 
              Increasingly, the components for such assemblies are batch-fabricated in MEMS
              (micro electro mechanical system) technology, often yielding thousands of
              components in one parallel fabrication run.    In contrast to the highly
              automated fabrication of MEMS components, current assembly techniques are
              rather limited.  Conventional, sequential pick-and-place assembly is extremely
              inefficient or impractical for such applications, because of the small size of
              the components and the high accuracy required.  Instead, novel techniques are
              proposed for parallel self-assembly.    Active surfaces (i.e., surfaces that
              can generate two-dimensional force vector fields) permit the precise
              positioning, orienting, and sorting of small parts with little or no sensor
              feedback.  Vibration and fluidic   agitation can generate a motive force for
              parallel assembly.  Mechanical compliance, using micro-chamfers and latches,
              can be exploited to reduce the degrees of freedom of the components.   
              Detailed models are developed to describe precision parallel assembly using
              three techniques: mechanical vibration, fluidic agitation, and active surfaces.
               The motive force response for each of these techniques is analyzed, and
              simulations with a modeling system are performed.  Physical experiments are
              performed   to confirm that our models accurately reflect measured behavior.
