Title       : Strongly Correlated Electron Phenomena in Rare Earth and Actinide Intermetallics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9705454

Award Number: 9705454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Brian Maple mbmaple@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc    9705454 
              Maple    This   experimental  research  project  focuses  on  the  unusual 
              electronic  properties of crystalline solids in  which  localized  inner  shell
               f-electrons  (present in rare  earth  and  actinide  elements)  lie in the
              same energy range as outer shell conduction  electrons.    Hybridization  of 
              the  localized  and   conduction  electron  systems  leads  to strongly 
              correlated  behavior  with  several manifestations which remain incompletely
              understood.  The  particular unusual effects of interest in this project  are 
              non-  Fermi-liquid behavior; superconductivity and magnetism  in  heavy 
              fermion compounds; and the formation of small energy gaps due  to 
              hybridization  in  small gap semiconductors  (Kondo  insulators).  These  
              effects  will  be  studied  under  changing  composition,  magnetic  field, 
              temperature  or pressure.  Measurements  to  be  performed  include  thermal,
              transport and  magnetic  properties;  additional measurements, in some cases
              with collaborations,  will  include  neutron  scattering, photoemission,
              electron  tunneling,  infrared spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance. 
              %%%  This research project experimentally studies the unusual behavior  of 
              certain types of compounds which combine heavy (rare earth or  actinide
              elements) with lighter elements,  as for example in  the  intermetallic metal
              Uranium Beryllium 13. In this case deep  core  electrons  from  U remain
              localized on the U sites  but  interact  with free electrons from the
              Beryllium, an interaction that lends  very  peculiar  properties to the free or
               conduction  electrons.  This  effect  leads  to  "correlated electron" 
              behavior  and  to  anomalies  in  "electronic" properties,  such as  the 
              electrical  conductivity, the electronic portion of the thermal conductivity, 
              the magnetic susceptibility, and others. The conduction electrons  behave  in 
              many  measurements as if their  masses  were  greatly  enhanc ed,  by  up  to
              three orders of magnitude (hence  the  name  "heavy  fermion  compound"),
              relative to the electronic  mass  in  vacuum  or  in simple metals such as
              sodium, copper or  aluminum.  The  study of these materials and their effects
              is valuable as  a  testing  ground for theories of electrical and related
              properties  of  solids, which can then be more confidently applied  to  other 
              systems; and in the search for novel properties and new compounds  which  may 
              find  new  application in technology.  This  research  project is
              interdisciplinary in nature and involves both graduate  and  undergraduate 
              students who will be excellently  trained  to  enter positions in industry,
              government or education.  ***
