Title       : Materials Studies and Superconductivity of Uranium Platinum 3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9705473

Award Number: 9705473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Halperin w-halperin@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Sauls  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Seidman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Bedzyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705473  Halperin    The  Ambitious goal of this program is to understanding 
              the  mechanism  for superconductivity in heavy fermion compounds.  The  first 
              step is to identify the symmetry  of  the  order  parameter and we focus first
              on Upt3, which is arguably  the  prototype  unconventional heavy fermion
              superconductor.   In  order  to determine the pairing state in Upt3 we propose 
              to  make  single crystals with a range of impurities and measure  the  
              impurity   dependence  of  the  physical   properties,  including  the thermal
              conductivity, specific heat  and  the  phase  diagram.  In order to identify
              the spin structure  of  the pairing state, we will measure NMR knight shifts
              and the  upper critical fields and compare with calculations that are 
              sensitive   to  surface  scattering  and  strong  spin-orbit  interactions.  We
              will perform measurements of magnetization  and  magnetoresistance and, with
              our collaborators at  other  institutions, we will investigate further the
              magnetic phase  diagram  using  neutron and magnetic X-ray  scattering.   We 
              will compare these results with calculations of impurity and  defect 
              scattering  on  the  physical  properties  for   the  principal  candidate 
              ground  states.   The  low-temperature  transport   coefficients,  eg.  thermal
               conductivity,   are  important  because  they reflect the low  enrgy 
              excitations  associated  with  the nodes of  the gap.   We  believe  that 
              transport measurements on high quality single crystals, such  as  we  are able
              to grow, will be decisive in resolving  the  orbital  symmetry  of  the pairing
              state  in  heavy  fermion  superconductors, e.g. Upt3.  %%%  It  is  proposed 
              to  solve key problems  in  heavy  fermion  superconductivity  with  initial 
              focus  on  the   important  compound  Upt3.   The  results of this  research 
              will  have  impact  on  understanding  of  superconductivity  in   other 
              correlated fermion superconductors, notably high temperature  superconductors. 
                That  superconductivity   in   Up t3   is  unconventional, is evident in its
              complex phase diagram  and  the  power  laws  that  are  exhibited  in  the 
              temperature  dependence   of  thermodynamic  and  transport   properties, 
              particularly  at  low temperatures.  Yet it is not yet known  which  of  a 
              number  of  likely  possible  candidates   for  superconducting pairing state
              is the appropriate  model  for  Upt3.   Separating intrinsic and extrinsic
              behavior  is  the  key   to  solving  this  problem  and  is  a  challenge  for
               experimental  and  theoretical condensed matter  physics  in  concert    with 
               a   materials   program.    Growing    and  characterizing   the   purest, 
              most  defect-free   crystals  possible  is  essential to the success of
              research  in  this  field  and  we  have developed facilities for this 
              purpose.  Interest  has been expressed from an international group  of 
              scientists  to  collaborate  with  us,  working   with   the  materials
              produced in these facilities.  The  proposed  work  draws  together  four 
              principal  investigators,  Professors  Bedzyk, Halperin, Sauls and Seidman from
              two departments  at  Northwestern University:  Materials Science and 
              Engineering  and Physics and Astronomy.  These researchers have expertise  in 
              materials  science, crystal growth and characterization,  experimental   low 
              temperature  physics,  and   theoretical  physics     of     correlated   
              electron    systems     and  superconductivity.   The expertise of the  members
               of  this  group is at the forefront of their respective disciplines.  ***
