Title       : Permanent and Transient Refractive Index Gratings in Rare-Earth Activated
               Silicate Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  2000    
File        : a9705284

Award Number: 9705284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Wicksted jpw519@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George S. Dixon  (Principal Investigator former)
              Joel J. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705284  Dixon    This is a new project on the physics of rare earth doped 
              silicate glasses for the formation of permanent and  transient refractive index
              gratings in rare-earth activated  silicate glasses.  These studies will help
              develop a  pjysical basis for tailoring the photorefractive properties  of
              these media for frequency-selective switches, holographic  memories,
              distributed feedback lasers, and other  applications in optical signal
              processing.  Glasses are  synthesized in-house and characterized for properties
              of  grating strength and kinetics.  These measurements are  supported by
              theoretical studies and by experimental studies  of the phonon physics and
              transport properties of the  glasses.  The PI's expect to demonstrate a
              prototype  frequency-selective optical switch using transient gratings.  Such a
              device is important in order to increase the capacity  of optical
              communications networks.  %%%  This is a new project on the physics of rare
              earth doped  silicate glasses for the formation of permanent and  transient
              refractive index gratings in rare-earth activated  silicate glasses.  The
              capacity of  fiber optical telephone  networks can be greatly increased,
              without installing new  cable, if messages carried by different light waves are
               transmitted simultaneously along the same fiber.  To do  this, it is essential
              to be able to switch and separate  these different light waves so that the
              messages arrives at  the correct receiver.  Light wavelength-selective filters 
              and switches are an interesting means of accomplishing this.  The present
              research project is directed toward  understanding the physical processes and
              chemical  compositions that make rare earth containing silicate  glasses a
              class of materials in which to fabricate these  switches and filters.  The
              results of this research are  expected to provide a "road map" for tailoring
              the glass  chemistry and processing to produce efficient devices of  this kind.
               One of the expected outcome of this work will be  a prototype  wavelength. 
              ***
