Title       : Latent Variable Models in Action: Hierarchical Bayes and Mixture Models for
               Repeated Discrete Measures with Individual Differences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9705032

Award Number: 9705032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Junker brian@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF DMS-9705032    Latent variable models in action: hierarchical Bayes and
              mixture   models for repeated discrete measures with individual differences   
              Brian Junker    Carnegie Mellon University        PROJECT ABSTRACT:    A
              central feature of this research is the development of widely   applicable
              methodology for latent variable models for measurement   problems in education,
              psychology and the social sciences.  This   methodology is being developed and
              tested in several specific areas:   Monotonicity and stochastic ordering
              properties that follow from the   strictly unidimensional latent variable
              representation are being   studied and applied to nonparametric scaling
              problems.  A promising   Markov chain Monte Carlo method is being extended and
              applied to a   variety of problems, including: correct modeling of rater
              variability   in educational achievement data; accomodating heterogeneous  
              catchability in multiple-recapture censuses; and developing methods   for
              multidimensional and hierarchical latent variable models for   discrete
              repeated measures.  In addition, the research addresses the   sensitivity of
              inferences to underspecification of the model.  A   second thrust of the
              research is to refine and develop existing   characterizations of
              unidimensional latent structure into a   statistical theory of, and statistical
              methods for assessing, latent   variable dimensionality.    This work aims to
              more fully blend psychometric and statistical   approaches to latent variable
              models for repeated discrete measures.   Psychometric methodology tends to
              concentrate on model building and   model features; and psychometric data
              analysis tends toward issues of   scaling (selecting questions that ``hang
              together'' in the sense that   a unidimensional latent variable model holds),
              reliability (ensuring   that the latent variable can be estimated well from the
              questions   selected), and the assessment of latent variable dimensionality
              from   data.  Statistical methodology tends to sidestep these bas ic  
              psychometric questions, and instead concentrates on finer model   adjustments,
              and various inferential and predictive tasks.  The focus   of this research is
              on statistical and psychometric features of latent   variable models for
              repeated measures data, which is of interest to   quantitative psychologists,
              educational measurement specialists, and   cognitive scientists, as well as
              other social scientists.  Much of the   work is collaborative in nature, and it
              is built around the   development of theory and methodology motivated from, and
              useful for,   substantive applications.   
              --------------------------------------------------------------------------
