Title       : Phase Transitions of Weakly Physisorbed Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9705270

Award Number: 9705270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton W. Cole mwc@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moses H. Chan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705270  Cole    This  Focused  Research  Group  grant  supports  a 
              collaborative  theoretical-experimental  study of phase  transitions  of 
              weakly  physisorbed films. The investigations focus on films of the noble  gas
              helium, including mixtures of the isotopes of masses four and  three,  adsorbed
               on  the  substrates  which  offer  the  weakest  possible  binding.  Such 
              substrates include  alkali  metals  and  molecular  hydrogen. This choice is
              made to more clearly  display  novel  behaviors  in  the  areas of superfluid 
              onset  and  phase  separation  in  submonolayer  two  dimensional  films;   in 
               the  varieties  of  wetting behavior; and in the  adsorption  of  very  thick 
               films.  In  all  cases  the  research  is  collaborative,  involving   close 
              coupling  between  experiment,   theory,   and  simulation. The experimental
              methods include dielectric constant,  volumetric,  capillary rise, torsional
              oscillator, heat  capacity  and  quartz microbalance measurements. The theory
              will deal  with  film  dynamics, statistical mechanics, van der Waals forces, 
              and  calculation  of potentials. Grand canonical simulations  will  be 
              directed primarily toward the wetting problem.  %%%  This  Focused Research
              Group grant supports a collaborative study  of  the adherence of thin films of
              gas molecules to several types  of  substrates, with an interest in the ability
              of the  molecules  to  wet the surfaces. The gases under study are relatively 
              inert  noble  gases, specifically helium atoms of masses three and  four 
              atomic   mass  units,  and  the  studies  are  carried   out   at  temperatures
              near the absolute zero, where the helium  atoms  can  appear  in  several 
              different  types  of  superfluid  state.   A  superfluid state is one in which
              the motion of the helium is  not  at  all impeded by its interaction with the
              surrounding container  or  substrate, in the case mentioned above. If, for
              example,  the  liquid superfluid is put into rotation (like swirling water in 
              a  glass)  the swirl ing motion will persist forever, and this effect  is  the 
              basis  for a gyroscope which can detect  extremely  slow  rotations. The
              proposed research will clarify the effects of  the  substrate  on  the 
              temperature at which the superfluid  behavior  first occurs, and will probe
              these behaviors down to layers  less  than one atomic layer thick, on average.
              The results may lead  to  new  insights  useful  in  the variety  of 
              situations,  such  as  chemical  engineering,  polymer science,  catalysis, 
              and  others  where  wetting  phenomena are important. The  results  will  also 
              contribute to general knowledge of situations where monolayer and  submonolayer
              coverages of surfaces by atoms and molecules  occur.  The  nation's science and
              engineering research base will  benefit  strongly  from the training of
              graduate students in this program,  in  addition  to the discoveries which may
              be made  on  monolayer  wetting and phase transitions.  ***
