Title       : Balancing Research and Practice, a Conference of NIE Principal Investigators and
               Practitioners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1997  
File        : a9705651

Award Number: 9705651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99209              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Carlitz rdc@info-ren.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Information Renassaince
	      425 6th. Ave., Suite 1880
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152191836    412/471-4636

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9705651  Carlitz    The conference "Balancing Research and Practice" will bring
              together principal investigators in the NSF's Networking Infrastnucture for
              Education (NIE) program. The conference will take place from April 3-5, 1997,
              preceded by a six-week on-line discussion of issues that will be addressed in
              the conference. The overall conference theme will be the question of balancing
              research and practice. The NIE program provides many examples of research
              projects which have made substantial strides toward the incorporation of the
              lessons reamed from this research into the daily practice of the school
              districts involved in these projects. Another aspect of the NIE projects that
              will be emphasized in the conference is the idea of infusing research values
              into the classroom environment and thereby maintaining the freshness and
              dynamic inherent in the research phases of these NSF-sponsored activities.
              Here, too, the NIE program provides a number of good examples. These aspects of
              the NIE program will be significant in several new NSF initiatives including
              Research on Education Policy and Practice (REPP), Leaming and Intelligent
              Systems (LIS) and other efforts aimed at technology integration in education.
              In this sense the proposed conference will assist the Foundation in the
              launching of these new initiatives.    Attendees at the conference will indude
              principal investigators and classroom prachboners from the various NIE
              projects, as well as the representatives of other federal programs which impact
              upon school networking programs. This group will interact on-line prior to the
              April 3-5 meeting. At the conference there will be break-out sessions which
              continue the on-line interactions and attempt to reach conclusions on the
              topics with which individual break-out groups will be charged. The emphasis
              here will be upon identifying problems and seeking to find solutions to these
              problems, rather than simply to catalog the many successes of the NIE program.
              On-line resources will be created in con junction with the conference, which
              will both highlight successes of the NIE program and summarize the on-line and
              face-to-face discussions which will take place as part of the conference.   
              The conference itself will be held in Pittsburgh, PA, allowing attendees to
              visit some of the dozens of school and community sites involved in the Common
              Knowledge: Pittsburgh project and its various extensions to community and
              municipal networking. These site visits will provide a portion of the
              conference's focus upon issues of practice. The site visits will be followed by
              the break-out sessions, which will emphasize issues of research and the balance
              between research and practice.    A plenary session will pull together the
              various threads that will have been explored in the break-out sessions and
              provide conference attendees with an overall summary of the issues addressed by
              the conference and an outlook for future activities in this area in the realms
              of research and practice.  ***
