Title       : Superlinear Equations and Weighted Norm Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9705757

Award Number: 9705757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Verbitsky igor@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Verbistky will investigate systematically an important  class of
              superlinear integral and  partial differential equations   which serve as 
              model problems in nonlinear analysis and also are   common in applications.
              Verbitsky will combine a number of analytic techniques  including discrete
              (wavelet-type) decompositions of linear and  nonlinear operators, weighted norm
              inequalities with iterated weights   and good control of the imbedding
              constants, quasi-metrics associated   with Green's kernels, refined
              3G-inequalities and nonlinear potential   theory. An expected new development
              is that   arbitrary nonnegative coefficients at the lower order terms and data 
               can be handled without any a priori regularity assumptions. Essential   to
              this approach is an introduction of new function spaces   intrinsically
              associated with  nonlinear problems, identification of   their preduals and
              establishing basic imbedding theorems.  Exact pointwise estimates of solutions
              and their gradients up   to the boundary could be extremely valuable in applied
              problems.    The proposed research develops new applications for modern methods
              of  harmonic analysis and potential theory which previously were used 
              extensively in   linear analysis. Nonlinear techniques  lead to more accurate
              mathematical models and numerical estimates for  differential and integral
              equations with singular coefficients and   data. They describe many
              environmental and technological phenomena   with nonlinear sources, and are
              widely used in the studies of heat   transfer, fluid flow, control theory, and
              stochastic processes.
