Title       : Asymptotic Models for the Spreading of Thin Solid Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1997        
File        : a9705089

Award Number: 9705089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk Brattkus brattkus@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Brattkus  9705089    The goal of the proposed research is to develop and
              analyze asymptotic  models which describe the spreading of thin solid films on
              solid   substrates. Models are based upon a slender-body approximation  that is
              valid for rapidly spreading films which nearly wet the underlying   substrate.
              The asymptotic technique has been tested on a simple model   of liquid phase
              epitaxy where the dominant mechanism of film growth is   solidification.
              Approximate solutions representing steady planar   spreading have been compared
              to numerical solutions of the exact problem.  We find that the boundary
              conditions at a contact line may be applied  directly to the asymptotic
              equations describing the spreading film   even though the slender-body
              approximation is not valid there (this is due   to the presence of a weak
              gradient singularity). For steadily spreading  films these contact angle
              conditions select the spreading rate.  The asymptotic equations are used to
              test the linear stability of a   planar film and it is found to be stable.   
              The technology behind thin film deposition is of principal importance  to the
              development of new and more compact semiconductor devices.  Moreover, this
              technology is unusual in that it is extremely sensitive   to frontier research
              in materials science. We propose to  examine the conditions that are applied at
              a tri-junction between a solid   film, its nutrient phase, and its substrate,
              and determine the role that   these contact conditions play in influencing the
              rate of growth and the   morphology of spreading solid films. Our preliminary
              results suggest  that contact conditions significantly influence both. A basic
              knowledge  of the connection between the contact conditions and the growth and 
              morphology of thin solid films will aid in controlling the deposition  process.
