Title       : Study of Excitations in Cuprate Superconductors and Related Systems by Inelastic
               Scattering of Visible, Ultraviolet, and X-Ray Photons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9705131

Award Number: 9705131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miles V. Klein m-klein5@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705131 
              Klein    This   experimental  research  project  focuses  on  the  unusual 
              electronic  properties  of  those  cuprate  compounds  which  are  "parent  
              compounds"   of  the  cuprate  superconductors.   These  compounds exhibit
              correlated electron behavior, and in particular  antiferromagnetism. In the
              superconducting phases,  the  residual  antiferromagnetism  is  poorly 
              understood.   This   experimental  project   will   clarify   the  residual 
              antiferromagnetism   by  scattering  experiments  using  visible,  ultraviolet,
               or  x-ray  photons,  to  study  excitations  wherein  an  electron  from  an 
              occupied initial state makes a transition to an unoccupied  final  state, 
              accompanied by a redistribution of charge. The objectives  are (1) to
              understand how electronic charge excitations couple to  electronic  spin 
              excitations  (magnons)  and  to  lower   energy  electronic  charge
              excitations, which may include superconducting  gap  excitations;  (2)  to 
              validate inelastic  x-ray  scattering  techniques for studying electronic
              charge excitations  at  finite  momentum   transfer;   (3)   to  better  
              understand   electronic  excitations in conventional metals and semiconductors
              through use  of  inelastic  x-ray scattering techniques. The experiments  will 
              employ a combination of low energy and high energy photon probes.  These 
              include  low  energy optical absorption;  resonance  Raman  scattering,
              especially resonant two-magnon scattering; UV excited  Raman   scattering,  and
               two  new  techniques,  inelastic  s-ray  scattering  spectroscopy  (IXSS)  and
               resonant  inelastic  x-ray  scattering  spectroscopy (RIXSS), which provide 
              data  at  finite  momentum  transfer. The work is expected to advance knowledge
               of  both  strongly-correlated electronic systems and of inelastic  x-  ray
              scattering.  %%%  This research project experimentally studies the unusual
              behavior  of   the  cuprate  compounds  which  when  "dop ed"  become   high 
              temperature  superconductors. These  "parent  compounds"  exhibit  unusual
              behavior, including antiferromagnetism, which is to  some  extent  retained in
              the superconducting phases.  It  is  believed  that  a  better understanding of
              the normal and parent phases  of  these  materials is necessary for
              understanding of the  unusually  strong   superconductivity  when  suitably 
              doped.  The   present  experimental   project  will  address  the  important  
              questions  concerning  the  antiferromagnetic behavior, by a combination  of 
              measurements  of the scattering of photons (visible, ultraviolet,  and x-ray)
              by these compounds. A portion of the work will utilize  the Raman effect, and
              another portion will utilize a new advanced  experimental technique, inelastic
              x-ray scattering, which is  now  available   at   the  Advanced  Photon 
              Source,   a   world-class  synchrotron  light  source  which is  located  near 
              the  Argonne  National  Laboratory.  The work will advance  knowledge  of  both
               strongly-correlated electronic systems and also of the  inelastic  x-ray 
              scattering process. The study of these materials and their  unusual magnetism
              is valuable as a testing ground for theories of  magnetic,  optical,  and
              electrical properties of  the  cuprates,  which can then be more confidently
              applied to other systems;  and  in  the  search for novel properties and new
              compounds which  may  find  new  application in technology. This  research 
              project  is  interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves  both  graduate  and 
              postdoctoral  students who will be excellently trained  to  enter  positions in
              industry, government or education.  ***
