Title       : Hankel-Type Operators on Banach Spaces of Analytic Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9705851

Award Number: 9705851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17736              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott F. Saccone   (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705851    Saccone    The investigator will study the linear topological
              structure of a class of  Banach spaces of continuous analytic functions and
              bounded analytic  functions. The primary tool is a relatively easily understood
              operator  which resembles a Hankel operator on a Hilbert space. It has been
              recently  demonstrated by the investigator and by other authors that these 
              Hankel-type operators often possess a wealth of information on the Banach 
              space structure of the function spaces they operate on. It seems likely  that
              these methods could yield solutions of some open problems concerning  bounded
              analytic functions on the unit ball in several complex variables  and extend
              the solutions to strictly pseudoconvex domains. Spaces of  uniformly convergent
              Fourier series on the unit circle and polydisk will  also be studied.    The
              goal of this project is to further understand the relatively new  techniques
              being used to solve difficult problems in a variety of areas of  the branch of
              pure mathematics known as analysis. These new techniques  involve the
              replacement of complex computational tools with methods that  are more abstract
              and theoretical in nature and are currently becoming more  and more popular due
              to the powerful results that can be achieved with  relatively little effort.
              The type of results we seek to obtain are less of  an exact, numerical nature,
              but deal more those problems that in all  likelihood could not be solved by
              computation. At the center of the  research is a tool, called a Hankel-type
              operator, developed by the  investigator in his thesis which has found an
              increasing number of  applications since his doctoral work. One target of these
              ideas would be  problems in harmonic analysis, or Fourier series. Fourier
              series are the  building blocks for the theory of wavelets, a fast growing area
              having  applications to numerous types problems such as data compression, voice
               recognition, and so on. Another important component of the project will be 
              problems of analytic func tions in one and several complex variables. 
              Otherwise known as complex analysis, this area of mathematics is intimately 
              connected to harmonic analysis, mentioned above. The key feature of the 
              results being sought after in this project is the generality in which they 
              work and also, once the tedious theoretical foundations have been laid, the 
              ease in which they can be applied.
