Title       : Phase Coherence and Dynamics in Superconductor Arrays and Unconventional
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9705695

Award Number: 9705695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale J. Van Harlingen dvh@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705695  Van
              Harlingen  This  experimental research project focuses on the role of  long- 
              range  phase  coherence in superconductor materials and  devices.  The  work is
              based on the SQUID interferometry techniques the  PI  has  developed  to 
              detect the phase of the  order  parameter  in  single  crystal  superconductor
              samples; and  on  the  use  of  a  scanning   SQUID  microscope  (SSM).   Three
               areas  of  proposed  research   include:  (1)  Use  of  the  SSM   to   study 
               vortex  configurations  and  dynamics  in  superconductor   arrays.   (2) 
              Application  of the SQUID interferometry methods to identify  the  order
              parameter symmetry in heavy fermion superconductors and  in  organic  
              superconductors,  both  types   of   material   showing  indications  of
              unconventional pairing. (3) Magnetic  imaging  of  hybrid  systems consisting,
              e.g.,of alternating arrays of  d-wave  and s-wave islands.  %%%  This 
              experimental research project, at the forefront of research  in  unconventional
               types of superconductivity,  focuses  on  the  "phase coherence" property of
              superconductors and superfluids  in  general.  The  most  useful properties  of
               superconductors:  the  superfluid    (lossless)   electrical   conduction,   
              and    the  Superconducting  Quantum  Interference  Device  (SQUID)  magnetic 
              field  sensors  and  fast logic elements, all  arise  from  phase  coherence.
              It has recently been found with high probability  that  the   phase-coherent  
              properties  of   the   high   Tc   cuprate  superconductors   are   strikingly 
              different   from   those   of  conventional  superconductors, like lead and
              NbTi. This  research  project  is devoted in part to the phase properties of
              additional  types  of  superconductors, organic metals  and  "heavy  fermion" 
              superconductors,  which  may also exhibit   unconventional  phase  behavior.
              Portions of this research will utilize a Scanning Squid  Microscope, which can
              measure local m agnetic fields at the  level  of one billionth of an Oersted
              (1/2 Oersted is about the level of  the  earth's magnetic field) with a spatial
              resolution  of  about  100  micrometers. Results from this research may include
               unusual  new   effects  or  structures  which  may  find  application   in 
              technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in  nature  and involves
              graduate students who will be excellently trained to  enter positions in
              industry, government or education.  ***
