Title       : Dissertation Research: Plio-Pleistocene Javanese Homo erectus Subsistence & Tool
               Use Behavior: An Experimental & Taphonomic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9705379

Award Number: 9705379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Kenoyer kenoyer@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jonathan Kenoyer, Mr. Kildo Choi will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze several large samples of
              fossilized mid-Pleistocene bone from Java to search for traces of human
              butchering marks. He will also conduct actualistic studies to determine the
              cutmark signatures different raw materials which are available on the island
              cause on fresh bone. The research is directed at a major anthropological
              enigma. Archaeologists know that hominids first produced stone tools over two
              million years ago and these virtually indestructible objects have been
              recovered in many parts of the world. Although they do not always co-occur in
              the same site, areas which contain early human remains are usually rich in
              stone tools which served a number of functions. Java is a very interesting
              exception. Homo erectus, early hominid remains have been discovered at a number
              of sites in Java. However stone tools of similar antiquity appear to be
              lacking. Several reasons - none supported by strong data - have been suggested
              for this. It has been argued that the people subsisted primarily on soft
              vegetable foods and did not have a need for stone tools. Others have proposed
              that bamboo, which retains a sharp edge and is still used today, served the
              needed cutting function. It is also possible, although unlikely, that no tools
              were used at all.   Mr. Choi has examined faunal remains, some associated with
              the hominids themselves, and found evidence of what he believes are cut marks
              on the bones. When bones lie on the ground for significant periods of time,
              they acquire abrasions and scratches through natural means. Many experimental
              archaeologists argue however that humanly induced cut marks can be
              distinguished from these other phenomena. In a preliminary study Mr. Choi has
              found, what he believes to be evidence of such cut marks. If such marks do
              exist, they argue strongly for the presence of tools. In a first phase of the
              current study Mr. Choi will use types of stone which are locally available, as
              well as bamboo, to butcher animals. He will observe through low power as well
              as scanning electron microscopy the marks which are recorded on the bone. With
              these controlled data in hand, he will then examine large series of Pleistocene
              faunal remains which have been recovered on the island.  This research is
              important because it will address one of the major anomalies in the
              archaeological record. It will shed new light on the cultural abilities of
              early hominids and assist in training a promising young scientist.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
