Title       : Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America (NMITA): A World-Wide Web Taxonomy
               Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9705199

Award Number: 9705199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann F. Budd ann-budd@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia Golden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M.H. Fortunato Martins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9705199  Budd    In this research, Ann Budd and colleagues will develop a
              vouchered taxonomic database of the Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America
              (NMITA) for fossil collections made by the Panama Paleontology Project, the
              Dominican Republic project, and associated projects in Jamaica, Curacao, and
              Venezuela.  In these projects, fossils are sampled following standardized
              procedures designed to document changes in marine biodiversity in tropical
              America over the past 20 million years.  NMITA will establish the taxonomic
              foundation for ongoing identification of the collections by providing images
              and synoptic information on five taxonomic groups (bryozoans, corals, molluscs,
              ostracodes, benthic foraminifera).  It will be important for standardizing
              nomenclature and recognizing taxa that are new to science, and it will provide
              a starting point for reconstructing the phylogenies of selected clades.    Data
              for more than 2000 taxa and 7000 images will be entered in an enterprise
              relational database management system at the University of Iowa using a model
              patterned after the ASC Information Model for Biological Collections.  The data
              include:  (1) taxonomic authorship, synonyms, type specimens, and diagnostic
              morphologic characters; (2) images of representative specimens and associated
              museum catalog and measurement data; (3) distributional information. 
              Illustrated glossaries of morphologic terms, character matrices, and
              computerized identification tools are being developed for corals and molluscs. 
              Distribution maps and stratigraphic range charts will be produced using GIS
              software and other tools.  Protocols will be developed for exchange of
              information with PaleoBank and the locality and stratigraphy database of the
              Panama Paleontology Project.
