Title       : Integrable Dynamics of Knotted Vortex Filaments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9705005

Award Number: 9705005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56531              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annalisa M. Calini calinia@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705005  Calini    This project concerns the connection between completely
              integrable partial   differential equations and the topological properties of
              knotted closed   curves which arise from models of vortex filament evolution.
              The principal   investigator plans to show that questions regarding knot types,
              mechanisms   for knotting and unknotting, stability of knot formations and
              classification   of knots by means of standard representatives can be
              effectively addressed   in this context. The two main tools that will be used
              are the periodic theory   of relevant integrable equations (among which are the
              Continuous   Heisenberg Model, the focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger and the
              sine-  Gordon equations) with periodic boundary conditions, and the theory of  
              Backlund transformations. The PI will use constructive methods for   multiphase
              solutions to generate large classes of knot representatives and   will study a
              precise relation between their knot type and the associated   Floquet spectrum
              both theoretically and computationally. Backlund   transformations will be used
              to investigate possible mechanisms for   topological changes, to construct
              self-intersecting curves that represent   transitions between different knot
              types and to produce examples of knots   that are realized by curves with
              special properties (such as curves of   constant torsion).    Complex
              structures in the form of knotted and linked loops are present in   many
              phenomena of the physical world: tornadoes, plasma loops and   magnetic arches
              in stellar atmospheres display complicated vortex   formations; mitochondrial
              DNA is a coiled, often knotted, molecule;   bacteria strands are found to form
              tangled loops; links and knots are   observed in certain stable mixtures of
              chemical media. This project   concerns the connection between evolution
              equations whose structure is   well-understood and the properties of knotted
              loops which arise in the study   of vortex filament dynamics and DNA modeling.
              The principal goal of this   inve stigation is the development of the
              mathematical tools necessary to   effectively address questions regarding the
              mechanisms for knotting and   unknotting, the stability of knot formations and
              the classification of knots   and links. Such issues are gaining great
              importance in a number of applied   fields: for example, an understanding of
              the complex vortex structures in the   solar crown can provide information on
              how the sun's magnetic activity   affects the earth's climate, while
              topological changes such as loop creation,   knotting and unknotting appear to
              be at the heart of the replication   mechanism of the DNA molecule, a
              fundamental question in cancer   research.
