Title       : Low-Energy Spectroscopy of Correlated Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9705442

Award Number: 9705442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zack Schlesinger zack@physics.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705442  Schlesinger    This  is  a  new  project to study systems in  which 
              the  effects  of  electron interactions extend the physics  beyond  the  domain
              of simple non-interacting theories of solids.  For  such  systems there is
              generally a characteristic energy scale in  the  infrared which separates a
              strongly correlated low-energy region  from  a high-energy region in which
              interaction effects are much  less  significant.   The  proposed  research 
              seeks  to  use   spectroscopic  measurements to probe the dynamics in this
              crucial infrared range  and  thereby  to  develop an understanding of
              correlated systems.  Specific  systems  to  be  studied include Kondo
              insulators, mixed-valent systems, metal-  insulator  transitions driven by
              magnetic order,  and  superconductor-  insulator  transition systems. These
              experiments  will  elucidate  the  nature  of   the  charge  dynamics  in 
              these  systems,  and  explore  crucial  relationships between charge dynamics, 
              magnetism, disorder and localization. Results will provide both a test  of and
              a stimulus for  theoretical  work  in this area at the forefront of  condensed 
              matter  physics.  %%%  This  is  a  new  project to study systems in  which 
              the  effects  of  electron interactions extend the physics  beyond  the  domain
               of  simple non-interacting  theories  of  solids.  Although our basic
              understanding of metals and semiconductors is built  on theories of
              non-interacting electrons, future electronic  technologies   will  
              increasingly   include   materials   in    which  interactions  between
              electrons play a role.  It is thus important  to  fully   understand  the 
              electronic  properties  of  these  correlated  electron  systems,  in which
              phenomena occur that  cannot  be  readily  predicted from a knowledge of the
              system components (the electrons and  nuclei),  but rather, arise in a
              non-obvious way from the interactions  between  them.  (Examples  include
              magnetism  and  superconductivity.)  This proposal is directed toward the study
              o f electron dynamics in the  infrared spectral region, which encompasses the
              energy range  relevant  to  the  formation  of most correlated electron  states
               and  is  thus  particularly  important.  Systems to  be  studied  include 
              rare-earth  compounds that can be viewed  as correlated semiconductors, and 
              oxide  systems  where an interplay between magnetism and electrical
              conductivity leads  to striking effects (e.g., giant magnetoresistance).  The
              experimental  results  can be expected to stimulate and test theoretical
              efforts  in  this area at the  forefront of condensed matter physics.  ***
