Title       : Photoinduced Electron and Energy Transfer in Molecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9705724

Award Number: 9705724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Meyer tjmeyer@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research on electron transfer reactions by Dr. Thomas J.  
              Meyer of the Chemistry Department, University of North Carolina at Chapel  
              Hill.  Metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) excited states of   polypyridyl
              complexes in molecular assemblies will be studied in order to   better
              understand the general phenomenon of photoinduced electron and   energy
              transfer.  Chromophore-quencher and ligand-bridged assemblies will   be
              synthesized.  These new assemblies will be designed for the   investigation of
              the following:  (a) novel photophysical phenomena   particularly in the Marcus
              inverted region, including intramolecular   competition, time delays, and
              multi-photon effects; (b) the role of new   structural motifs, based on
              cis/trans isomerism at unsymmetrically   substituted bipyridine ligands; (c)
              long-lived storage of photochemical   redox equivalents through the use of
              bridging electron transfer ligands;   and (d) photchemical energy conversion. 
              Spectroscopic parameters will be   used to calculate electron transfer rate
              constants.  Investigation of the electronic properties of large molecules and  
              associations of molecules, or assemblies, is ultimately aimed at   development
              of molecular-level electronic devices.  This research is   relevant to
              photochemical energy conversion and information storage based   on color
              changes.  To develop this technology, movement of electrons over   long
              distances and over long time scales must be better understood.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
