Title       : Charged Rare Gas Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9705242

Award Number: 9705242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan A. Northby jnorthby@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705242 
              Northby    This  experimental research project focuses on unusual properties 
              of  nanometer  scale  droplets of helium and  other  rare  gases,  produced  in
               a beam apparatus, including excited states  of  the  nanodroplets  produced 
              by electron excitation.  The  bombardment  with  electrons of variable energy
              produces various  charged  and  metastably  excited  states of the droplets. 
              The  proposed  work  builds  on a previous observation that infrared light can
              produce  photodetachment  of  electrons  and  also  of  metastable  helium 
              molecules   from   the  clusters.  A  time  of  flight   velocity  spectrometer
               will  be  added  and used  to  measure  the  energy  distributions  of  the 
              detached  species.  Experiments  will  be  perfomed  to  measure (1)  the
              energy of the bombarding  electron  which  creates  the  initial excitation,
              (2) the  energy  of  the  photon which detaches the resulting relaxed particle,
              and (3) the  velocity  distribution of these particles after  detachment.  The 
              goals  are  to  learn  about the cluster density  of  states,  to  measure the
              ground state kinetic energy of an electron trapped in  a  bubble, and to study
              the evolution of excitonic states of  the  cluster.  %%%  This  experimental
              research project probes unusal  properties  of  nanometer  size  droplets  of 
              rare gases,  particularly  helium,  produced  in  a  beam  apparatus.  Of 
              particular  interest   are  interactions  of the nanometer scale droplets with 
              electrons  of  variable energy, which put the drop into states of altered
              energy  and/or  altered charge. The excited states thus produced  are  of 
              fundamental  interest, and will be probed by use of light,  which  has  been 
              found  to  lead  to detachment  of  metastable  helium  molecules from the
              excited clusters. The velocity distribution of  resulting photodetached
              molecules will be measured with a time of  flight  apparatus.  The  research
              will add important   information  about   nanometer   scale  clusters,  their  
              interactions   with  electrons,  and  the nature of their states as  their 
              energy  is  raised. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature  and 
              involves  graduate  students who will be excellently  trained  to  enter
              positions in industry, government or education.  ***
