Title       : SGER: Testing the Effects of Steroid Hormones on the Immune System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9705807

Award Number: 9705807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7480               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Sherman pws6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9705807  Sherman  It has been hypothesized that male steroid hormones,
              particularly testosterone (T), suppress immune system functions.  Males with
              high T levels are said to be less capable of mounting an immune response that
              males with lower T levels.  If so, males with high T levels should be more
              susceptible to infections and parasitic infestations.    To investigate this
              hypothesis, the PI will use as a vertebrate model, the red-winged blackbird. 
              Birds (24) will be captured locally and maintained in captivity for 10 months. 
              Each will be injected with a non-pathogenic antigen (KLH) in the (I) autumn
              (natural T levels low), (ii) early spring (rising T levels), (III) mid-spring
              (peak T levels, during breeding), and (iv) late-spring (T levels boosted higher
              with an implant).  At each sampling period, immunocompetence will be measured
              with an ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay) that was developed for
              quantifying humeral immune responses (antibody production) in this species; T
              levels will be quantified with a radioimmunoassay.    This research will yield
              precise information on how naturally-produced and enchanced levels of steroid
              hormones affect immune functions in a wild vertebrate.  It will also help us to
              understand why only some males express exaggerated T-dependent secondary sexual
              characters (e.g., plumes, crests).  Perhaps only extremely high-quality males
              can produce such characters and also maintain levels of immunocompetence
              necessary for survival.  Females that choose these males as mates benefit their
              sons and daughters genetically.  This exploratory project thus merges three
              fields of research (immunology, endocrinology, and behavioral ecology) and
              promises to open up a new area of investigation into how interactions between
              the hormone and immune systems affect sexual selection.
