Title       : Dynamics and Phase Equilibra of Polymers: Finite Size Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9705101

Award Number: 9705101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Green green@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Green  9705101  The overall goal of this study is the development of a 
              microscopic understanding of the effects of confinement and  of surfaces and
              interfaces on the dynamics and phase  stability of polymeric thin film
              mixtures.  The strategy is  to use information about the interface as a probe
              to  understand the phase stability and dynamics.  A critical  aspect of this
              strategy is focused at independently "tuning"  the molecular parameters of the
              substrate and of the  polymers in mrder to have control over the molecular 
              interactions.  This will involve novel synthesis of new  norborene-like
              polymers with varying functionalities,  synthesis of novel inorganic tellurium
              dioxide-based glasses  whose reactivity can be tailored and surface treatments
              of a  silicon substrate.  The proposed study is divided into two  parts, the
              first of which involves using a combination of  variable angle spectroscopic
              ellipsometry (VASE) and forward  recoil spectrometry (FRES) to study the
              development of the  interfacial thickness between homopolymer bilayers of 
              varying thickness, L.  Information learned from the  equilibrium  interfacial
              thickness from this aspect of the  study will give insight into the effect of
              copolymers  (random and diblock) on the phase stability of the mixtures.  The
              second phase of this proposal involves a related study  of the formation of
              wetting layers and coexistence phases in  mixtures of these polymers in contact
              with the substrates of  varying characteristics in order to gain insight into
              the  role of the "interfacial" fields on the formation and growth  of the
              wetting layer in homopolymer mixtures.  An additional  aspect of this work is
              to use information about the wetting  layer to develop new insights into the
              effect of copolymers  on the phase stability of the thin film mixtures.  %%% 
              Interest in this area is motivated by technological need  since thin film
              polymers serve "active" and "passive" roles  in many technologies.  For
              example, they serve "active"  roles in microsen sors, large area light emitting
              displays  and selective membrane applications.  "Passive" applications  include
              use as protective coatings and lubricants for  magnetic storage media,
              biocompatibility and use as thin  film adhesives.  Because information about
              bulk properties  provides limited guidance, it is critical to develop a 
              fundamental understanding of polymeric properties under  these conditions.  ***
