Title       : LMC: A System for the Specification and Evaluation of Logic-Based Model Checking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9705998

Award Number: 9705998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1223697            (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Smolka sas@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrance L. Swift  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. R. Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              I. V. Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yella Pantula S. Ramakrishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to deploy the latest advances in  concurrency
              research and in logic programming systems to build a  software environment
              called LMC for system specification and  verification. LMC's main function is
              model checking: determining  whether a software system possesses a particular
              formally  specified property. LMC is built from two independently developed 
              systems, each of significant interest in its own domain: the  Concurrency
              Factory verification toolkit (developed jointly by  Stony Brook and NC State),
              and the XSB tabled logic programming  system (developed by Stony Brook).    The
              anticipated benefits of this research include the following:  a model checker
              in XSB is specified at the level of semantic  equations, meaning a system for a
              specific specification language  and logic can be coded in several hundred
              lines of XSB code  rather than in tens of thousands of lines of C++ code; the 
              programmability of XSB allows for direct encoding of important  model checking
              optimizations; in XSB it is possible to interleave  arbitrarily model checking
              computational steps with deduction  steps without penalizing the performance of
              the former. These  features are expected to make LMC a practical tool for
              formally  assuring the correctness of critical software systems such as 
              network protocols.
