Title       : Conference on Mathematical Models in Medical and Health Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9705595

Award Number: 9705595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn F. Webb webbgf00@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Webb  9705595       The investigators and colleagues organize an international 
              conference on mathematical models in medical and health sciences  at Vanderbilt
              University.  The conference involves approximately  100 talks and 175
              participants.  There are 11 plenary talks in  such areas as models of the HIV
              infected immune system, models of  normal and pathological blood production
              systems, models of tumor  growth and treatment, models of pancreatic function,
              wavelet  analysis and medical imaging, models of the emergence of drug 
              resistance, models of epidemiology, models of DNA and hereditary 
              abnormalities, and models of nerve impulse conduction.  The  conference has
              special sessions in cancer models, diffusive  systems in biology, epidemic
              models, models in immunology, models  of cell population dynamics, optimization
              and control in  biological models, medical imaging, and cure models in survival
               analysis.       The scientific purpose of the conference is to stimulate 
              research in theoretical mathematical models in areas of biology,  medicine, and
              health and life sciences.  The focus of the  conference is to bring together
              mathematicians, biologists, and  medical researchers to a forum that promotes
              interdisciplinary  collaborations.  A major aim of the conference is to involve
              young  researchers and to stimulate their research goals and directions.  The
              participation of recent Ph.D. recipients and graduate  students is a
              substantial part of the conference program.  The  scientific and educational
              significance of the conference is  evidenced by the wide range of research
              topics presented, the  diverse participation of researchers from mathematics 
              departments, biology departments, engineering departments,  medical research
              institutes, and pharmaceutical companies, and  the active participation of
              graduate students and young  researchers.
