Title       : STTR Phase II: Aerosol Mass Spectrometer for Size and Composition Analysis of
               Sub-Micron Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9705610

Award Number: 9705610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349610             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Jayne jayne@aerodyne.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerodyne Research Inc
	      45 Manning Road
	      Billerica, MA  018213934    508/663-9500

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                     This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project
              will develop an aerosol sampling instrument that yields both size and chemical
              composition information in real time for sub-micron sized particles. The
              instrument will have application to airborne particle analysis where commercial
              instrumentation is currently unavailable. The device combines proven technology
              for aerosol sampling and size separation with a unique hot wire particle
              vaporization/mass spectrometric detection scheme. This instrument is less
              complex compared to current research systems utilizing high power lasers for
              particle vaporization and, hence, will provide a significant cost reduction for
              particle analysis. The particle mass spectrometer combines an aerodynamic
              aerosol sampling inlet and charging system which generates a beam of charged
              particles whose size is determined by its interaction with electric fields. The
              mass selected beam impacts a hot wire where the particles vaporize and ionize.
              The resulting ions are analyzed with a molecular time of flight (TOP) mass
              spectrometer. The Phase I work has successfully coupled the particle mass
              spectrometer with the hot wire vaporization technique using quadrupole mass
              spectrometric detection. The initial work has demonstrated chemical composition
              detection for single particles for a range of liquid and solid salt particles
              down to 0.1 1lm diameter. The detection limit will be extended in the Phase II
              work to -0.03 1lm diameter.  The instrument will be useful for basic
              atmospheric aerosol research and as a real time monitor for on-line particulate
              emissions from combustion sources (coal-fired power plants, and exhaust from
              commercial aircraft and automobiles).                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
