Title       : Advanced Methods for the Statistical Analysis of Functional Magnetic Resonance
               Imaging Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9705034

Award Number: 9705034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Eddy bill@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicole A. Lazar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Genovese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9218,BIOT,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Eddy, Genovese, & Lazar  9705034    Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
              (fMRI) is a powerful new tool for understanding the brain.   With fMRI, it is
              possible to study the human brain in action and trace its processing in
              unprecedented  detail.  During an fMRI experiment, a subject performs a
              carefully planned sequence of cognitive tasks  while magnetic resonance images
              of the brain are acquired.  The tasks are designed to exercise specific 
              cognitive processes and the measured signal contains information about the
              nature and location of the  resulting neural activity.  Neuroscientists use
              these data to help identify the neural processes underlying  cognition and to
              build and test theoretical models of cognitive function.  This is inherently a
              problem of  statistical inference, yet the statistical methods for fMRI are
              still undeveloped.  In this project, the  statistical methodology for these
              large and complex data sets is advanced on three fronts: dealing with  model
              response variation, developing better registration and acquisition methods, and
              analyzing spatial  activation patterns.      Functional Magnetic Resonance
              Imaging (fMRI) is a new tool that is currently being used to study the  brain
              and the way it functions.  Very large amounts of data, with considerable noise,
              are collected on  neural activity while specific cognitive tasks are being
              performed.  In this way, cognitive scientists hope to  understand the processes
              underlying the way humans think.  Statistical inference is a natural way of 
              approaching this question.  However, the complex nature of the data means that
              standard methods are not  applicable and the methodologies used in fMRI for
              data analysis are still relatively undeveloped.  The  current project advances
              the statistical methodology for fMRI data by working in three directions. 
              Brain  response to a given task varies not only by location, but also in
              different replications of the same  experiment.  This source of variability is
              not taken into account by the models  now in use.  The first  direction of the
              project incorporates this source of variation, resulting in more precise
              inferences.  Subject  motion during fMRI scanning is the focus of the second
              direction, while the third direction involves  quantifying how spatial patterns
              of activation change over time.  This allows the comparison of different 
              individuals and groups.
