Title       : Electron Energy Levels in Magnetic Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9705059

Award Number: 9705059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Ralph ralph@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              W:\awards\awards97  9705059  Ralph    This  is  a new project to study electrons
              confined within  metal  particles  less  than 10 nm in diameter such  that  the
               discrete  "electrons-in-a-box"  energy  levels  become  resolvable  at  low 
              temperatures.   We  have  developed  techniques  for  fabricating 
              single-electron tunneling transistors containing  an  individual,  nm-scale
              metal particle, and we have used these devices  to  make  detailed 
              measurements  of  the electronic  spectrum  within  the  nanoparticle.   This 
              new  capability  is  a  powerful  probe  of  electronic  structure, because all
              the forces which  act  on  the  electrons  can be studied through their
              separate effects  on  the  eigenstate  spectrum.   In this proposal,  we  will 
              apply  these  techniques  to study magnetic particles.  We will (a)  manipulate
               single quantum levels to study spin-polarized electron tunneling,  (b) 
              examine  the  electronic spectrum in magnetic  particles  to  understand 
              exchange forces and the correlated states which  they  produce, and (c) use
              time-dependent studies of level spectra as a  probe of the dynamics of the
              nanoparticle's magnetic moment.  %%%  This  is a new project to study electrons
              confined in  very small  metal  particles.  When a piece of metal  is  so 
              small  that  it  contains fewer than 10,000 atoms, the mobile electrons inside
              the  metal  cannot  have any arbitrary energy, but are  limited  to  a 
              resolvably  discrete  set  of  states.   Because  of  the   level 
              discreteness, electronic devices on these small length scales can  be  thought
              of as "artificial atoms".  We have recently developed  techniques  for
              producing transistor devices by connecting  wires  to  individual metal
              nanoparticles, and then using these  devices  to measure the spectrum of
              allowed energy levels inside the metal  particle  for  the first time.  In this
              proposal, we  will  apply  these  new  techniques  to  study magnetic 
              particles.   We  will  examine (a) under what conditions electrons can h op on
              and off  a  magnetic  particle without flipping their spin, (b) how  magnetic 
              forces alter the spectrum of electron energy levels, and (c)  the  mechanisms 
              by  which  the magnetism of the particle  may  switch  direction under the
              influence of an applied magnetic field.  ***
