Title       : Free-Model Based Intelligent Control of Power Plants and Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9705105

Award Number: 9705105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwang Y. Lee kwanglee@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9705105  Lee      This project is to develop a Free-Model Based Intelligent
              Control (FMBIC) system for power plants and power systems.  Automation of
              normal power plant operation is currently achieved in a simple and direct
              manner using single-loop feedback and feedforward controls based on linearized
              models of plant subsystems.  In this environment, controlling a system is very
              difficult when there are plant or controller failures or a significant
              variation in operating conditions.  The proposed free-model based intelligent
              control approach offers an alternative in achieving highly autonomous power
              plants and power systems.    Current main streams for intelligent control are
              fuzzy logic and artificial neural networks.  Both attempt to emulate human
              control schemes by incorporating human decision making and learning ability. 
              However, they alone can not emulate humans perfectly.  Therefore, it is
              proposed to develop a new approach based on the "free model" concept, which
              will help in modeling human behavior more closely.  The free model is defined
              only with input and output data obtained from the system and consequently, no
              mathematical model is required for control purposes.  Thus, it can be used for
              any system which is complex, highly nonlinear, and susceptible to disturbances,
              such as power plants and power systems.    By representing a system in terms of
              the free model, human control schemes will be modeled in five different areas:
              (1) human learning ability will be emulated on the premise of the free model
              using neural networks and fuzzy systems; (2) a supervisory control system will
              be developed to emulate human supervisory ability using a bank of controllers
              in parallel; (3) a decentralized control scheme will be developed by
              partitioning a complex system into a number of smaller subsystems which are
              coupled by interaction variables; (4) a predictive control scheme will be
              developed by adding an optimizing feedforward control; and (5) a
              fault-accommodating control system will be devel oped by using the free-model
              based neuro or fuzzy identifier.    This  research an the Free-Model Based
              Intelligent Control (FMBIC) will be conducted at Penn State University as a
              regular project.  In order to enrich the project and enhance the progress of
              the research, it is also proposed to add an international dimension by
              collaborating with Seoul National University (SNU), Seoul, Korea through the
              U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research Program.  This will enable the Principal
              Investigator and a graduate student to visit SNU and exchange research results
              and experiences with the Korean counterpart.  The theoretical and
              implementation aspects of this collaboration will be of benefit both to Penn
              State University and Seoul National University, as well as to the U.S. and
              Korea power industries, in general.    The anticipated scientific and practical
              benefits are: (1) sharing of laboratory facilities and theoretical developments
              in the Free-Model Based Intelligent Control (FMBIC) system; (2) joining of
              complementary skills: Penn State's experience in power plant intelligent
              distributed control and SNU's experience in power system intelligent control;
              (3) providing new insights and improvements to power engineering education in
              the U.S. and Korea; and (4) development of intelligent control technology
              providing improved efficiency, economy, and safety of power plants and power
              systems in the face of future deregulation and plant construction difficulties
              in both countries.
