Title       : Travel Support for American Investigators from Academia to Attend the 3rd
               International Discussion Meeting on Relaxations in Complex Systems; Vigo,
               Spain; 6/30 - 7/11/97
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9705736

Award Number: 9705736
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: K. L. Ngai ngai@estd.nrl.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept of Navy Naval Res Lab
	      4555 Overlook Avenue, SW
	      Washington, DC  203755328    202/404-7339

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9705736  Ngai    Relaxation  and diffusion in complex materials  and  systems 
              play  an  important  role  in  important  problems  of  many  branches of
              science, technology and engineering.  In  recent  years,  the study of
              relaxation and diffusion has grown  and  become  interdisciplinary in nature 
              with  involvement  from  colleagues in condensed matter physics, chemistry, 
              chemical  engineering  and  materials science and engineering.   Rapid 
              developments  across many areas in this  vast  field  on  an  international 
              level make it profitable  to  bring  together  researchers  from  around the
              world to  discuss  the  recent  advances,  explore  new  ideas, promote 
              collaborations  and  stimulate  future research.  The Conference at  Vigo, 
              Spain  (June  30  - July 11, 1997) is organized to follow two  very  successful
               previous meetings.  The meeting is supported  by  several  agencies of Spain,
              by the Max Planck  Institut  fur  Polymerforschung-Mainz  and the Naval 
              Research  Laboratory.  Application is made to NSF for a grant to support 
              partially  the travel expenses of American colleagues, particularly the  young
              investigators.  %%%  The  main  objective  of this International  Meeting  is 
              to  discuss  the  current important issues  in  the  studies  of  relaxations 
              in  complex materials and systems.   Scientists  with  backgrounds  as  varied
              as condensed  matter  physics,  statistical mechanics, physical chemistry,
              materials science  and   engineering,  glass  science,  polymer   science   and
               engineering,  metallurgy, thermodynamics and  rheology  will  have the
              opportunity to discuss critical issues which impede  progress  in  this  vast
              interdisciplinary  research  field.  Following  the tradition of the past two
              Meetings (Heraklion  1990,  Alicante  1993),  the conference  will  cover 
              recent  advances in relations in the following areas:  a)  Theories and models
              of  relaxation  b)  Computer simulations  c)   Glass  transition, relaxations
              in supercooled  liquids,  glasses, co lloids and melts  d)   Relaxations  in
              polymers, physical aging,  plastization  and antiplastization  e)   Polymer 
              dynamics  on  surface,  at  interface  and  in  confined spaces  f)  
              Viscoelastic  and rheological properties  of  polymers,  solutions, ionomers,  
                  polyelectrolytes, copolymers and blends  g)  Polymer diffusion  h)   Solid 
              State  Ionics, conductivity and NMR  relaxation,  ionic diffusion  i)    
              Structural  relaxations  of  electronic  and  optical  materials, gels and
              ceramics  j)   Dielectric studies  k)  Optical and laser relaxation
              spectroscopy  l)   NMR, X-ray and neutron scattering  ***
