Title       : Theoretical and Computational Problems in Fluid Mechanics and Climatology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9705229

Award Number: 9705229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Temam temam@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ciprian I. Foias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1303,9216,9263,EGCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Temam  9705229       The understanding of the equations of fluid mechanics and 
              turbulence as well as the development of efficient numerical  codes for the
              solution of these equations are challenging  problems of considerable
              importance, in particular in industry or  for studies in meteorology or global
              climate change.  The aims  for this project are to explore what can be learned
              about these  problems from the theoretical and computational viewpoints, using 
              the dynamical systems approach to turbulence.  More specifically  the
              investigators and their colleagues intend: (i)  to develop  new efficient
              computational algorithms taking into account the  physics of turbulence and
              well adapted to the current evolution  of large scale computing towards
              parallel computing; (ii)  to  devote special attention to the problems related
              to the study of  the climate and global changes.  For (i), new multilevel 
              algorithms related to the concept of attractor and approximate  inertial
              manifolds have been introduced during the past years.  The analysis of these
              algorithms is developed, their performances  improved, and their range of
              application extended, in particular  towards problems of practical relevance. 
              During the period of  this grant a book will be published on this subject,
              describing  the state of the art on the theoretical side, and including many 
              aspects of their actual implementation on parallel computers.  For  (ii), a
              significant part of this project is devoted to the study  of models for the
              atmosphere, the ocean and their coupling.  Involved models based on the
              primitive equations are considered,  as well as simpler models such as
              multilayer or quasi-geostrophic  models.  The study includes the development of
              the models and the  mathematical and numerical problems that they raise.      
              The interaction of meteorology and mathematics has very long  traditions going
              back to such famous names as Leonard da Vinci,  Pierre Simon Laplace or, in
              this century, after WWII, John Von  Neumann.  At a more  modest level, the
              investigators pursue a  program of research initiated a few years ago and aimed
              at  developing interactions between geosciences and mathematics.  These
              interactions can be mutually beneficial.  Meteorology and  oceanography raise
              very challenging mathematical problems very  useful for mathematicians and
              other scientists (for example  scientists have learned much from the experience
              of E.  Lorenz in  chaos).  Conversely, mathematicians might help scientists of
              the  geoscience communities in choosing their models by determining if  they
              are well posed.  In the long range they might help also  develop new efficient
              numerical procedures; although the codes  (programs) used in meteorology and
              oceanography are very involved  codes written over a long period of time,
              eventually new codes  will be written responding to new needs or new
              opportunities, and  new insights could become useful; it is hoped to contribute
              to  this daunting task.
