Title       : Microstructural Evolution in Sintering - Experimental, Mathematical and
               Numerical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9705849

Award Number: 9705849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173586             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Tech University
	      P O BOX 3168 TECH STATION
	      Ruston, LA  71272    318/257-0211

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,1774,9162,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705849  Zhang    The project investigates an important process in materials 
              science, solid state sintering of powders.  In order to  understand, control
              and predict the results of a sintering  process, a close study of the process
              from a microstructural  point of view is required.  This project aims at
              process  simulations based on specific sintering and related  mechanisms rather
              than empirical, statistical functions.  To  model sintering from the mechanism
              point of view, the  investigators employ a combination of experiments, 
              mathematical models, and numerical simulations.  Among many  sintering
              mechanisms, the investigators have selected a  common one which often dominates
              the sintering process,  grain boundary diffusion.  They couple mass transport
              by  surface and grain boundary diffusion to form a complete  mathematical
              system.  This system involves high order  nonlinear partial differential
              equations (PDEs) and moving  boundaries.  To solve this system, the
              investigators use an  accurate and efficient numerical method for solving PDEs,
               combined with domain decomposition and adaptive/moving  grids.  A parallel
              computation in the simulation algorithm  for both fine and coarse granularity
              level is also explored.  To verify and corroborate the simulation, the project 
              designs and carries out eight experiments.  Seven of these  target simple
              regular geometries of particles.  For  experimental reasons, Ni-coated W wires
              are used in most of  the experiments.  These experiments provide sound 
              comparisons with the mathematical models based on individual  mechanisms.  The
              experimental results will be compared with  the numerical simulations.  These
              comparisons will verify  and estimate the validity of the theoretical models. 
              After  comparisons based on these simple cases, the investigators  will conduct
              an experiment on the sintering of an irregular  cluster of particles where
              several mechanisms are involved  and coupled.  This experimental result will be
              compared with  the numerical simulation  of the enlarged complete  mathematical
              system.  %%%  This investigation provides a powerful tool for studying the 
              effects of sintering on the evolution of the microstructure  of a sintering
              material.  By combining experiments,  mathematical models and computer
              simulations, the results  will closely follow real world situations and better
              explain  the microstructural evolution during sintering.  The  simulation will
              help scientists and engineers to understand  better the properties of the
              sintered materials and to  optimize sintering process.  ***
