Title       : Social Organization and Task Allocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1997    
File        : a9705366

Award Number: 9705366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Sherman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9705366  Social Organization and Task Allocation in a Eusocial Mannal    The
              naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber) occupies a unique  place among social
              vertebrates because of its behavioral  similarities to cooperatively breeding
              birds and mammals on  the one hand and eusocial insects on the other.  Naked
              mole-  rats are playing a pivotal role in attempts to unite  occurrences of
              alloparental care in vertebrates  invertebrates under a single theoretical and
              terminological  umbrella, to understand the relative importance of extrinsic 
              (i.e, ecological), intrinsic (kinship), and historical  factors in the
              evolution of eusociality, and identify  proximate and ultimate sources of
              conflict and cooperation  in animal societies.    However, comparative
              behavioral and evolutionary analyses  are presently stalled by lack of
              information, or existence  of conflicting results, on key details of
              intra-colonial  social organization and task allocation.  The P.I. s  research
              will address this need by quantifying the behavior  of mole-rats in 5 captive
              colonies (n=126 animals,  presently) housed in transparent burrow systems. 
              Four  specific questions will investigated: (1) Is there a  specialized
              dispersive morph, or are putative dispersers  actually colony defenders
              instead?, (2) Are burrows  excavated primarily by large individuals or small 
              individuals, or do large and small individuals participate,  but in different
              aspects of burrow excavation?, (3)  Do  particular colony members seek
              environmental heat sources  and then transfer heat to nest mates (like living
              hot water  bottles), thereby improving the work efficiency of the  entire
              colony?, and (4) How accurate is the recently-  discovered foraging recruitment
              system: do scouts that find  new food sources lay polarized trails to them, and
              how  precisely do the communicate information about food  quantity, quality,
              distance, and divisibility to potential  recruits?    For each question,
              straightforward, non-invasive experiments  and observations will y ield strong
              inference tests of  alternative hypotheses.  Overall, this research will deepen
               our understanding of individual and group-level adaptations  in one of the
              most remarkably complex, cooperation mammalian  societies on earth.
