Title       : Finding the Pattern
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9705458

Award Number: 9705458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1588716            (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen McConnell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn Baum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Science
	      
	      Boston, MA  02114    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9705458  McConnell    Museum of Science will develop a 4500 sq. ft. exhibit
              "Finding the  Pattern".  The primary objective is to develop activities and 
              programs that encourage visitors to practice scientific thinking  skills in
              settings that have interdisciplinary science content.   The main component is
              an activity area that will encourage visitors  to observe, compare, and sort
              objects and phenomena in meaningful  ways; help visitors recognize that systems
              of organizing and  classifying objects and phenomena reveal underlying meaning;
               provide visitors with opportunities to practice answering questions  and
              solving problems based on museums collections; and encourage  visitors to
              search for the "hidden" meaning in things around them.   The exhibit will be
              composed of three overlapping areas: 1) the  sorting area, 2) the mystery area,
              and 3) the open collections  area.  This project is one of the six science
              activity centers that  have been described in the museum's long-range plan; two
              activity  centers/exhibits have been completed.  The impact of "Finding the 
              Pattern" will be extended via the museum's web site.   Activities  that employ
              the kinds of scientific thinking skills targeted in the  exhibit will be
              developed to engage informal learners at home.   Complementary programming
              linking the exhibit with formal education  will include the development of
              teacher workshops and programs for  school groups.  Teacher workshops will be
              developed in consultation  with groups of Project PALMS teachers.  The
              activities will be  accessible to individuals with disabilities.  They plan to
              open the  exhibit in the fall of 2000.
