Title       : Charge Transfer and Energy Transfer in Transmission of Low Energy (<10eV) Ions
               Through Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1999  
File        : a9705476

Award Number: 9705476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore E. Madey madey@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This research project, in the laboratory of Professor Ted Madey at  Rutgers
              University, addresses questions of the energy transfer and  charge exchange in
              the interaction of very low energy ions with  various surfaces.  Support is
              provided by the Analytical and  Surface Chemistry Program to probe the
              interaction of low energy  atomic and molecular ions with overlayers of inert
              gases, thin film  metals and oxides, and condensed molecular layers.  Ions are
              formed  at low energies by electron stimulated desorption, and the energy 
              distribution and identity of emitted ions is probed as a function  of overlayer
              composition and thickness.  Experimental results will  be compared with
              calculations which simulate these processes.  This  information is basic to our
              understanding of many ion based surface  analysis techniques, as well as the
              dynamics of radiation chemistry  and low energy plasma processing of materials.
               The interaction of low energy ions with surfaces is crucial in the 
              application of analytical methods using ion probes of surface  structure and
              composition, as well as in the interaction of low  energy ions in materials
              processing and in radiation chemistry.   This research project explores the
              detailed mechanism of the  interaction of low energy ions with a variety of
              surfaces, with the  goal of obtaining a molecular level understanding of these 
              mechanisms.  Detailed experimental measurements will be coupled  with
              calculational studies of these processes.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
