Title       : STTR Phase II: High Speed Capillary Electrophoresis/Time-of-Flight Mass
               Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9705341

Award Number: 9705341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar D. Lee edlee@lardav.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Milton L. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sensar Corporation
	      1652 W 820 N
	      Provo, UT  84601    801/561-8679

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase 11 project will further refine
              the concepts from the phase I results that established the feasibility of
              capillary electrophoresis/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (CE/TOFMS).  TOFMS
              potentially provides nearly ideal detection capability for CE because it
              combines high sensitivity, and high scan speed, with the ability (when used
              with electrospray ionization) to detect ionized solution phase compounds
              typical of many biological and environmental samples.  Our research objectives
              for the phase 11 project include: (1) development, implementation, and testing
              of the next generation high speed data acquisition system; (2) construction and
              testing of a 50 cm `inverted perfectron` TOFMS; (3) refinement of the
              electrospray ion source and the interface between the ion source and the TOFMS;
              and (4) further development of capillary column technology for CE.  These
              refinements are based on new concepts and experimental results generated in
              phase I and are aimed at improving performance and reliability and increasing
              the cost effectiveness of CE/TOFMS.  They will culminate in a prototype
              instrument very similar to one that could be introduced as a commercial
              product.  To date no publications have resulted from this work.  We plan to
              publish results in the future.  Two inventions were developed during the course
              of this work.  One deals with the transport of ions through the differentially
              pumped interface connecting the mass spectrometer to the electrospray ion
              source.  The second is a new type of data acquisition system.  The art of both
              inventions will be taught in patents we will file.  We anticipate describing
              the them in scientific presentations and papers as well.  It is also our plan
              to make the inventions available as part of a commercial TOFMS when the
              technology has matured sufficiently for a product introduction.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
