Title       : Exploration of Localization Phenomena at Ultra Thin Metal/ Semiconductor
               Interfaces: Going Beyond Surface Spectroscopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9705246

Award Number: 9705246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanno H. Weitering hanno@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705246  Weitering    The  primary  goal  of this new research program  is  to 
              explore  the  fundamentals  of  electron  localization at crystalline 
              semiconductor  surfaces  or  in  ultrathin epitaxial films. The PI who  is  a 
              junior  faculty member at Tennessee will measure the temperature dependence of 
              the surface state conductance and attempt to correlate these classical 
              transport  measurements with state densities and band  dispersions  as 
              measured  with  angle-resolved  photoemission,  electron  energy  loss 
              spectroscopy and scanning tunneling spectroscopy. In addition, we will  explore
               the  possible formation of local magnetic moments  using  the  a.c.
              susceptibility technique in ultrahigh vacuum. It is expected that  this
              multi-technique approach will  ultimately  bridge  the  gap between surface 
              science  and  mesoscopic  physics, thereby generating a profound impact on both
              condensed matter  physics and semiconductor technology.  %%%  The  primary 
              goal  of this new research program  is  to  explore  the  fundamentals  of 
              electron  localization at crystalline  semiconductor  surfaces   or   in 
              ultrathin  epitaxial  films.  The   trend   toward  miniaturization of
              industrial components is leading to materials  that  are  so  small as to be
              nearly two-dimensional. The smaller a  sample,  the  more important its surface
              properties, simply because the surface  represents  a  higher  percentage of
              the sample.  In  order  to  learn  something  about surfaces, scientists have
              "bombarded"  surfaces  with  quantum  particles  such as electrons or photons.
              Unfortunately,  such  experiments are  extremely  difficult to relate to
              practical matters such as electrical  conductance. In this research project, we
              are exploring  new  ways  to  measure  the  electrical  and  magnetic 
              properties  of  semiconductor  surfaces  and thin films directly. A novel
              method is being implemented  to  electrically insulate the surface from the
              bulk  so  that  we  can  measure  the  electrical  resistance  o f  the 
              surface.  We  are  also  constructing a very sensitive nstrument capable of
              detecting extremely  weak  magnetic signals from a  surface. It is expected
              that these  new  measurements  will provide unprecedented insights that  will 
              help  to  bridge  the  gap between the physicist's world of atoms and 
              molecules  and the engineer's world of device fabrication.  ***
