Title       : RUI: Fractional Power Fringe - Adjusted Filter Based Joint Transform Correlation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9705668

Award Number: 9705668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56684              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammad S. Alam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: ECS-9705668    Principal Investigator:  Mohammad Alam    Title:
               Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI):  Fractional Power
              Fringe-Adjusted Based Joint Transform Correlator      In this research, a novel
              real-time distortion-invariant filter procedure for optical pattern recognition
              will be investigated.  Optical pattern recognition involves the use of either a
              matched filter based correlator or a joint transform correlator (JTC); only the
              later is suitable for real-time applications.  Recently a number of nonlinear
              optical techniques have been proposed for optical pattern recognition, and the
              all-optical photorefractive crystal JTC stands out among these.  To date, the
              photorefractive JTC architecture is suitable only for single target detection
              and the processing speed is slow.  The PI's research will develop a novel
              generalized JTC which employs nonlinear apodization at the Fourier plane. 
              Preliminary studies by the PI indicate that this JTC technique results in
              better correlation output compared to alternate JTC architectures.  This seems
              true for multiple targets, which may be rotated with respect to each other and
              well as single targets; and for noisy as well as noise-free backgrounds. There
              are many applications for such an improved optical pattern recognition
              technique:  machine parts recognition and label inspection for industrial
              automation, optical character recognition, ultrafast fingerprint
              identification, target detection and tracking, robotics vision, automated
              intelligent vehicle control systems, and real-time region-of-interest
              identifier in broad area search situations such as the identification of
              specific features, patterns or characteristics in earth resource images.    The
              PI will explore various architectures to effectively implement the nonlinear
              Fourier domain processing, through extensive modeling, simulation and
              experimentation.  The experimentation will be carried out in collaboration with
              the Electro-Optics Laboratory at University of Dayton. Fu ll undergraduate
              student participation in the research at INPU-Fort Wayne and at University of
              Dayton is planned.
