Title       : Set-Membership Adaptive Filtering for High Performance Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9705173

Award Number: 9705173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153624             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yih-Fang Huang huang@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Due to the existence of fast fading and co-channel interference in wireless 
              communications systems, the problems of adaptive equalization and interference 
              suppression call for solutions that are beyond the reach of conventional
              schemes,  e.g., those based on least squares and least-mean-squares.  This
              research project  is applying novel adaptive signal processing techniques,
              referred to as Set-  Membership Adaptive Recursive Techniques (SMART), to
              resolve critical problems  that arise in advanced communications systems.  The
              novelty of SMART stems from  the following: (1) Their outcomes always satisfy a
              prescribed instantaneous bound  on the magnitude of the estimation error, which
              in adaptive equalization, is the  difference between the desired output and the
              filtered output.  (2) They are  characterized through a feasible set of
              parameters, which meet the specification  without requiring the existence of a
              true parameter.  (3) They update parameter  estimates selectively depending on
              the innovation of the input data.  This  feature leads to an adaptor sharing
              paradigm that significantly improves the  cost-effectiveness and data usage
              efficiency in adaptive signal processing.  In  simulation studies, SMART have
              exhibited superior performance and lower  computational complexity in
              applications such as adaptive equalization and  interference cancellation.   
              More generally, this project will establish a sound theoretical foundation for 
              Set-Membership Adaptive Filtering (SMAF), and explore the use of SMART in those
               applications where performance requirements may exceed what traditional 
              algorithms can offer, e.g., modern multiple access communication systems.  We 
              anticipate that this research will advance the state-of-the-art in adaptive 
              filtering, both theoretically and practically, and significantly enhance the 
              performance of modern wireless communication systems.
