Title       : Boundary Phenomena in Quantum and Classical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9705304

Award Number: 9705304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander E. Meyerovich Meyerovich@CERBERUS.PHYS.URI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705304  Meyerovich  This project consists of two components.  One deals with
              the  physics of spin polarized quantum systems, specifically the  spin
              dynamics.  Here the anomalous zero-temperature spin  attenuation in polarized
              Fermi liquids, which is now well  established both experimentally and
              theoretically,  nevertheless needs to be brought under the umbrella of a 
              general theory of Fermi liquids.  There are plans to study  the nonlinear
              phenomena, e.g. close to the Castaing  instability.  In the second component,
              the PI plans to  develop a general framework for a study of boundary  roughness
              effects.  Much of this work is an extensive  development of a recent
              breakthrough formalism by the PI and  his coworkers where the boundary
              roughness is mathematically  expressed in terms of bulk distortions.  In
              details, this  research hopes to develop a description of particle flow at 
              very high Knudsen numbers and an exploration of random  boundary effects in
              microscopic models of friction.  %%%  A renewal to a distinguished mid-career
              PI, this grant  supports work on two different projects.  In the first part 
              the PI will continue his well-recognized study of highly  polarized systems,
              equivalent to materials in magnetic  fields of the order of hundreds of Tesla. 
              the second group  of problems involve random/rough surfaces and boundaries. 
              The PI has recently developed a mathematical formalism,  amounting to a major
              breakthrough in the description of a  wide range of problems.  The possible
              areas of inpact are  particle flow at very high speeds and low densities and/or
               models for understanding material friction.  ***
