Title       : Thin Films, Heterostructures and Mesoscale Physics of Quasi-One-Dimensional
               Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9705433

Award Number: 9705433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Thorne ret6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  Thorne 
              9705433    This experimental project focuses on the properties of interfaces 
              involving   thin  films  of  novel  charge-density   wave   (CDW)  conductors, 
              including Rb0.3MoO3. Materials  of  this  class  are  among  the  most
              remarkable conducting materials ever discovered,  and  have many novel and
              potentially useful properties.  In  part  the work will build upon the recent
              demonstration by van der Zant  et  al at the Delft University of Technology,
              that thin films  of  CDW  conductors  can  be prepared, patterned  and 
              characterized,  which  indeed  demonstrate the novel and potentially  useful 
              CDW  phenomena. Collaboration with this group and the Buhrman group at  Cornell
               will explore pulsed laser depostion of these  materials.  Methods  for 
              patterning and for attaching contacts to  indvidual  grains,  and for preparing
              heterostructures with other  materials  will  be  investigated. These films
              make possible a broad variety  of  experiments  to probe mesoscale aspects of
              CDW  physics,  and  several such experiments are planned. In addition, memory
              devices  based   on   metastable  CDW  states  will  be   fabricated   and 
              characterized. Mesoscopic structures will be used  to  study  CDW  phase slip
              and vortex dynamics. MOSFET-like heterostructures will  allow  modulation  of 
              the  CDW wavevector,  gap  and  collective  conductance. Such devices may be
              useful as detectors and  mixers.  CDW-superconductor  heterostructures  will 
              be  used  to  explore  proximity  effects due to the competing pairing 
              interactions  in  these  two ground states. Preliminary efforts to test
              predictions  for  the  properties  of mesoscale CDW-insulator-CDW  and  normal 
              metal-insulator-CDW  heterostructures will  also  be  undertaken.  This 
              research  project is interdisciplinary in nature  and  will  involve   graduate
               and  undergraduate  students  who   will   be  excellently  trained  for 
              careers in  industry,  government  and  a cademia.    %%%    This  experimental
               project is based  on  novel  and  potentially  useful   electronic  conducting
               films  of  "charge-density-wave"  conductors.   In  these  materials,  which 
              are  typically   very  anisotropic,   often  needle-like  in  their  shape,  
              electrical  conduction  occurs in a completely different way than  in  common 
              metals  such  as  copper  and aluminum.  In  these  conductors  a  cooperative 
               motion   of  charge-carrying   "domains"   provides  conduction, with many
              novel and potentially useful properties. In  this  project,  thin  films  of 
              such  materials,  suitable   for  incorporation  into  electronic device 
              configurations,  such  as  "mixers"  of use in high frequency communication
              equipment,  will  be  fabricated  and studied. Heterojunctions of such  films 
              will  resemble in some cases the "MOSFET" structures well known in  the 
              silicon  device technology, and will be explored for their  novel  properties.
              This work will lead to a much better understanding of  the electrical behavior
              of interfaces between conventional metals  and  insulators and the novel
              charge-density-wave conductors, and  will  possibly  lead  to new applications 
              in  electronics.  This  research project is interdisciplinary in nature and
              will  involve  undergraduate  and  graduate students  who  will  be 
              excellently  trained for positions in industry, government and academia.  ***
