Title       : Controlled Fabrication of Tunnel Barriers and Electron Tunneling into High Tc
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9705180

Award Number: 9705180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dynes rdynes@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705180 
              Dynes    This  experimental  research project focuses  on  the  controlled 
              fabrication  of tunnel barriers intended to permit tunneling  and  transport 
              studies of superconductors that are subject to  strong  electron  correlations
              and to reduced dimensionality. A topic  of  interest is the nature of the
              superconductor-insulator transition  in lower dimensional systems. A further
              topic is the search for a  useful     analogy     between     two-dimensional  
                disordered  superconductors and high Tc cuprate superconductors.  Samples  of
               varying  dimensionality are to be studied by means of  transport,  tunneling, 
              and  scanning tunneling microscopy,  emphasizing  the  effects of dimensional
              crossover and disorder.   %%%  This  experimental  research project  is  based 
              on  use  of  the  technique  known  as  electron tunneling, and  in  particular
               on  finding  methods to fabricate barriers suitable for  the  use  of  this  
              technique.  Electron  tunneling  is  a  quantum-mechanical  process  by  which 
              an electron can pass a potential  barrier  or  "hill",  which could not be
              overcome under the rules of classical  physics,  governing macroscopic objects
              like planets  and  tennis  balls. Quantum mechanics allows such hills to
              "tunneled under" on  a  probabilistic basis with measurable rates of transfer 
              limited  to cases of very small mass and short (Angstrom scale) distances, 
              such as the case of electrons in atoms. The technique of electron  tunneling 
              is  important in determining the  density  of  states,  especially  in 
              superconductors; and also as the  basis  for  the  scanning  tunneling
              microscope. This research project probes  the  effects  of atomic scale
              disorder and geometric configuration  on  transport,  with  emphasis  on  the 
              metal-insulator  transition.  Geometries of interest include planar and
              one-dimensional  linear  samples.  Results  from  this research may  include 
              unusual  new  effects  or  st ructures which may find application in
              technology.  This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves 
              graduate  and  postdoctoral  students  who  will  be  excellently  trained to
              enter positions in industry, government or education.  ***
