Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Nonlinear Electrokinetic Effects on the
               Dynamics of Colloidal Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1997      
File        : a9705810

Award Number: 9705810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Baygents baygents@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 0000,5912,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705810  Baygents      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty -  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a nine-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. James C. Baygents of the University of
              Arizona  to work with Dr. Robert J. Hunter at the University of  Sydney in
              Australia.  Support for this project will be  provided by the U.S.-Australia
              Program of the Division of  International Programs.    This project will work
              to describe the dynamics of colloidal  particles in applied electric fields
              that vary with position  and time.  Equipped with a proper theoretical
              description of  the particle dynamics, one can then interpret the results of 
              experimental measurements on nonlinear electrokinetic  effects. 
              Electroacoustics is a procedure in which one  applies an alternating electric
              field to a colloidal  suspension.  Since most colloid particles are
              electrically  charged, they respond to this field by oscillating backwards  and
              forwards at the same frequency as the applied field.  This generates a sound
              wave, and it is by measuring the  properties of the sound wave that it is
              possible to obtain a  detailed characterization of the colloid particles. 
              Current  theory assumes that the applied field strengths are so low  that the
              particle response is linear.  Dr. Baygent's  research will extend the theories
              of these effects to take  into account the non-linear effects which would
              result if  the field strength is raised to much higher levels.  Sufficiently
              high fields should be able to orient the  particles along the direction of the
              field and this would  cause them to respond differently to an unoriented
              particle.  This added information could be used to obtain the charge  and size
              of the particles as well as their aspect ratio  (length to diameter)  if they
              are non-spherical.      ***
