Title       : Magnetism, Superconductivity and Anisotropy in Unusual Materials and Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9705414

Award Number: 9705414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Markert markert@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705414 
              Markert    This  experimental  research  project  is  devoted  to  exploring 
              unusual     phenomena    in    anisotropic      magnetism     and 
              superconductivity.  Emphasis is placed on  the  relation  between  materials 
              structure  and  electronic  properties.  The  work  is  materials-based  and
              involves synthesis of new materials,  growth  of  single  crystals  and of
              epitaxial films, and  microstructure  manipulation. A wide range of experiments
              to be employed includes  SQUID    magnetometry;   magnetic,   elastic   and   
              dissipative  measurements using high-Q oscillators; surface analysis, NMR, and 
              heat  capacity. Specific topics will include magnetic excitations  and 
              anisotropy  of infinite layer cuprates; competition  between  Kondo/heavy
              fermion behavior and 3d transition metal magnetism in  two  Ce-based compounds;
              and effects of surface structure on spin  excitations  in  ultrathin 
              ferromagnetic  films,  including  the  engineering of specific magnon dispesion
              features. In this  work,  the   unity  in  one  project  of  a  wide  array  of
               synthesis,  charcterization  and  analytical  techniques  will  provide   the 
              graduate  students  with  an  excellent  training  in  areas   of  materials
              science and physics.  %%%  This experimental research project is centered on
              discovering the  relations  between  structure of materials and  those 
              electronic  properties  which  may  be  particularly  useful  in  technology, 
              including  magnetic  properties and superconductivity.  The  work  includes 
              synthesis  of novel materials in  the  form  of  single  crystals,  epitaxial 
              films  and will  also  explore  effects  of  microstructure   manipulation. 
              Methods  will  include   use   of  sensitive  magnetic property measurements,
              surface analysis,  and  nuclear  magnetic  resonance.  Results  from  this 
              research  may  include  unusual  new  effects  or  structures  which  may  
              find  application   in   technology.    This   research    project    is 
              interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves  undergraduate   and  graduate 
              students  who  will  be excellently  trained  to  enter  positions in industry,
              government or education.  ***
