Title       : Mathematical Problems in Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9705779

Award Number: 9705779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70578              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher King king@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705779    King    There are three projects described in this proposal, all
              concerned  with the physics of interacting many-body systems. The first is 
              "Spontaneous and stimulated emission of photons"; the problem here  is to find
              a useful approximation for the time evolution  operator in the simplest
              interacting quantum field theory, namely  a two-state atom coupled to the
              quantized radiation field, and  to investigate stimulated photon emission in
              this model.  The second project is titled  "Mutually avoiding self-avoiding
              random walks"; the goal is to locate  the exact phase boundaries of a model of
              non-intersecting random  walks on the lattice and to determine the correlation
              functions in each  phase.  The third project is "Scaling behavior of
              correlations in a critical model",  where it is proposed to find the scaling
              and large deviation  properties of an order parameter in a model of
              non-intersecting  random loops on the two-dimensional torus.      The broad
              goal of this project is to elucidate the macroscopic  behavior of a large
              system which is composed of many small  components by drawing mathematical
              conclusions from its  microscopic formulation. At the microscopic level,
              physics  provides well-understood laws which allow a consistent  mathematical
              description. The challenge is to predict the  macroscopic consequences of these
              laws.  This project focuses on two areas: first, the interaction of photons 
              with an atom, where the macroscopic behavior is the emission and absorption  of
              light, and second, the spatial fluctuations of vortex lines in 
              superconductors, where the macroscopic behavior is the sudden  occurrence of
              long-range correlations. There are many areas in science and  technology where
              local rules may conspire to produce huge effects  (for example congestion in
              high-speed communications  networks). This project will use mathematical
              analysis to address questions  of this type in the realm of theoretical
              physics.
