Title       : Quantum Engineering of Metallic Thin Film Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9705406

Award Number: 9705406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Ward Plummer eplummer@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qian Niu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhenyu Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Kang Shih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip T. Sprunger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1771,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9705406 Plummer  This FRG proposal addresses, experimentally and theoretically,
              basic materials science issues in a collaborative program involving researchers
              at four universities and ORNL, combining expertise and facilities to explore a
              new concept in epitaxy, an "electronic growth" mechanism. Within this mechanism
              the critical thickness for the formation of an atomically flat film corresponds
              to the thickness where the two-dimensional electronic system can be confined in
              a potential well between the vacuum and the substrate. This magic film
              thickness depends on the nature of quantum well states, that is, the overall
              arrangement of atoms is dictated by the preference of electrons to occupy
              certain quantum-mechanical states. Special resources made available jointly for
              this project include high resolution photo-emission, surface x-ray scattering,
              scanning probe microscopy, high resolution inelastic electron scattering, and
              super computing equipment. The proposed research emphasizes understanding of
              fundamental mechanisms and processes through a combination of theoretical and
              experimental studies. %%% The project addresses forefront materials science
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of metal-semiconductor
              interfaces critical to electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry, in
              general.  Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from
              the research is expected to contribute to improving the performance of advanced
              devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing and producing improved materials and structures for the quantum
              mechanical devices of the future. The research program may lead to a new
              paradigm for metal heteroepitaxy, which is of significance in the fabrication
              of electronic devices and microelectronics circuitry. ***
