Title       : Effects of Intrinsic and Disorder-Induced Anisotropies on the Vortex Dynamics
               and Superconducting Gap of High-Temperature Superconductors-From Macroscopic to
               Microscopic Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9705171

Award Number: 9705171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nai-Chang Yeh ncyeh@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705171  Yeh 
                This experimental research project focuses on the vortex dynamics  and  
              vortex-pinning  of  anisotropic  cuprate   superconductors,  emphasizing  a 
              wide  range  of length- and  excitation-frequency  scales.  Two  goals  of  the
              work are to investigate  competition  between  the intrinsic and
              disorder-induced anisotropies  on  the  vortex  pinning and dynamics of cuprate
              crystals and  films  with  different static disorder; and to study the
              thermally-induced and  current-driven  vortex dynamics from macroscopic  to 
              microscopic  scales.  Experiments include measurement of the Hall conductivity 
              up   to   10MHz;  the  first-  and  third-harmonic  ac   magnetic 
              susceptibility  from 0.1Hz to 0.1MHz, and the microwave  magneto-  impedance
              from 6 to 26 GHz using high-Q sapphire-loaded microwave  cativites. Scanning
              tunneling microscope measurements  will  also  be made.  %%%  This experimental
              research project is centered on the effects  of  magnetic  field  on the
              cuprate high temperature superconductors,  which are important in potential
              applications such as filters for  communication  systems  and  current 
              carrying  wires  for  power  transmission.  The  research focuses  on  the 
              stability  of  the  magnetic  flux  lines  as they penetrate the
              superconductor,  the  types  of  motions  of the flux lines and how  to 
              minimize  such  motions by providing so-called pinning centers. Flux line
              motions  lead  to internal energy loss and heating and are detrimental  to 
              efficiency in most applications. The experimental tools  in  this  project 
              include  measurement  of  harmonic  generation  in   the  interaction of ac
              magnetic fields with such samples, and study of  vortex   geometries  using 
              the  scanning  tunneling  microscope.  Results  from  this research may include
              unusual new  effects  or  materials  which  may  find new application in 
              technology.  This  research  project  is  interdisciplinary in nature  and  
              involves  graduate  students  who  will  be excellently  trained  to  enter 
              positions in industry, government or education.  ***
