Title       : Collaborative Research between General Motors Corporation and Iowa State
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9705045

Award Number: 9705045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean L. Isaacson dli@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Koehler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Vardeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     The General Motors Corporation Technical Education Program   and the
              Department of Statistics at Iowa State University (ISU)  have a partnership
              under which General Motors (GM) employees  can earn a non-thesis M.S. Degree in
              Statistics taking regular  courses from the department via video tape.  The
              degree  requirements include a research component that results in a  formal
              paper (creative component).  Students from GM will have  co-major professors, a
              statistician from GM and a statistician  from ISU.  The purpose of this
              proposal is to create  opportunities for visits and interactions that will help
              the GM  students with this creative component research and introduce ISU 
              faculty to research problems of interest to industry.         This project will
              fund interactions of two different but  related types: 1) site visits by ISU
              personnel with GM students  and co-major professors and 2) collaborative
              research with  scientists at GM Research Labs.  In the summer of 1997, one ISU 
              statistician will visit GM students and co-major professors,  discussing
              company interests and areas for collaboration, and  identifying appropriate
              topics for creative component research.   In the summer of 1998, this person
              will spend 1 additional month  doing collaborative research with GM scientists.
               In the summer  of 1998 a second faculty member will spend two months engaged 
              in visits and collaborative research.  As part of their visits  with GM
              research scientists, these faculty members will give  seminars for GM
              statisticians and engineers on modern statistical  methods.  This proposed
              interaction will produce topics for  publishable creative components, research
              ideas for ISU faculty  members and solutions for real industry problems.       
               The educational experience of the students at GM will be  greatly enhanced
              through the proposed interaction.  The GM  students will be exposed to both
              academic and industrial  approaches to research.  Ideally, their creative
              components will  both answer a particular q uestion for GM and raise new
              questions  for the ISU faculty members, that can serve as subsequent topics 
              for both personal research and for that of future ISU graduate  students.  The
              end result will then be the advancement of  knowledge in directions important
              to industry practice.         Since the projects at GM will likely combine
              statistics and  engineering, many will serve as focal points to bring together 
              ISU faculty members from Statistics and Engineering.  Additional  collaborative
              research at ISU is thus likely to follow from this  project.         This GOALI
              project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities
              (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
