Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9705825

Award Number: 9705825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Jerison jerison@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Jerison      The first goal of the research proposed is to describe
              level sets of  eigenfunctions and Green's function on regions in three or more 
              dimensions and on positively curved surfaces.  Another goal is to  prove a
              unique continuation property which is the appropriate  substitute for
              uniqueness in the Cauchy problem for solutions to  elliptic boundary value
              problems.  The proposal is to use an optimal  hypothesis on the smoothness of
              the boundary, namely, Lipschitz  regularity.  The optimal hypothesis makes this
              a fundamental issue in  harmonic analysis.  A third goal is to solve two
              extremal problems for  eigenvalues, one related to regularity in the Neumann
              problem, the  other aimed at proving uniqueness in an inverse problem of
              finding a  domain given the density of the first variation of the eigenvalue as
              a  function of normal variation.  Another main goal concerns three  problems
              motivated by fluid mechanics.  The first problem is to show  that infinitesimal
              control on vorticity and compressibility implies  some global control.  The
              second problem relates the first to measures  of consistency of economic data. 
              The third is a free boundary problem  related to constructing equilibrium fluid
              flows with vortex lines.  The final goal is to study certain oscillatory
              integrals with singular  phases, with an application to pattern recognition in
              camera images.    The main project is to understand how the shape of a region
              affects  the distribution of heat in the region or how the shape of an 
              electrical conductor affects the distribution of electrical charge on  it. 
              These problems are closely related mathematically, even though  they describe
              very different physical systems.  The case of  temperature describes a
              refrigerator or building with insulated walls,  but the case of electrical
              charge describes electrical components like  wires and cables.  The main issue
              addressed in the part of the project  motivated by fluid mechanics is how
              stretching and twisting at small  scales  leads to changes in the shape, speed,
              and density of a fluid  (or air) at large scales.  This is a fundamental
              question in the  mechanics of solids, plastics, and elastic materials, as well
              as  fluids.  A similar mathematical model is encountered in economic 
              equilibrium theories.  The ultimate goal of the project in the  economics
              context is to give criteria for when a set of economic data  about purchases
              can be combined into a meaningful price index, despite  errors and
              inconsistency.  In other words, how small must  inconsistencies be in order
              that one can safely ignore them?  The  camera image project will use Fourier
              analysis to design a computer  program to recognize the angle a building makes
              with the camera's line  of sight based on a single photograph of the building. 
              The  determination from a single image would improve on existing techniques 
              using two images and make computer vision less subject to error.
