Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics and Pattern Formation in Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9705670

Award Number: 9705670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard J. Matkowsky b-matkowsky@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Matkowsky   9705670    We pursue a research program in nonlinear dynamics and
              pattern formation   in combustion. The program involves a synergism of
              analytical and numerical   studies of problems in combustion and flame
              propagation, which has been   successful in elucidating solution behavior of
              the highly nonlinear systems   of PDEs which we study. In particular, interest
              centers on problems exhibiting   complex spatiotemporal dynamics in gaseous
              combustion as well as in solid fuel   combustion. In gaseous combustion, we
              consider four different problem areas:   (a) flames with sequential reactions,
              (b) flames in stretched flows,   (c) flames stabilized on a burner, and (d)
              flames in gas filled tubes.  We also consider problems in solid fuel
              combustion, in which  combustion waves are used to synthesize advanced
              materials. In this  relatively new and innovative technological process, which
              appears to  enjoy many advantages over conventional technology, the combustion 
              wave propagates through the sample, converting unreacted solid powder  mixture
              to solid product. Our analytical studies are based on  bifurcation and
              nonlinear stability theories, which employ asymptotic   analysis and singular
              perturbation theory in the neighborhood of  bifurcation or other transition
              points, resulting in a local  description of the solution in a neighborhood of
              the appropriate  critical point. Then an adaptive pseudo-spectral method,
              developed by  the proposer and A. Bayliss, is employed for large scale  
              scientific computations, with which the local description is globally  
              extended. The solutions of the problems considered exhibit layer type 
              behavior, i.e., localized regions in which the solution varies very  rapidly.
              It is a challenge to numerical methods to accurately and   efficiently resolve
              such behavior. The adaptive pseudo-spectral method  has been shown to
              successfully meet this challenge. As critical  parameters of the problem are
              exceeded, transitions to   states with successively greater degrees of 
              spatio-temporal complexity occur.    Our goal is to describe the transitions as
              well as the resulting   spatio-temporal patterns. The analytical studies, in
              addition to  elucidating system behavior, e.g., parameter dependencies, also
              serve  as benchmarks for the ensuing numerical computations. Codes are thus  
              validated not only for simple solutions, but for complex  spatio-temporal
              behavior as well. In addition to studying specific   combustion problems, we
              contribute to the development of both analytical and   numerical methodology
              for the investigation of these and other  problems. Finally, where possible,
              comparisons to relevant  experimental observations will be made.    We
              investigate mathematical problems describing combustion processes. The  
              primary concern in these studies is the understanding of basic mechanisms,  
              including cause and effect, influencing combustion,  which is a necessary  
              prerequisite to any attempt to control the combustion process. In particular,  
              we study the characteristics, e.g., structure, propagation speed, stability,  
              etc., of combustion waves.  An example of the problems considered is the use  
              of combustion waves to synthesize advanced materials. In the conventional  
              technology, a powder mixture of components is placed in a furnace and "baked"  
              until it is well done. In combustion synthesis the mixture is pressed into a  
              solid and ignited at one end. A combustion wave then propagates through the 
              solid converting it to desired product. The process is significantly  faster
              and cheaper than the conventional technology. The nature of the  product is
              determined by the manner of propagation of the combustion  wave, which is the
              subject of our investigation.
