Title       : Healthcare Robotics Workshop; Boston, MA; March 26-27, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1997   
File        : a9705435

Award Number: 9705435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry Asada asada@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  The  objective  of  this  workshop is to bring  together  leading 
              scientists,  engineers, practitioners, and entrepreneurs  in  the  robotics and
              healthcare communities, display state-of-the-art  of  healthcare  robotics, 
              and identify fundamental  issues  and  key  technologies  which  require long
              term  research  endeavors.  The  rapid  increase  of  the aged population and 
              soaring  healthcare  costs  are crucial problems faced by today's society.
              Traditional  labor-intensive services and costly treatments will no longer  be 
              affordable,  yet demands for quality care continue  to  increase.  New 
              healthcare  technologies  are  emerging  from  robotics  and  intelligent
              systems which would make significant changes  in  the  current  practice  of 
              healthcare  services.  Minimally  invasive  surgery,  for  example, allows
              patients to be quickly  discharged  from  the  hospital.  Remote health
              monitoring  and  tele-nursing  systems  allow  patients to stay at home,  thus 
              avoiding  costly  hospital  stays.  Robotic vehicles and manipulation 
              technologies  allow   bedridden   patients   and   elderly   people   to   live
               independently.  Miniaturized  sensors  and  actuators,   wireless 
              communication,  advanced  human-machine  interface,   and   their  integration
              technologies are pointing in the future direction  of  healthcare   technology.
               Furthermore,  strategic   planning   of  research,  development, and
              deployment as well as the social  and  economic impact of the new technologies
              will be discussed at  the  workshop. The workshop will be held on March 26 and
              27,  1997  in  the  Boston  area.   Participants will be  invited  from 
              various  sectors of the healthcare community, e.g., hospitals, home health 
              agencies,  nursing homes, insurance companies,  as  well  as  the  vendors  and
               researchers  in robotics,  biomedical  engineering,  communication,  and
              software.  The result will be  published  and  disseminated as workshop
              proceedings as well as by web  page  and  virtual librari es.***
