Title       : Magneto-Electrodynamics of High Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9705129

Award Number: 9705129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Dennis Drew hdrew@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705129  Drew
                 This  experimental  research  is on the  infrared  and  microwave 
              magneto-optical  properties  of  Type  II  superconductors,  with  emphasis on
              cuprates, in both normal and superconducting  states.  Measurements  of 
              magneto-transmission of  superconducting  films  using   circularly   polarized
               radiation  with   frequency   and  temperature  variation, followed by
              kramers-Kronig analysis  will  determine   the   full   complex  
              frequency-dependent   magneto-  conductivity  tensor.  Features in such data
              recently  discovered  to   be   related  to  vortex  pinning;  the  hybridized 
               vortex  pinning/cyclotron resonance, the hybridized vortex pinning/vortex 
              core  resonance, and the low frequency depinning loss band,  will  be  a  focus
               of  the experimental work.  The  effects  on  these  properties  of  vortex
              pinning as introduced by ion  implantation  will  be studied.  Additional
              topics include studies of Josephson  plasmons,  and of plasma and
              magneto-plasma modes  of  arrays  of  superconducting disks.  These studies are
              novel and will  provide  new  information on high temperature
              superconductivity, with  the  possibility  of opening new paths for the science
              and  technology  of superconductivity.  %%%  This  experimental  research
              project makes use  of  sophisticated  optical  measurements  to  clarify the 
              interaction  of  magnetic  fields   with   cuprate   (high   Tc)  
              superconductors.    These  superconductors have the potential for application
              in motors  and  generators,   where  the  loss-free  electrical  conduction  
              and  potentially high levels of magnetic field could lead to  smaller, 
              lighter,  and  more  efficient motors and generators.   The  full  exploitation
               of  this potential has not been reached  thus  far,  because  of  heat
              generating motions of the magnetic field  lines  inside  the cuprate material. 
              Such motions, and how they may  be  reduced  by  introduction of "pinning cent
              ers" by irradiation  or  other  means,  are  one  of the topics  to  be 
              clarified.   This  experimental  grant  may  thereby help  to  develop  an 
              improved  electrical   technology.  Results from this research may  include 
              unusual  new effects or structures which may find application  in  technology. 
              This research project is interdisciplinary in nature  and involves graduate
              students who will be excellently trained to  enter positions in industry,
              government or education.  ***                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             This 
              experimental  research  is on the  infrared  and  microwave  magneto-optical 
              properties  of  Type  II  superconductors,  with  emphasis on cuprates, in both
              normal and superconducting  states.  Measurements  of  magneto-transmission of 
              superconducting  films  using   circularly   polarized  radiation  with  
              frequency   and  temperature  variation, followed by Kramers-Kronig analysis 
              will  determine   the   full   complex   frequency-dependent   magneto- 
              conductivity tensor. Features in such data recently discovered to  be   related
                to   vortex   pinning;   the   hybridized   vortex  pinning/cyclotron
              resonance, the hybridized vortex pinning/vortex  core  resonance, and the low
              frequency depinning loss band,  will  be  a  focus  of  the  experimental work.
              The  effects  on  these  properties  of  vortex pinning as introduced by ion 
              implantation  will  be  studied. Additional topics include studies of Josephson
               plasmons,  and of plasma and magneto-plasma modes  of  arrays  of 
              superconducting disks. These studies are novel and  will  provide  new 
              information on high temperature su perconductivity, with  the  possibility  of
              opening new paths for the science and  technology  of superconductivity.  %%% 
              This  experimental  research project makes use  of  sophisticated  optical 
              measurements  to  clarify the  interaction  of  magnetic  fields   with  
              cuprate   (high   Tc)   superconductors.    These  superconductors have the
              potential for application in motors  and  generators,   where  the  loss-free 
              electrical  conduction   and  potentially high levels of magnetic field could
              lead to  smaller,  lighter,  and  more  efficient motors and  generators.  The 
              full  exploitation  of  this potential has not been reached  thus  far, 
              because  of  heat generating motions of the magnetic field  lines  inside  the
              cuprate material. Such motions, and how they  may  be  reduced  by introduction
              of "pinning centers" by irrradiation  or  other  means,  are  one  of  the
              topics  to  be  clarified.  This  experimental  grant  may  thereby help  to 
              develop  an  improved  electrical  technology. Results from this  research  may
               include  unusual  new effects or structures which may find application  in 
              technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in  nature  and involves
              graduate students who will be excellently trained to  enter positions in
              industry, government or education.  ***
