Title       : Investigation of Formation, Stability, Structure and Hydrogen Storage Properties
               of Ti-Quasicrystals and Related Crystalline Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a9705202

Award Number: 9705202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth F. Kelton kfk@howdy.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705202  Kelton    The atomic structures of titanium-based quasicrystals and 
              related phases, the formability of the quasicrystal and  crystal approximants,
              the role of impurities in phase  formation, and the nature of the phase
              transitions  connecting the quasicrystal and the crystal approximants,  are as
              yet poorly understood.  Pursuing successes under the  past grant period, these
              points are explored in titanium and  zirconium-based quasicrystals and related
              crystal phases.  Subjects include: (1)  the investigation of the role of 
              interstitial impurities on icosahedral phase formation; (2)  the hydrogenation
              characteristics of quasicrystals, related  crystalline and amorphous phases,
              and the  hydrogen/quasicrystal phase diagram and pressure/composition 
              isotherms; (3) X-ray and neutron diffraction to determine  the atomic
              decoration of stable crystal approximants in  TiZrTM alloys; (4) 
              investigations of the sequence of phase  formation in TiCrSiO, TiZrNi, and
              TiZrFe alloys; and (5)  the nature of the phase transitions between the stable 
              icosahedral-phase and the rational approximant phases in  TiZrNi alloys. 
              Several collaborations are underway,  including studies of phase formation
              aided by drop-tube  experiments in collaboration with Cambridge University, UK;
               the stabilizing role of impurities by magnetic  susceptibility measurements in
              collaboration with scientists  at Washington University; neutron scattering
              studies of  hydrogenated (and deuterated) quasicrystals in collaboration  with
              Missouri University Research Reactor (MURR), and  Saclay, France; NMR studies
              of samples with Knox College,  IL.  The elastic neutron scattering and NMR
              studies lead to  a better understanding of the distribution, symmetry and 
              chemistry of the hydrogen containing sites in the TiZrNi  quasicrystals.  These
              data will be used to refine  quasicrystal models constructed from determined
              structures  for the crystal approximant phases.  Inelastic neutron and  NMR
              studies allow estimates to be made to hydrogen  diffusion  rates in the
              quasicrystal.  %%%  This research provides fundamental knowledge related to the
               potential for quasicrystal alloys to function as hydrogen  storage materials. 
              ***
