Title       : NMR Investigations of Spin Density Waves in Organic Metals and Vortices in
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9705369

Award Number: 9705369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Gilbert Clark clark@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705369 
              Clark    This  experimental research project employs techniques of nuclear 
              magnetic resonance in study  of the thermal and driven motions of  the  local
              broken symmetry ground state structures in CDW and SDW  one-dimensional 
              systems, and the motion of vortex  structure  in  several Type-II
              superconductors. Organic metal systems for  study  include  a Bechgaard salt
              alloy system and the blue bronze.  Most  of  the experiments will employ pulsed
              NMR over a very wide range  of  frequencies  and  up to high pressures.  In 
              superconductors,  recent  NMR spin-echo field-rocking measurements will be
              extended  to  anisotropic superconductors to measure the anisotropy of  the 
              penetration  depth;  and to high field to measure  the  coherence  length. Work
              is planned to extend the recent observations by  NMR  of  rf-assisted 
              flux-lattice annealing in anisotropic  Type-  II  superconductors.  Some  very
              high magnetic  field  work  will  be  performed  at  the National High Magnetic
              Field Laboratory.  This  study of unusual ground states in novel materials will
              extend the  knowledge base and has potential to generate significant advances 
              in  basic  solid  state  physics. It also  will  demonstrate  new  methods  
              for  using   NMR  which  may  be  applicable  in  other  circumstances.  %%% 
              This  experimental research project uses primarily the  technique  of  Nuclear 
              Magnetic Resonance (NMR) to probe  basic  electrical  properties of novel
              organic metal conductors, as well as  aspects  of  the  magnetic behavior in
              highly anisotropic superconductors.  The organic conductors of interest exhibit
              nearly one-dimensional  electrical conduction. Their electrical conduction is
              believed to  occur  by  a  novel mechanism known as a "sliding charge  density 
              wave",  which  involves a highly correlated motion  of  carriers,  unlike 
              conventional  metals.  The  properties  of  this  unusual  effect,  and 
              materials that can exhibit  it,  a re  of  interest.  Results  from  this
              research may include unusual new  effects  or  materials which may find new
              application in technology. A portion  of  the  work  will be carried out at the
              National High  Magnetic  Field  Laboratory. This research project is
              interdisciplinary  in  nature  and involves both graduate and postgraduate
              students  who  will  be  excellently  trained to enter  positions  in 
              industry,  government or education.  ***
