Title       : The Secret Life of the Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9705241

Award Number: 9705241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1877562            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Grubin grubin@mail.idt.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara E. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : David Grubin Productions
	      125 West 94th Street
	      New York, NY  10025    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9705241  Grubin     David Grubin Production, Inc., in conjunction with
              Thirteen/WNET, is producing a multimedia project entitled, The Secret Life of
              the Brain.  The project will examine new understandings into the processes of
              the human brain that have developed over the last decade.  Through an
              exploration of the brain's normal development from conception through old age,
              the project conveys the most recent knowledge available.  The series will
              enable audiences to appreciate the current revolution in neuroscience,
              understand how new technologies have enabled scientists to unearth a wealth of
              information, and learn how neuroscience research impacts the health and future
              well-being of the average person.  The five one-hour programs in the series
              will explore the brain from conception through age two, childhood from age two
              through puberty, adolescence, adulthood, and normal aging process in older age.
                    Educational outreach materials for use in informal and formal setting
              will include two separate sets of printed materials, one for adolescents and
              one for adults.  A Secret Life of the Brain Web Site will include Brain Games,
              the Brain Quiz, and the Live Brain that present learning opportunities for
              adults and teens.       The project Principal Investigator will be David Grubin
              who will serve as Executive Producer.  Grubin previously was the producer of
              Healing and the Mind with Bill Moyers and the critically acclaimed biographies
              of Lyndon Johnson, Franklin Roosevelt, and Theodore Roosevelt.  June Kinoshita,
              an internationally recognized science reporter and editor, will serve as the
              Series Science Editor.  Lead advisors for each program will be Bruce McEwen,
              President-elect of the Society for Neuroscience and Professor at Rockefeller
              University (Program 1); Steve Petersen, Director, Division of Neuropsychology,
              Dept. of Neurology and Neurological Surgery at the Washington University School
              of Medicine (Program 2); Steven Hyman, Director of the National Institute of
              Mental Health (Programs 3  & 4); and Carl Cotman, Director for the Institute
              for Brain Aging and Dementia at the University of California, Irvine (Program
              5).  Robert Miller of WNET will be responsible for the educational materials to
              accompany The Secret Life of the Brain.
