Title       : Multidimensional Depth Functions, Multidimensional Generalized L-Statistics, and
               Related Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9705209

Award Number: 9705209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William B. Smith                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95774              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Serfling serfling@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9705209  Serfling    In order to provide strengthened foundations for
              statistical analysis of multidimensional data, this research develops a general
              theory of statistical depth functions.  General theory is developed which
              unifies and extends the few examples of depth functions presently in the
              literature.  Based on the notion of center-outward ordering of multidimensional
              data points by "depth,"  corresponding notions of multidimensional location,
              spread, quantiles, ranks, and other traditional one-dimensional sample
              statistics are formulated and studied in this research.  In this framework,
              statistics such as multidimensional L-statistics, rank statistics, and
              generalized forms of these statistics, are investigated (extending previous
              work of the investigator for the one-dimensional case).  Further, corresponding
              notions of "contours" are investigated.  Statistics are developed which perform
              well overall with respect to robustness criteria (e.g., breakdown points),
              equivariance (relevant to the geometric structure), computational ease,
              conceptual consistency (with associated population notions), and theoretical
              tractability.Tools used, and further developed, for this research include
              functional analytic and U-statistic methods.  Application contexts receiving
              special attention include robust and nonparametric regression and analysis of
              variance.    This research develops improved methods for analyzing
              multidimensional data.  For a "cloud" of data points, one wishes to have a
              sense of where the "center" is located, for example.  One can take the average
              of the points, or one can seek to define a "middle point" that is less
              influenced by the extremities of the data cloud.  Similarly, other
              representative features of the data cloud need to be defined as analogues or
              extensions of concepts already in use for analysis of simple one-dimensional
              data.  This research systematically treats such issues and develops new methods
              to be put into practice.  Such summary statistics enable the main featur es of
              a data cloud to be conveyed by means of a few easily interpretable numbers,
              thus enabling one to describe the data adequately within the confines of a
              conventional statistical report.  Whereas visual methods lose their
              effectiveness for dimensions greater than three, the summarizing methods
              developed in this research apply equally well for any number of dimensions. 
              Multidimensional data sets are arising increasingly in the very complex
              data-gathering activities now pursued in the various arenas of modern society
              and strategic national concern.  This research leads to tools for
              simplification and reduction of this complexity.  Further, this study develops
              methods for interpreting the data as but a sample from a target population
              about which one seeks to make statistical inferences.  For example, the
              question of what exactly is being estimated by such data is addressed.  Basic
              mathematical advances needed for development of these new statistical methods
              are also accomplished as part of this research.
