Title       : Computer Simulation of Chemical Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9705694

Award Number: 9705694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329100             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Hase wlh@traj.chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting   Professor
              William Hase of Wayne State University for the next three   years.  In this
              research project classical molecular dynamics simulations   will be used to
              study the microscopic atomistic motion of individual   molecules and of
              chemical reactive systems, with the goals of comparing   with experiment and
              determining fundamental information about   intramolecular dynamics, energy
              transfer, and chemical reaction dynamics   and kinetics.  Since statistical
              theories are widely used to interpret   experiment, statistical calculations
              will be performed to compare with   the molecular dynamics simulations.  The
              specific problems chosen for   study are: (1) the kinetics of CH3 and H atom
              association with diamond   surfaces; (2) energy transfer dynamics in
              collision-induced dissociation   (CID) and surface-induced dissociation (SID);
              (3) the dynamics of   gas-phase nucleophilic substitution; and (4) direct ab
              initio and   semiempirical dynamics.   Classical molecular dynamics is expected
              to   give accurate results for these research problems and, given their  
              complexity, quantum dynamical calculations would be difficult.  In direct  
              dynamics, trajectories are integrated  `on the fly` by interfacing   electronic
              structure theory directly with the molecular dynamics   simulations.  This is a
              frontier approach for performing simulations,   which is directly linked to the
              computational power of modern computers.    Direct semiempirical dynamics may
              be used to study large systems for long   times (e.g. CID and SID), while ab
              initio direct dynamics may be applied   to small systems for short times.  An
              example of the latter is the   exit-channel and energy partitioning dynamics of
              trajectories as they   move from a potential energy barrier to products.  
              State-of-the art   vector and parallel processing  computer architecture will
              be used to   enhance the direct dynamics simulations.   In this research
              project molecular modeling and simulation is used to   study the motion of
              individual molecules and of molecular collisions   leading to chemical reaction
              and energy transfer.  Molecular simulation   methodologies have become
              sufficiently sophisticated that they are often   predictive, giving
              near-quantitative results.  The research to be   performed during the upcoming
              three year period includes applications  of   well-developed simulation methods
              to interpret new experimental results   and test theoretical models,  as well
              as the development of more direct   simulation approaches for studying large
              molecular systems.  The specific   simulations to be performed are of: (1)
              reactions leading to diamond film   growth; (2) mass-spectroscopy experiments
              of cluster fragmentation and   fragmentation of ions when they collide with the
              surfaces.  The latter   has been proposed as a procedure for sequencing
              peptides; (3) reactions   between ions and molecules; and (4) the fragmentation
              of highly energized   molecules.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
