Title       : Quantum Mechanics of Macroscopic Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1997  
File        : a9705058

Award Number: 9705058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Lukens jlukens@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Siyuan Han  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705058  Lukens    Experiments  will  be  undertaken to explore  the  quantum 
              mechanical  behavior  of a macroscopic variable---in this case, the magnetic
              flux through  a  ring.  A  particular focus of this work will be to understand
              the  effect  of  the  environment  (damping and temperature) on the evolution 
              of  the  flux  from  purely  classical  to  quantum.  The  system  to  be 
              studied   is   a  superconducting  loop   containing   a  Josephson  junction 
              (SQUID)  which   undergoes  transitions  between  two  fluxoid states by
              tunneling through a potential  barrier  between  potential  wells. The system
              energy is quantized within  each  fluxoid  well as  has  recently been
              confirmed using macroscopic resonant tunneling.  At  low  temperatures  only 
              the lowest state in a well is occupied,  giving  a  model  two  state  system.
              These states differ in magnetic  moment  by  about  10^10  Bohr magnetons---a
              very macroscopic quantity. The primary goal of this  work  is  to  attempt an
              observation of macroscopic quantum coherence  (MQC)  between  these two states
              and to understand the role of the environment in  determining the extent of
              such coherence.  %%%  Quantum  mechanics predicts many `strange' phenomena 
              which  are  very  much at  odds with our everyday experience. This was
              illustrated rather vividly  in  the early years of the field by Schroedinger --
              one of the founders of  quantum  mechanics  --  through  a  thought  experiment
               in  which  he  postulated  his  cat in a state where it oscillated between
              being dead and  alive.  We are  usually spared the consequences of these
              paradoxes since they tend  to  only  arise in atomic scale systems:
              interactions with the rest of the world  prevent  them  from  occurring in the
              sort of macroscopic  objects  we  encounter  in our everyday lives. Recent
              advances in experimental technology are,  however, predicted to make it
              possible to observe such effects (called  macroscopic quantum coherence (MQC))
              in a superconducting system known  as a  SQ UID, which generates a magnetic
              field (or magnetic moment as  it  is  more  correctly known) about 10 billion
              times greater than that of an  atom.  In  our experiments, which must be
              performed a few thousandths of a degree  above absolute zero, we hope to be
              able to observe this system in a  coherent superposition of states with the
              magnetic moment pointing  up  and  down.  ***
