Title       : Wild World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2001  
File        : a9705292

Award Number: 9705292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1693446            (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Kaufman kaufman@thirteen.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susane Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educ Broadcasting Corp
	      450 West 33rd Street
	      New York, NY  100012605    212/560-6608

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              97-05292  Fred Kaufman    ABSTRACT: Educational Broadcasting Corporation (WNET,
              NY) is developing a multi-media environmental education project for youth aged
              8 to 12.   Wild World focuses on American children's everyday urban and
              suburban surroundings - city streets, parks, backyards, vacant lots, the woods,
              and similar environments easily and often accessible to the audience.  The
              project will educate young people about environmental and natural science
              topics and issues in an entertaining, engaging way, and will encourage them to
              become more aware of their immediate environment.  Important goals are to
              showcase people who are passionate about their work with, and in, natural
              surroundings, and to show that our world is intriguing and well worth
              investigating.  The science content will reflect the recommendations of the
              National Science Education Standards and Benchmarks for Science Literacy. 
              Major components of the project include:    * A thirteen part series of
              half-hour television programs entitled Wild TV  -- this exciting and
              occasionally irreverent series is designed to attract viewers indifferent to
              traditional nature documentary program.  The format is also intended to appeal
              to young people with little pre-disposition to science or nature.  * Wild Comix
              -- a comic book-styled educational print piece for young people that includes
              activities that kids can try at home, puzzles, and other thought-provoking
              exercises.  * Wild Web --  a World Wide Web site featuring an interactive
              version of the comic book, activities and puzzles, a chat room, a bulletin
              board, and links to environmental groups.  * A Home and Extracurricular
              Settings: Activity Guide - intended for parents and informal educators, the
              guide will include: enriching nature appreciation for the entire family;
              improving the learning relationship between children and their parents; and
              activities/directions for parents that are not prohibitive with regard to area,
              income, and adults' educational background.    * Classroom materia ls - a
              12-page guide designed as an introductory resource for classroom teachers who
              want to incorporate environmental science activities into their teaching.
