Title       : A Novel Computational Approach to Combustion Modelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9705150

Award Number: 9705150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Paolucci paolucci@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT-Paolucci  CTS-9705150        Unsteady, multi-dimensional combustion
              processes are modeled using a newly   developed wavelet technique combined with
              a technique to rationally reduce the   relevant differential equations to lower
              dimensions.  The focus is on problems   in which there is full coupling between
              fluid mechanics and chemical kinetics;   such problems are characterized by a
              multiplicity of phenomena evolving over   widely disparate length and time
              scales.  The first technique uses a multi-level   wavelet collocation
              approximation.  The multilevel structure of  the algorithm   facilitates the
              computational adaptation of the grid refinement according to the   temporal
              evolution of the solution.  The rational reduction phase of the compu-  tation
              applies intrinsic low-dimensional manifold (ILDM) theory; those   processes
              occurring on time scales faster than a physically motivated cutoff time   scale
              are allowed to relax to partial equilibrium while the remaining processes   are
              subject to time evolution.  In brief, the wavelet decomposition reduces the  
              total number of unknowns and the rational reduction then reduces the  
              dimension of the manifold on which the system of differential equations is  
              solved resulting in a more efficient numerical method.    This project
              considers both general algorithmic development and application to   specific
              combustion problems well characterized by experiment and/or   independent
              theory.  This work introduces wavelet techniques into combustion   modelling
              and also has applicability to other large-scale numerical simulations.
