Title       : Synthetic and Electrochemical Studies of Oganometallics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9705121

Award Number: 9705121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwight A. Sweigart Dwight_Sweigart@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Dwight A. Sweigart, Department of Chemistry, Brown University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division for the study of chemical reactions effected by   the
              coordination of the manganese tricarbonyl moiety to aromatic ligands   and for
              the development of systems that contain a redox switch to   activate or
              deactivate remote metal centers. The ability of coordinated   manganese
              tricarbonyl fragments to activate aromatic ligands will be   exploited to
              prepare a wide range of monoarenes and heterocycles.    Examples include
              functionalized centropolyindan hydrocarbons and   stereoselectively derivatized
              prochiral arenes. Arene ligand exchange   will be extended to bimetallic
              complexes of conjugated polyarenes   containing a variety of metals.
              Concentrating on hydroquinone and   catechol complexes, the redox properties of
              the metals will be evaluated.   The studies will converge into the design of
              systems in which metal-metal   interactions can be electrochemically switched
              on or off. Drawing on the   reactivity of the manganese tricarbonyl fragment,
              reductive insertion   reactions into sulfur-carbon bonds will be developed,
              with an emphasis on   processes related to HDN and HDS.   This project will
              concentrate on developing several applications for   manganese metal complexes.
              The first of these aims at the synthesis of   selected types of organic
              molecules and at the use of manganese   containing species to break
              carbon-sulfur bonds in thiophenes. This study   is significant because the
              removal of thiophenic materials is important   to the desulfurization of fossil
              fuels and manganese is especially   attractive for this application because of
              its low toxicity and relative   abundance. Another major activity is the
              development of systems in which   the transfer of an electron to or from a
              metal atom will control the   behavior of a second metal center. This will have
              relevance to several   areas including the control of conductivity and optical
              properties in   metal containing materials.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
