Title       : Ion Scattering Studies of Surfaces and Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a9705367

Award Number: 9705367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Torgny Gustafsson gustaf@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705367 
              Gustafsson    This  experimental  research project is in the  area  of  surface
               analysis  based  on  the  use of  ion beam  scattering.  A  first  project 
              centers  on  study  of the  unexpectedly  large  spacing  observed between the
              two outermost layers on surfaces of  Ag  and  Cu,  at elevated temperatures in
              ultra high vacuum. Study of this  expansion effect will be extended to binary
              systems, and will  be  compared  with  recently generated theoretical 
              predictions.  The  second  major project is a study of initial stages of 
              oxidation,  the  first  1   -   10nm of oxide growth,  making  use  of  great 
              advances in surface analysis techniques that have been made since  classic
              oxidation studies. Emphasis is on the mechanism of growth  and  the 
              microstructure of the resulting oxide. A wide range  of  systems, including Si,
              Ni, Al, Cu, Ge and SiC will be studied.  A  variety of additional tools,
              including STM, AFM and photoelectron  spectroscopy  will  be  employed  in  the
               project.  The  primary  experimental   tool   is  high-resolution   medium  
              energy   ion  scattering,  which can provide information on surface  structure,
               growth mechanisms, and kinetics.  %%%%  This   experimental   research  uses 
              advance   surface   science  instrumentation to study at the atomic level the
              process of oxide  film  growth  on metals and semiconductors. Oxide  growth  is
               of  immense  importance in wide areas of technology, for  example  in  the 
              silicon  technology  where  gate  oxides  are  central,   to  passivation 
              layers on metals such as aluminum. Previous  studies  have  been limited in the
              availability of experimental techniques  and  equipment,  leaving many
              questions on how oxidation  occurs,  especially  during the first few atomic
              layers. This experimental  study  will  depend primarily upon medium energy ion
               scattering,  supplemented  by  other techniques including  scanning  tunneling
               microscopy and atomic fo rce microscopy. Materials of interest  in  this 
              project are Si, Ni, Al, Cu, Ge and SiC. Results  from  this  research   may 
              include  unusual  new  effects  which  may   find  application   in  
              technology.   This   research    project    is  interdisciplinary   in   nature
                and   involves   graduate   and  postgraduate  students who will be
              excellently trained  to  enter  positions in industry, government or education.
               ***
