Title       : Naturally Nanostructured Epitaxial Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9705440

Award Number: 9705440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1089241            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Murray Gibson j-gibson@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Cahill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Zangwill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,1589,1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9705440 Gibson  This FRG/GOALI proposal addresses basic materials science and
              engineering issues in a collaborative program between the University of
              Illinois and Hewlett-Packard Laboratories to understand fundamental phenomena
              and interactions associated with naturally nanostructured epitaxial
              semiconductors. Goals of the project are to obtain semiconductor epitaxial
              nanostructures smaller than feasible via lithography, and to examine their
              applications to novel devices; strain-induced self organization and kinetically
              driven pattern formation are two approaches being taken to achieve naturally
              nanostructured materials. The joint activities include staff exchange with
              graduate students spending time at H-P, and with additional staff exchange
              between U. IL and  H-P personnel. The proposed research emphasizes
              understanding of fundamental mechanisms and processes along with exploration of
              advanced device technology. %%% The project addresses forefront materials
              science research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/photonic
              devices and integrated circuitry, in general.  Additionally, the fundamental
              knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute
              to improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits by providing a
              fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved
              materials and structures for the quantum mechanical devices of the future.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area, and with the benefit of teaming with industrial research
              staff, and exposure to industrial facilities, equipment and approaches. ***
