Title       : A Harmonic Analysis Approach to Problems of Tiling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9705775

Award Number: 9705775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihail N. Kolountzakis kolount@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philippe Tondeur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS-9705775       Kolountzakis     Kolountzakis will study properties
              of translational tilings of   Euclidean Space using Harmonic Analysis. A
              function f(x) is said to   "tile" the Euclidean space with the discrete "tile
              set" A if, when   translated at the locations of A, it adds up to a constant w
              (the   "weight" of the tiling), almost everywhere. One obtains an equivalent  
              condition for this to happen: the Fourier transform of the   distribution with
              one point mass at each point of A must be supported   at the zeros of the FT of
              the function f, plus the point 0.   Among the problems Kolountzakis  proposes
              to  study are:  (a) the structure of tilings of the line with tiles of
              non-compact   support, (b) the periodic tiling conjecture in higher dimension, 
              (c) results related to the uniqueness of the Poisson Summation formula,   (d)
              further estimates on the Steinhaus problem, (e) the problem of   simultaneous
              fundamental domains in general abelian groups and   (f) non-translational
              tilings of space via methods of non-abelian   harmonic analysis.    The study
              of tilings of space using a certain building block called  the "tile" has
              significant connections with crystallography. Interest  in this has been
              renewed after the, relatively recent, discovery  that non-periodic tilings
              (i.e., pavings of space which are  not "determined" by how they look in an
              arbitrarily large but finite  part of the space) do exist in nature. The
              question of which are  the possible ways that space can be tiled is the
              paramount one in this  field.  The proposed research will help  to understand
              the situation   in higher dimensions. Another domain of application of the
              proposed   methods concern the theory of Wavelets
