Title       : Photoemission Investigation of Collective Excitations in Novel Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9705210

Award Number: 9705210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Xun Shen zxshen@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705210  Shen
                 This   experimental   project  is   based   on   angle   resolved 
              photoemission  spectroscopy  in  characterizing  the   collective  excitations
              of novel materials. The goal of the experiments is to  provide  critical
              experimental data to stimulate the  development  of an analog of the
              Nambu-Eliashberg theory for momentum resolved  spectral  function in systems
              where the quasiparticle  excitation  is  strongly coupled to collective
              excitations such as phonons or  spin  fluctuations. Materials of interest are
              organic  conductors  and superconductors, doped C60, A15 compounds, BiK BiO3,
              and high  Tc  superconductors. Synchrotron radiation and a UV laser will be 
              used as the excitation source.  %%%  This  experimental research project uses
              the technique  of  angle  resolved  photoemission spectroscopy to measure  the 
              energy  and  crystal  momentum  of characteristic excitations  in  crystalline 
              specimens  of  materials of current scientific and  technological  interest. 
              In  this  techniq  light  photons  of  well  specified  direction  (momentum)
              and energy (wavelength) fall upon  a  clean  surface  of  the  material of
              interest. The photoelectric  effect  leads  to  emission of electrons from the
              surface layers  of  the  material.  These photoelectrons are detected in such a
               way  that  their  number,  direction and kinetic energy  are  simultaneously 
              measured.  These  data, making use of principles  of  energy  and  momentum 
              conservation, allow detailed information to be obtained  on  the  collective
              excitations of the sample. In this  work  the  materials of interest include
              several different unusual electonic  conductor, including films of
              electronically conducting  (alkali-  metal   doped)  carbon-sixty,  and 
              several  unusual   types   of  superconductors, including a cubic Bismuth
              Potassium Barium Oxide  and  high  Tc  cuprates. The intent of the  work  is 
              to  provide  excellent  data  which may permit  theorists to propose  and  test
               detailed models for the interaction of electrons in these systems  with 
              "collective  modes" including lattice vibrations  (phonons)  and  spin  waves. 
              It  is hoped that a theory  analogous  to  the  successful  Nambu-Eliashberg
              theory for electrons and phonons  in  conventional superconductors such as lead
              and mercury, might also  be  found  for  these  more  complicated  materials 
              of  possible  technological    application.   This    research    project    is
               interdisciplinary  in nature and involves graduate  students  who  will  be 
              excellently  trained to enter  positions  in  industry,  government or
              education.  ***
