Title       : Electron Correlations at the Edge of Instability: Complex Materials and
               Restricted Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a9705300

Award Number: 9705300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances Hellman fhellman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705300  Hellman    This is a new project by a PI who collaborates with a well
              established  group  of  scientists  a  UC  San Diego to  study  "highly 
              correlated  electron systems".  These are complex systems, with
              superconductivity,  magnetism, metallic conduction, and insulating behavior
              found  in  the  same material system, often with only small changes in
              composition  or  structure.   One electron bands are narrow, screening is
              limited,  and  electron-electron  correlation energy is high, leading  to  a 
              general  instability  of  the electronic system to different  competing  ground
               states.   In  the neighborhood of such instabilities, the  effects  of 
              reducing dimensionality, thereby increasing the correlation energy, or  of
              adding magnetic moments can be extremely dramatic.  This complexity  is  
              absent  in  more  traditional  materials,  where  properties  can  generally 
              be quite successfully described using Fermi liquid  theory,  and  dramatic 
              effects  seldom result from small  changes.   In  these  complex systems the
              importance of measuring all properties on the same  sample   cannot   be 
              overstated,  since  subtle  and   often   nearly  unmeasurable  structural or
              chemical changes  can  drastically  affect  properties.  Measurements of
              specific heat  from  low  temperature  up  through any phase transitions reveal
              important characteristics of  the  electronic system.  Our ability to measure
              the specific heat  of  thin  films  and  microgram  size  single crystals 
              allows  measurements  of  magneto-transport, magnetization, IR and tunneling
              spectroscopy on the  same samples.  We plan collaborations with Maple,
              Schuller, Basov, and  Dynes to prepare and measure samples of materials in
              which correlation  energies   can   be   varied,  either  by   composition   or
                reduced  dimensionality, and with theorists Sham, Arovas, and Renn  to 
              develop  models for these materials.  %%%  This is a new project by a PI who
              collaborates with a well established  group  of  scientists  a  UC  Sa n Diego
              to  study  "highly  correlated  electron  systems".  These are materials
              causing great  excitement  in  condensed  matter physics  and with great
              potential for  applications,  such    as    high    temperature   
              superconductors    or    colossal  magnetoresistance.  The phase diagrams of
              these materials are complex,  with  superconductivity, magnetism, metallic
              conduction, or insulating  behavior  found  in the same material system, often 
              with  only  small  changes  in  composition or structure.  This complexity is 
              absent  in  more  traditional materials.  The interactions between the 
              electrons,  which  cause the magnetism, superconductivity, or insulating
              behavior,  compete with each other, with one or another winning.  It thus
              appears  that  the electrons in these new materials are perched on the edge  of
               many  different types of behavior, with the potential to go  different  ways 
              depending  on  extremely  subtle  differences  in  structure  or  composition. 
               With  this  in mind, the importance  of  measuring  all  properties  on the
              same sample cannot be overstated, since subtle  and  often   nearly 
              unmeasurable  structural  or  chemical   changes   can  drastically  affect
              properties.  We have a unique capability  here  to  make  a  basic measurement
              (specific heat) on samples which cannot  be  measured   elsewhere.    This 
              grant  will   allow   us   to   develop  collaborations taking advantage of our
              unique expertise together  with  others' expertise in sample preparation,
              characterization, measurement  and theoretical understanding.  ***
