Title       : Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9705016

Award Number: 9705016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard D. Coleman bcoleman@stokes.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705016  Coleman            The principal investigator will continue his work on
              the  development of the elastic rod model for DNA with the goals of (i) 
              attaining insight into the mode of action of topoisomerases, (ii) finding 
              efficient ways to calculate configurations of DNA segments and plasmids in 
              circumstances in which the forces arising from self-contact are not 
              negligible, and (iii) obtaining mathematical results in the theory of 
              vibrations of elastic rings that are needed to account for the effects of 
              thermal fluctuations on quantities, such as writhe, that depend on the 
              tertiary structure of DNA plasmids. In research in a different area, 
              analytical and numerical methods will be employed to study the  morphological
              changes and instabilities that result from curvature driven  mass diffusion
              within the bounding surfaces of solid bodies.  Among the  topics to be
              investigated are (i) the evolution and stability of  axisymmetric surfaces and
              of planar curves in the theory of curvature  driven diffusion and (ii) the
              evolution of pit-like defects in otherwise  flat films.            Much is yet
              to be learned about the modes of action of proteins  that are known to bind to
              and induce deformations in DNA. There are cases  in which one can discuss the
              action of DNA bending proteins by treating a  DNA molecule as an elastic rod. 
              Recent research has shown that one can use  exact solutions of the equations of
              equilibrium for elastic rods to  investigate the nature of the dependence of
              the configuration of a segment  of DNA on conditions imposed at its end points.
               Several of the problems  that are investigated in this way are important for
              understanding  mechanisms of gene regulation. The work on curvature driven mass
              diffusion  within the bounding surfaces of solids is expected to have
              significant  applications in materials science.  As the effects of surface
              diffusion  increase in importance as dimensions become small,  the theory of
              such  diffusion can be applied to obtain insight and quan titative results in
              the  following research areas: the formation of thermal grooves, i.e., the 
              development of surface indentations at grain boundaries in heated metals;  the
              stability of field-emitter cathodes, of interconnecting elements in 
              microelectronic circuits,  and of moving parts in micro-electromechanical 
              devices; fiber spheroidization in metallic composites; and the pitting of  thin
              films at grain boundary vertices.
