Title       : University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the Mathematical
               Sciences- Modeling and Optimization of Diffractive Optical Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9705139

Award Number: 9705139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44361              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Bao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Title of Proposal: Modeling and optimization of diffractive  optical
              structures             Project Summary    The PI proposes training on the
              professional development of two  Mathematical Sciences Industry-Based Graduate
              Research  Assistants.  The first objective of the training activities is to 
              prepare the graduate students with skills and experiences that  will make them
              strong competitors in an industrial environment.  Another objective is to
              produce the graduate students who have  qualifications that will make them
              important contributors to  science and technology developments in a
              academic/industrial  environment.    The proposed research focuses on
              computational methods and  numerical analysis for modeling and design of
              optical  micro-structures  in linear and nonlinear optical media. The  research
              will extend the PI's long term collaboration with  Honeywell, Inc., and develop
              a new collaboration with Cray  Research, Inc. It will provide opportunities for
              the graduate  assistants to engage in academic/industrial joint research 
              programs and make important contributions to an exciting area of  applied and
              industrial mathematics.    The main topics of the proposed research are as
              follows:     -- Computational modeling of optical coatings. Multiscale         
                   finite element methods.     -- Inverse and optimal design problems in
              diffractive optics.     -- Surface enhanced nonlinear optical effects. 
              Optimization            and design problems in nonlinear optics.  These
              problems are motivated by industrial applications.    This project is jointly
              supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
              Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
