Title       : Novel Properties of Liquid Crystal/Coil Diblock Copolymers via Tandem
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9705271

Award Number: 9705271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin L. Thomas elt@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Ober  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murugappan Muthukumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1589,1773,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705271  Thomas  Liquid crystals hold great promise as materials in optical, 
              barrier and structural applications.  In this GOALI/Group  Award, supported
              jointly by DMR and the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities, the PIs
              will exploit the  unique tandem interplay of domain formation and alignment in 
              the block copolymer structure and self-organization of the  mesophase by use of
              liquid crystal block-coil block  copolymers and homopolymers in special applied
              processing  fields.  From their prior work, they have identified two  general
              applications which will act as vehicles to exploit  and test fundamental
              understanding of these tandem  interactions: (1)  to develop the knowledge and
              engineering  expertise to produce flexible plastic liquid crystalline  displays
              and switches and (2) to create new thermoplastic  liquid crystalline polymer
              materials with layered structures  for transparent, highly impermeable barrier
              film  applications.  To accomplish these goals they plan to  exploit the
              interactions of microphase separation, liquid  crystallinity and applied
              fields.  A 3 year program is  envisioned, with a team comprised of Superex Inc.
              and each  university PI with 1 graduate student and 2 undergraduate 
              researchers.  Complimentary areas of expertise of the PIs  will ensure a
              through approach to the investigation: Thomas,  characterization and
              properties; Ober, synthesis and  characterization; Muthukumar, theory and
              modeling.  %%%  Apart from the specific scientific and engineering  objectives
              of this program, the PIs plan to use this inter-  university focused research
              group collaboration to examine  several new approaches to graduate and
              undergraduate  education of the students connected with this program.  Both 
              graduate and undergraduate students will gain research  experience outside the
              normal university training: graduate  students will mentor undergraduates, and
              both groups will  learn entrepreneurial skills through exchanges with our 
              industrial partner and by taking business cou rses.  Communication skills will
              be improved through joint  seminars.  Students from all three university groups
              will  participate in special retreat-style meetings, traveling to  a site
              chosen by the host univeristy.  The location of all  three universities in the
              Northeast makes such exchanges and  visits very feasible.  They will also
              encourage both the  graduate and undergraduate students to carry out exchanges 
              with other university teams.  Each institution and research  group carries with
              it a unique style and tradition that  influences the way research is
              approached.  By experiencing  these different cultures, students at both levels
              (graduate  and undergraduate) will benefit.  The education approaches  found to
              be most successful will be expanded at MIT, UMass  and Cornell into other
              undergraduate programs.  ***
