Title       : Ultra-Fast Electronic-Photonic Materials and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9705038

Award Number: 9705038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $765316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Salamo salamo@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705038  Salamo  Information technology has become the defining technology for
              our  world. Ultra-fast delivery of information to anyone anywhere is  to be
              expected in the near future. Such technology must rely on  the development of
              ultra-fast microelectronics and information  pathways. Fiber optic pathways
              have demonstrated transmission  capacity characterized by extremely high bit
              rates over the  longest non-repeated distances. Though impressive capacities
              have  been achieved, today's systems utilize only a small fraction of  the
              potential transmission capacity available through optical  fibers. The main
              reason is that electronic-photonic components at  the input and output ends of
              the fiber pathways are not capable  of operating at the ultra-fast speeds which
              would be commensurate  with the fiber's potential band width. A new generation
              of  ultra-faster electronic-photonic materials and devices is needed.  This
              research endeavor is the focus of the proposal.         Parallel to the need
              for new ultra-fast devices, a window of  opportunity for corresponding
              entrepreneurial ventures has  opened. University spin-off companies, inspired
              by new ideas for   smaller, faster, lower power photonic-electronics can emerge
               wherever the needed mix of vision, talent and support resides.  Given the
              potential for small companies to seed and grow in this   area, there is little
              doubt that the next few years will be  witness to a burgeoning microelectronics
              economy which can be  located anywhere in the United States.         The
              University of Arkansas has decided to seize the opportunity  for research and
              entrepreneurial ventures in this area. The  approach is based on: (i) frontier
              research and development of  new materials with the potential for ultra-fast
              performance; (ii)  formation and development of a competitive interdisciplinary
              team  of scientists, engineers and students with the talents needed to  forge
              achievements; (iii) initiation of an organization which  will build bridges to
              industry and entre preneurial opportunities  for faculty and students, (iv)
              formation of a Center for  Ultra-Fast Electronic-Photonic Materials and
              Devices, and (v) an  innovative educational program which provides enhanced
              career  opportunities for students.         The technical approach is based on
              the development of indium  phosphide, InP, cubic boron nitride, cBN, and
              polymers to produce  ultra-fast electronic-photonic components capable of
              advancing  the rate of processing of information to and from high bandwidth  
              pathways. This effort is built around a unique Molecular Beam  Epitaxy -
              Scanning Tunneling Microscope facility, making it  possible for the University
              of Arkansas to gain a strategic  foothold in the global race to advance the
              frontier of ultra-fast  electronic-photonic materials and devices and inspire 
              corresponding spin-off companies in Arkansas.
