Title       : Late Cenozoic Invertebrates, Protists and Fish of the Tropical Eastern Pacific
               Ocean: Database for Comparisons with Caribbean Taxa Through Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9705289

Award Number: 9705289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurel S. Collins collinsl@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony G. Coates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy B. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9705289  COLLINS  The emergence of the Isthmus of Panama split apart a single
              tropical ocean, an event which had a profound impact on organismal evolution,
              ecologic systems and oceanic circulation. Fossils preserved in Eastern Pacific
              and Caribbean deposits comprise successive tropical American biotas that
              changed dramatically through the last 15 million years in response to the
              constriction and closure of the great Caribbean - Pacific seaway. Research
              based on Pacific and Caribbean collections of fossils will address these
              changes. The main goal of this project is a paleobiotic survey of shallow-water
              fossil faunas of coastal Ecuador, for comparison with Caribbean faunas of
              similar age and environment that were collected previously.    This project, by
              Laurel Collins and colleagues, involves collecting Neogene marine fossils in
              Ecuador, preparing and identifying these collections, determining the ages and
              paleoenvironments of their stratigraphic sequences, designing a new database
              for the data, making the project's data available on the Internet, and using
              the collections in research. The identified faunas will include calcareous
              nannoplankton, foraminifera, ahermatypic corals, bryozoans, echinoderms,
              mollusks, ostracods and fish. The new model for the database will track the
              progress of preparing collections and identifying taxa, aid in dating samples
              and correlating strata, and serve as the repository for all faunal occurrence
              data, maps, stratigraphic sections, and locality information.    Research based
              on these data will result in the most accurate assessment to date of the
              long-term effects of environmental change and isolation on marine biotas, and
              the data model will set the standard for field-based paleobiotic surveys.
