Title       : Magnetic Resonance: Metal Hydrides and Innovative Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9705080

Award Number: 9705080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Conradi msc@howdy.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705080 
              Conradi    This  experimental research project is based on  NMR  techniques, 
              and  has  two main thrusts: (1) study of metal hydrides  and  (2)  development
              of innovation in NMR technique. The work on  hydrides  (1)  focuses  in one
              case on motion of hydrogen or  deuterium  in  elemental hcp dilute hydrides, in
              the temperature range near  60-  80K.  In  a  second  aspect, the YH2-YH3 
              system,  with  possible  application as a switchable mirror, will be examined. 
              (2)  Spin-  echo  double  resonance  (SEDOR)  will  be  extended  as  an  NMR 
              technique  in  such  a  way that the echo  amplitude  A  will  be  measured  as
               a  function  of the flip angle  on  the  unobserved  spins.This  new method
              will be applied to amorphous  hydrogenated  silicon.  The  nuclear Overhauser
              effect (NOE) will be  exploited  to   enhance the use of optical techniques,
              which have previously  been   developed  by  others  to  provide  20-50% 
              nuclear   spin  polarization of helium 3 or Xe 129. The nuclear Overhauser
              effect  will  be  used to transfer some of this polarization to spins  of 
              analytical  importance, such as protons and  C13.  An  additional  application 
              of the NOE will be made in a proposed  technique  to  avoid  inhomogeneous 
              broadening in NMR study  of  dilute  solute  resonances in a solvent.  %%% 
              This  experimental research project is based on the technique  of  nuclear 
              magnetic  resonance. In one  aspect  of  the  work,  the  hydrogen   or 
              deuterium  resonance in  metal  hydrides  will  be  studied  to clarify the
              state of motion of hydrogen or  deuterium  ions in the hydride structure. Metal
              hydrides are of interest for  potential use as an energy storage medium. In a
              second aspect  of  the work, the project will research an enhancement of the
              nuclear  magnetic  resonance technique, in conjunction with  a  separately 
              developed  nuclear spin polarization technique.  The  new  method  will  make
              use of the nuclear Overha user effect, and may   permit  new  applications  of 
              nuclear magnetic resonance  in  analytical  studies.  Secondly,  in solutions,
              where a dilute  solute  is  of  interest, the new method will greatly reduce
              the broadening which  arises from interaction with the solvent molecules. This
              research  project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves graduate  and 
              postgraduate  students who will be excellently trained  to  enter  positions in
              industry, government or education.  ***
