Title       : Systematics and Biogeography of the Guatemalan Herpetofauna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1998    
File        : a9705277

Award Number: 9705277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222390             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Campbell Campbell@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9705277  Campbell  Guatemala has an extremely diverse herpetofauna, but most
              regions of this country remain poorly explored, and new species continue to be
              discovered frequently in this country. It is estimated that at least 10% of the
              species occurring in this country remain unknown to science. This project will
              emphasize field investigations in the most poorly known regions, and will
              produce extensive new collections, including whole specimens, tissues, and
              photographs. Additionally, this comprehensive survey of the herpetofauna of
              Guatemala will provide a unique opportunity to gain information on their
              parasites. The number of parasite species can be expected to be more numerous
              than their hosts by at least an order of magnitude. Internal and external
              parasites will be collected from amphibians and reptiles using traditional
              techniques and prepared in a manner consistent with long-term museum
              preservation and study. The biology of some of these parasites will be studied
              and reported by parasitologist colleagues and their students. Other
              parasitological material resulting from these field investigations will be made
              available to a range of other specialists. As a direct result of the research
              proposed, a comprehensive National Herpetological Reference Collection will be
              developed within Guatemala that will be a valuable aid to persons working in
              that country in many diverse areas of research including systematics, ecology,
              and conservation. Also, a computerized database will be developed and made
              available online. This database will be used to produce a checklist,
              distribution maps, and identification keys for the herpetofauna of Guatemala
              and will correlate their parasites with the host species.
