Title       : Magnetotransport and Millimeter Wave Spectroscopy of a Partially Filled Landau
               Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9705521

Award Number: 9705521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rui-Rui Du rrd@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9705521  Du    This experimental research project is a study of 
              magnetotransport  and  millimeter wave spectroscopy of the 2-D electron gas in 
              the  fractional   quantum   Hall  effect  regime,   specifically  the 
              properties  of  composite Fermions in a partially  filled  Landau  level. The
              experiments open a new window to probe dynamics  of the  quantum  Hall system.
              The internal structure, ie, the  dispersion  w(q)  of the bound states, and the
              inherent fluctuations  of  the  bound states, will be investigated.  Millimeter
              waves  tunable  in  energy  from  1-10K will couple into the 2-D gas  via  a 
              surface  metal  grating  or periodic density modulation, and  a  sensitive 
              differential  photoconductivity  technique  will  be   used  for  detection.  
              The  experiments  will  also  involve  nanostructure  techniques such as
              high-resolution electron-beam lithography  and  processing.  %%%  This
              experimental research project is devoted to basic  properties  of  a 
              conducting  electron  system when  confined  into  a  two-  dimensional  planar
              region. Such a confined set of  electrons  at  low  temperatures and with high
              magnetic fields exhibits  a  very  unusual  set  of characteristics, and in
              some ways  the  entities  which  are relevant are not electrons behaving as
              they  behave  in  vacuum,  but "quasi-particles" having separable spin  and 
              charge  properties. The "composite Fermions" of this situation are  to  be 
              studied  by  shining radio waves onto them and making  measurments  to
              determine the response to the radio waves. On the one  hand the  experiments 
              will provide new basic information  about  electrons  when   they  are  in 
              interaction  in  confined  layers  at  low  temperatures. On the other hand the
              device structures  which  are  used  in  these experiments are similar to those
              used in  advanced  microelectronic  devices  in the GaAs technology.  This 
              research  will  involve students who will be well trained in  the  area  of 
              physics and will also gain familiarity with  semiconductor  device  technolgy,
              and who will be excellently trained for  employment  in  industry, government,
              or education.  ***
