Title       : Spin-Transport and Dynamics of Excitons in Magnetic Quantum Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9705443

Award Number: 9705443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leigh M. Smith leigh.smith@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705443 
              Smith  :  This  is a renewal project  directed to the study of the dynamics 
              and transport of  spin  systems in diluted magnetic semiconductors.  The main
              goals  of this  research  are:   (1)   To measure the spin transport  of 
              exciton  magnetic  polarons     using     spatially-     and    
              temporally-resolved  photoluminescence  spectroscopy.    (2)    Use 
              time-resolved   near-field   optical  microscopy to  measure  local
              fluctuations and clusters of Mn-impurities  within  the ZnMnSe  alloy.   (3)  
              Measure  the  dynamics of  spin-polarized  exciton  populations  and  the 
              effect of phonons, magnetic ion exchange, electron-hole  exchange  and  band
              mixing on the thermalization times.  This research will  probe  directly  the 
              physics  of  spin interactions  using  all-optical  techniques  which  are 
              particularly suitable for use in semiconductors.  The  information  gained on
              spin dynamics in these systems will have application to  other  spin systems as
              well, particularly in metallic systems.  %%%  This  is  a  renewal project 
              targeted towards understanding  the  fundamental  physics  of  magnetic
              interactions in novel semiconductors  which  have been  doped with magnetic
              impurities.  Study of these interactions  has  direct  applicability to the
              technologically important area of magnetic  technologies  such as magnetic
              memories (eg. Hard disks),  super-  sensitive  magnetic  detectors, and
              magneto-optical modulators. These  novel  magnetic  semiconductors can be
              probed with ultrafast optical methods using  femtosecond  lasers.  This allows
              one to probe  the  dynamics  of  these  magnetic interactions on a time scale
              which is impossible  to  do  in the  metallic systems.  Such information is
              crucial to the improvement  of  existing and the development of new magnetic
              technologies.  ***
