Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Phonetics and Phonology of Ju/'hoan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9705334

Award Number: 9705334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24930              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Odden odden@ling.osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              .

9705334

Khoisan languages are interesting to phoneticians and
              phonologists because of their
     large, unique sound inventories. The goal
              of this project is a detailed description and
     analysis of all of the
              contrastive sounds found in Ju/'hoasi , a Namibian Khoisan
     language, as
              well as a theoretical analysis of the language which will advance universal
  
                linguistic theories. Sounds unique to Khoisan languages are 47 click
              consonants, as well
     as many different types of vowels. Vowels contrast
              not only by where they are made in
     the oral cavity, but also by the
              quality of voice used. The language also uses four
     different pitch levels
              to convey meaning contrasts, and to make phrasing more
     perspicuous and
              maintain rhythm in spoken language. While many languages in the
     world use
              pitch contrastively, pitch is used somewhat differently in Ju/'hoasi and
              other
     Khoisan languages. In addition, some of the consonants have a
              depressing effect on
     pitch, and thus cause physical perturbations in the
              speech which may be cognitively
     internalized. These will be investigated
              to determine how much of these effects are
     phonological, or cognitively
              based, and how many are phonetic, or due purely to the
     physical quality
              of the sounds. Complete investigation of the sound patterns of Ju/'hoasi
    
              will require travel to Namibia to record individual sounds, words, phrases
              and
     sentences which contrast by meaning, how they are phrased, and which
              part of the
     sentence is being focused on. The data will be processed both
              in the field using a laptop
     computer, and upon return to the United
              States, where resources at the Ohio State
     University Linguistics Lab will
              be used to investigate the physical acoustic properties of
     the sounds,
              words and phrases studied. Theoretical analysis will be carried out
    
              throughout the project. The final outcome of this work will be a doctoral
              dissertation by the student      investigator, Amanda Miller-Ockhuizen.

