Title       : High Risk Exploratory: Investigation of Cape Addington Rockshelter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1997  
File        : a9705014

Award Number: 9705014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19713              (Estimated)
Investigator: Madonna L. Moss mmoss@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Madonna Moss and her colleagues
              will conduct exploratory archaeological research in a rock shelter located on
              the Cape Addington Peninsula of Noyes Island, one of the outermost islands of
              the Prince of Wales Archipelago in southeast Alaska. The site was discovered
              during a 1994 survey of the Tongass National Forest and in 1996  Dr. Moss and
              colleagues carried out a brief, one day examination of the deposits. The
              shelter itself consists of ca. 160 square meters and the ceiling is quite high,
              providing a roomy comfortable and dry occupation area. Very limited excavation
              recovered cultural material, including faunal remains in an excellent state of
              preservation. Although many archaeological sites have been discovered in this
              part of Alaska, the Cape Addington rockshelter is unique in the protected
              nature of the sediments and the high degree of preservation of the contents.
              Based on the presence of well dated beachline features, it is quite possible
              that the shelter preserves terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene materials. It
              thus would have the potential to shed light on the entire prehistory of the
              region.  One of the primary goals for fieldwork during the summer of 1977 will
              be to determine the total depth of the archaeological deposit. A trench will be
              excavated in stratigraphic units to bedrock and all cultural material as well
              as shells, faunal and floral remains will be collected. Surface mapping will
              also take place. Material will be identified and samples submitted for
              radiocarbon dating. Isotopic analysis of shell will permit investigation of
              climate change.  Coastal Alaska is of anthropological interest for several
              reasons. It is highly likely that the earliest humans to enter the New World
              from Asia utilized a route through this region and Dr. Moss' work has potential
              to shed new light on the peopling of the New World. Rich coastal resources
              permitted hunting and gathering peoples to reach a level of cultural complexity
              unknown elsewhere in the world at this level of subsistence and for decades
              anthropologists have studied this unique phenomenon. In Alaska however
              knowledge is severely limited because of the generally poor state of
              archaeological preservation and therefore the discovery of a `dry` rock shelter
              is extremely important.  This research will provide unique data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It will also, hopefully, set the stage for a larger
              research project.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
