Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeology of Northern Rio Grande, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9705233

Award Number: 9705233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9370               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Kohler tako@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Timothy Kohler, MS Samantha Ruscavage-Barz will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct stylistic analysis
              of ceramic materials excavated from sites in the northern Rio Grande region of
              New Mexico and which date to the late 13th and early 14th centuries AD. In
              addition, selected pieces will be thin sectioned and subjected to petrographic
              analysis to determine raw material sources. With National Science Foundation
              support MS Ruscavage-Barz will visit collections housed in Santa Fe, Tucson and
              Los Angeles.  Prior to the late 13th century population density in the northern
              Rio Grande region was low and people lived in small widely dispersed
              settlements. The picture rapidly changed however towards the end of this period
              when significantly larger groups aggregated in the type of multiroom Pueblo
              communities which still exist in the region today. Although archaeologists are
              uncertain of the cause, many believe that immigration is responsible for this
              rapid population rise. The basic question which MS Ruscavage-Barz wishes to
              address concerns forms of social organization and integration processes. What
              mechanisms do individuals and groups employ when they find themselves
              incorporated into new large and more complex social units?  To what extent to
              they develop new sets of rules and demand compliance to promote uniformity?
              Some theories suggest that exactly the opposite occurs and previously
              independent entities act to emphasize their individuality in such changed and
              often charged circumstances.  `Style` serves, in many instances, as a marker of
              group and individual identity. Different Southwest Native American groups
              decorated pottery in distinctive ways and it is possible to look at
              contemporary pottery and determine its point of origin. Complex decorations
              were likewise painted on prehistoric ceramics and MS Ruscavage-Barz will
              analyze materials excavated in well controlled contexts from a number of Rio
              Grande sites. In this way she will be able to trace design changes from the
              early smaller through the succeeding larger aggregated communities and
              determine to extent to which variation is either emphasized or disappears.  It
              is likely that patterns noted in this realm would be reflected equally in other
              behavioral realms.  This research is important for several reasons. It will
              help to develop an analytic technique which archaeologists may potentially
              employ in many regions of the world. It will shed new light on mechanisms which
              underlie culture change and assist in training a promising young scientist.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
