Title       : University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the Mathematical
               Sciences- Graduate Research Assistantships in Industrial Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9705193

Award Number: 9705193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59783              (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Corliss georgec@mscs.mu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Tonellato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Merrill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Graduate research assistants in industrial mathematics are placed  at Johnson
              Controls, Inc. (JCI),  and at Penta Technologies.  These collaborations
              strengthen the Marquette's educational and  research missions in faculty
              research in industrial mathematics,  industrial partnerships, and research
              training, and deliver  business-critical industrial mathematics solutions to
              JCI and  Penta.    At JCI, a manufacturer of automotive seats and batteries and
              HVAC  controls, the student will investigate chaos theory models of the 
              enterprise and measures of enterprise agility with validation  using real data
              and will explore scoping/targeting systems  analysis.  We will develop simple
              mathematical models and  business gaming simulations of the problem and then
              use  traditional operations research tools such as econometric models  and
              computer simulations.  JCI's work on biological and  ecological paradigms of
              the enterprise are complemented and  enriched by the technical expertise and
              resources of Marquette  University.    At Penta, a business solutions provider
              for the engineering and  construction industry, the student will use
              mathematical modeling  and nonlinear global optimization techniques to develop
              a  software distribution system aimed at providing maximum  flexibility in the
              delivery of real-time updates.  Penta is  actively exploring on-line software
              distribution and product  update systems  to deliver software to clients in a
              timely  manner.  The review, design, development, and implementation  of the
              SDS will be coupled with a mathematical analysis of SDS  optimization for a
              heterogeneous environment of customer sites.   We will determine components
              causing the greatest constraints to  SDS on-time delivery.  The data will
              include load-balancing,  internet transport rates, real-time computational
              time, and  human-interaction delays.  This data will be used to develop an 
              optimization model that will be solved to address the most  critical
              bottlenecks in the system.    This GOALI project is jo intly supported by the
              MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
