Title       : Entropy Driven Ordering in Colloidal Suspensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9705336

Award Number: 9705336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth Fraden fraden@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                              w:\awards\awards97\fraden5336.doc  9705336 
              Fraden    The  objective  of  this  new project is to  develop  fundamental 
              understanding of  (1)  liquid  crystal ordering of colloids,  and  (2)  the  
              phase  behavior of  mixtures  of  rodlike and spherical colloids. These
              inter-related  projects  involve understanding of the physics of colloids at
              three levels,  the  microscopic  level  of the particles and their 
              interaction,  the  mesoscopic  level  of  ordered phase formation, and the
              macroscopic level  of  materials  properties.   The  interparticle potentials
              of  the  colloids  we  study are  dominated  by steric and short-range
              repulsive interactions,  and  thus serve  as  experimental models of hard
              particle suspensions, where phase  behavior  is   determined  solely  by 
              entropy.  The  colloids   are   well  characterized,  uniform  particles and
              since there is an established  theoretical  framework  for understanding their
              phase behavior, what we learn about these  particular   systems   has 
              implications  for   the   fundamental  understanding of  liquid    crystals,  
              colloid   -   polymer   mixtures,   protein  crystallization, and  the 
              biophysics of the intracellular environment, as well as  the  design of 
              composite materials where molecular ordering and self-assembly is  important. 
              %%%  This  new  project   will carry out a series of  studies  of  the 
              structure, dynamics,  and phase behavior of two systems, (1) colloidal mixtures
              of rods  and  spheres, and (2) colloidal suspensions of rods. The interparticle
               potentials of the colloids we  study are dominated by steric and  short-range 
               repulsive   interactions,   and   thus   serve   as  experimental models  of 
              hard  particle  suspensions, where phase behavior  is  solely  determined by 
              entropy.  Hard  particle  theories  serve  as  a  basis  for  the 
              understanding of  all  fluids, and in particular capture essential features of 
              the  phase  behavior  of  colloidal suspensions.  The colloids w e  study  are 
              well  characterized,   uniform  particles  and  since   there   is   an 
              established  theoretical  framework  for understanding their  phase  behavior, 
              what we learn  about   these  particular  systems  has  implications   for  
              the  understanding of  fundamental  properties  of liquid crystals,  colloid  -
               polymer  mixtures,  protein    crystallization,   and   the    biological   
              cellular  environment, as well  as  for  the  design  of  novel materials where
               molecular  self-  assembly is  important.  ***
