Title       : STTR Phase II: "Wired" Enzyme Sensors for Use in Bioreactor Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9705608

Award Number: 9705608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Tomasco mike.tomasco@therasense.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert P. Silverman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mark S. Vreeke  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Therasense Inc
	      1311 Harbor Bay Parkway
	      ALAMEDA, CA  94502    510/748-6901

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 1938,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project will develop in situ,
              steam sterilizable, amperometric sensors for bioreactor control in the
              pharmaceutical, food/beverage and fermentation industries. At this time, in
              situ sensors for bioprocessing applications are not commonly available. Glucose
              concentrations can change drastically within minutes in bioreactors. In situ
              real time monitoring will provide the missing tool for effective bioprocess
              control. In Phase I a prototype in situ sensor was shown to monitor reliably
              the glucose concentration in E. coli fermentations. Importanty, the sensor
              housing, consisting of a stainless steel holder and an autoclavable membrane,
              was demonstrated to be capable of monitoring sterility for severa1 days and was
              highly resistant to fouling. In Phase II, the sensor chemistry will be made
              robust, its structure and components manufacturable at low cost, its range of
              analyses expanded to include, in addition to glucose, lactate and glutamate.
              Moreover the sensor will be tested, in addition to E. coli fermentations, in
              fermentation of yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Streptomyces, a mycelial
              organism. Membranes and monolithic, injection molded insert structure will be
              designed for high reliability and manufacturability.   At the end of Phase II,
              prototype sensors for beta testing will be available for testing by the  
              biotechnology industry.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
