Title       : Component Architectures for Software in Education: Planning for Systemic Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1997    
File        : a9705650

Award Number: 9705650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49990              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Kaput jkaput@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy Roschelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  9705650  Kaput    Using technology to advance education will require
              attention to the interplay between local and systemic factors in design. In
              some sense, all learning is local: students construct knowledge in response to
              the problem and resources at hand. Yet if technology design addresses only
              these local factors, the result is often systemic failure: software that is
              fragmentary, poorly supported, and easily marginalized. For broad educational
              improvement, we must be willing to address factors that will enable local
              successes to serve larger agendas, scale up to widespread audiences, and evolve
              to meet new challenges. To address these factors, the educational research and
              development community must begin to attend to implementation strategies and
              software architectures.    Emerging industry standards for component software
              architecture such as JavaBeans, OpenDoc and ActiveX will soon provide a
              powerful new substrate for educational technology design-supporting rapid
              prototyping, plug and play interoperability, and distributed authoring.
              However, industry solutions are aimed at business productivity, rather than
              learning processes. Due to historically low profits in educational technology,
              public sector investment will be needed to develop commercial infrastructures
              into powerful educational platforms. This project will engage researchers,
              policy makers, and publishers in a series of electronic discussions and
              regional meetings organized around three broad questions:    1. What extensions
              to industry-standard component architectures are needed to support educational
              needs such as linked multiple representations, publishable student portfolios,
              and interactive instructional aides?    2. What sorts of design frameworks,
              both conceptual and technological, will enable educators to smoothly integrate
              diverse layers and objects to fully meet the needs of their students?    3.
              What organizational, funding, and distribution arrangements will enable the
              growth of a distributed educational researc h and development community to
              produce suites of math and scientific components that interoperate, integrate,
              and scale to the needs of the educational reform movements?    These planning
              meetings will provide the Foundation and the community with detailed, concise
              reports about the promising directions and critical obstacles for component
              architecture in educational technology. Both organizational (i.e. intellectual
              property, project management) and technological (i.e. interoperability,
              standards) issues will be considered. Following the planning work, one or more
              multi-institutional consortia for educational component R&D will be proposed. 
              ***
