Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Diffusion, Cross-Diffusion and Spike Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9705639

Award Number: 9705639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Ming Ni ni@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705639    Ni    Professor Ni plans to continue his research in investigating 
              various diffusion related mechanisms mathematically.  A thorough  understanding
              of those phenomena and effects of diffusions will  enhance our ability in
              modelling more complicated or realistic  situations in applied sciences.  It
              seems that substantial  progress has been made in the last ten years, and the
              stage is set  for even more exciting mathematical breakthroughs, especially in 
              diffusion related pattern formation.  In this project, Professor  Ni will study
              the following three closely related aspects:    (I) Systems of semilinear
              diffusion equation    (II) Systems of self-diffusion and cross-diffusion
              equations    (III) Spike-layers (point condensation solutions) in              
                    diffusion/cross-diffusion systems.    The purpose of this project is not
              only to separately develop  these directions further, but to synthesize the
              results obtained  and to build a theory to give a systematic point of view in 
              understanding those "concentration" phenomena in differential  equations.    In
              an attempt to understand segregation phenomena in population  dynamics, in 1979
              several Japanese scientists at Kyoto University  incorporated the notions of
              "self-diffusion" and "cross-  diffusion" into the classical Lotka-Volterra
              model for the  dynamics of two competing species.  In a slightly broader 
              context, these "bio-diffusions" could also be viewed as special  cases of
              combinations of random diffusion and taxis (i.e.  directed movements). 
              Chemotaxis would be another such example.   These have greatly enriched our
              diffusion-related models -- from  the celebrated "diffusion-driven instability"
              of A. Turing in  1952 to recently discovered "diffusion-induced extinction" and
               "diffusion-induced blowup" -- and have therefore enhanced our  ability in
              modelling those biological and physical phenomena.   The research in this
              proposal would provide a first step toward  the understanding, in a
              mathematically rigorous manner, of t he  concentration/segregation effect of
              the various types of   "bio-diffusions" (namely, random, repulsive, and
              attractive)   as well as "taxis" (namely, positive and negative).
