Title       : Symbolic Computation and Hopf Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9705132

Award Number: 9705132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Nichols nichols@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT,  NICHOLS  97-05132        Professor Nichols plans to continue to study
              fundamental questions about Hopf  algebras. He will develop and bring to bear
              techniques of symbolic computation to  attack some of these questions. Several
              of the specific questions about Hopf algebras  that Professor Nichols plans to
              investigate are related by their connection with  Yetter-Drinfel'd modules.
              With the goal of proving Kaplansky's conjecture that the  degree of an
              absolutely irreducible representation of a semisimple Hopf algebra  divides the
              dimension of the Hopf algebra, Professor Nichols, in joint work with  Bettina
              Richmond, has been studying the Grothendieck algebra of a Hopf algebra. 
              Information about how certain Yetter-Drinfel'd modules multiply should help
              resolve a  conjecture which is a key part of that program. A quite different
              investigation  involves computations of bialgebras which are completely
              determined by  Yetter-Drinfel'd modules of finite groups. Even when the groups
              are small, these can  be extremely complicated. The algebra/coalgebra
              interaction in Yetter-Drinfel'd  modules is considerably easier to understand
              than is the corresponding interaction in  the Hopf algebra itself, yet it is
              rich enough to shed a great deal of light on the  Hopf algebra structure. Its
              elucidation in this situation should be quite  instructive.      Hopf algebras
              and symbolic computation are both areas of growing interest, areas  which cross
              fields in mathematics, and areas which are very important outside  mathematics
              as well. Hopf algebras are useful in the type of knot theory that is of 
              interest to molecular chemists. Certain types of Hopf algebras are now referred
              to as  "quantum groups", in recognition of their applications in physics. 
              Symbolic  computation is part of a key technology, namely, scientific and
              engineering  computation, that is becoming increasingly important to science,
              technology, and  society. It is leading to dramatic changes in the theory and
              practice of mathematics.  There  are good reasons to expect a synergistic
              relationship between investigations in  Hopf algebras and symbolic computation.
              Hopf algebra arguments often involve  complicated symbolic calculations which
              are quite similar to ones which (in the  commutative case) can now be done very
              effectively by machine. In the other  direction, Hopf algebra ideas help to
              explain and organize computations. Hopf  algebras provide a challenging setting
              in which to develop computational methods, but  the very structure that causes
              the scarcity of simplifying relations helps to keep  track of the ones that
              exist. It is expected that the insights gained in exploiting  this Hopf
              structure will contribute to the wider goal of advancing  symbolic 
              computation.
