Title       : Indefinite and Singular Optimal (boundary) Control Problems for P.D.E's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9705046

Award Number: 9705046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77191              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. McMillan mcmillan@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705046  McMillan    This project focuses on issues of boundary
              stabilization/optimal control of   several linear and nonlinear dynamical
              systems on a bounded domain.  The   main goals of this study are the following:
               (1)  To develop an abstract theory for the finite horizon indefinite cost   
              problems (including singular problems) for parabolic and   hyperbolic/Petrwoski
              partial differential equations (p.d.e.'s) with   nonsmoothing observation
              operators.  This result will be new even for   standard (positive definite)
              finite horizon cost problems.  In addition, we   would like to investigate
              conditions for solvability of certain differential   Riccati equations which
              are  related to certain nonlinear optimal control   problems.  (2)  Develop a
              minimax Riccati theory for indefinite cost problems, after   first developing
              the standard Riccati theory (i.e., the case where there are no   disturbances
              present in the system).  (3)  Verify various assumptions required by the
              minimax theory (which we   have developed previously) for various shell models.
                 The abstract problems that are being considered arise out of the  
              mathematical modeling of problems in mechanics and structural design.  In  
              particular, the focus is on large vibrating structures such as satellite
              dishes,   aircraft, antennae, etc.  By necessity, the modeling of the movement
              of these   structures results in systems of partial differential equations. 
              Ways will be   investigated in which to damp out (i.e., control) unwanted
              vibrations of   these structures. In addition, the project seeks to address the
              control of   vibrating structures in the presence of outside disturbances
              (e.g., external   forces on aircraft wings). The project's goal is to
              contribute in filling a large   gap in the literature on optimization problems
              for large flexible structures.
