Title       : Calorimetry and Thermal Transport at the Quantum Limit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  2000  
File        : a9705411

Award Number: 9705411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Roukes roukes@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Worlock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                   w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705411  Roukes
                 Calorimetry and Thermal Transport at the Quantum Limit.  This  new research
              program focuses on reduced-dimensional  heat  flow   and   thermal  
              equilibration  in  nanostructures.   The  investigators  have developed new
              techniques  for  the  surface  nanomachining of suspended semiconductor
              structures that enable  the  construction  of  miniature,  thermally-isolated 
              devices.  These   possess  integral  transducers  permitting  the   local 
              introduction  of  heat,  and  local  temperature  measurements.  Coupling these
              with high sensitivity dc SQUID-based methods for  electron  thermometry at
              millikelvin temperatures is ultimately  expected  to  yield sensitivity
              sufficient for  exploration  of  energy  exchange processes involving
              individual quanta. Single-  phonon phenomena, with analogs in classical and
              quantum optics,  should  become  observable.  Intriguing  possibilities 
              include  phonon  shot  noise, phonon bunching, anticorrelated  electron- 
              phonon relaxation, and the phonon-by-phonon energy decay  of  a  quasi-isolated
                thermal  reservoir.   With   this   level   of  sensitivity,  calorimetry 
              experiments  elucidating   processes  involving individual atoms and molecules
              are also possible.  %%%    Calorimetry and Thermal Transport at the Quantum
              Limit.  This  new research program focuses on the question of how  heat  flows 
               in   extremely  small  objects,  i.e.   nanostructures.  Ultrasmall   systems 
              can  behave  as  if  they  are   reduced-  dimensional  (i.e.,  less than 3D). 
              At low  temperatures,  for  systems   that  are  small  enough,  heat  flow  
              and   thermal  equilibration  will  ultimately  occur  by  the   exchange   of 
              individual  energy quanta. This domain, where heat transfer  is  "granular"
              (delivered quanta-by-quanta rather than as a  steady  flow)  remains 
              completely unexplored. A complete understanding  of   these  issues  will 
              become  crucial  with  the  continued  miniaturi zation  of  devices leading to
               nanotechnology.  These  studies  are now possible through new nanomachining 
              techniques  developed  by  the  investigators,  allowing  the  creation  of 
              suspended,  ultrasmall  semiconductor  structures  with  three-  dimensional 
              relief  --  with on-board  electronic  measurement  circuitry.  Among possible
              applications of this research, these  experiments  should  enable  direct 
              observation  of  the  heat  evolved during chemical reactions involving
              *individual*  atoms  and   molecules.  The  devices  developed  should  also  
              offer  unprecedented  sensitivity  for  measurement  of  optical   and 
              infrared radiation.  ***
