Title       : Generalized Linear Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9705347

Award Number: 9705347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter McCullagh pmcc@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McCullagh  9705347    This research will examine a number of issues, all bearing
              directly or indirectly on statistical models of the generalized linear type.  A
              major part of the work is concerned with multivariate models, either graphical
              dependence models,  or marginal models constructed for epidemiological or
              similar purposes.  The extent to which such models are capable of a causal
              interpretation will be examined.  Apart from specialized models such as those
              arising in the analysis of ranked data, a most pressing need has been for
              satisfactory methods for dealing with non-linear models having several
              components of variation.  Residual likelihood is one technique used in linear
              models for the estimation of variance components, by-passing the regression
              parameters.  The intention is to develop a similar strategy for generalized
              linear models in order to help focus attention on subsets of the parameters
              without compromising the inferences.  The final component of the research is
              related to the algebra of model formulae, and in particular, on the limitations
              of the algebra in common use, particularly where homologous factors are
              involved.  Only a minority of group-invariant subspaces correspond to
              interesting statistical models:  A promising alternative to group-invariance is
              monoid-invariance, which corresponds closely to factorial models.  The aim is
              to find a succinct way of specifying suitable invariant subspaces in a way that
              is unambiguous and can be understood by statistician and computer alike.  This
              exercise will involve a mixture of algebra and computational work.   
              Generalized linear models have been used in a wide variety of applications in
              the social, physical and biological sciences, in addition to commercial
              applications such as insurance and marketing.  Despite this success, there are
              a number of important areas in which further development would be beneficial. 
              Foremost among these are applications in which random effects accrue from
              several identifiable sources.  Examples incl ude longitudinal studies, genetic
              models for plant and animal breeding, and agricultural field experiments. 
              Methods will be developed to deal with patterns of dependence induced by such
              random effects.  A second area on which some progress has already been made is
              the connection between statistical model formulas and what are known in algebra
              as monoid-invariant subspaces.  The currently-used algebra for statistical
              models is incapable of recognizing that two factors have the same set of
              levels.  An extended algebra will be developed to accommodate this phenomenon.
