Title       : Multiple Time Scales in Neuronal Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9705780

Award Number: 9705780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Guckenheimer gucken@cam.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Guckenheimer    9705780         The investigator studies dynamical systems with
              multiple    time scales as models of neural systems.  Data and models from a   
              small invertebrate neural network, the stomatogastric ganglion of    lobsters,
              guide the work and provide case studies.  Phenomena    observed in the
              stomatogastric ganglion, such as bursting    oscillations and spike frequency
              adaptation, can best be modeled    as dynamical systems with multiple time
              scales.  Previous    mathematical analyses of qualitative properties of
              multiple time    scale dynamical systems have dealt mainly with local phenomena
                 that occur in low dimensions.  The dynamics of neural systems    raise
              questions that are not addressed by existing theories of    multiple time scale
              systems.  The aim here is to extend the theory    by classifying qualitative
              features of the global dynamics and    bifurcations for systems with two time
              scales.  This is an    ambitious endeavor to extend theories of nonlinear
              dynamical    systems and singularly perturbed systems of ordinary differential 
                equations that have been developed over the past thirty years.    Using
              numerical investigations as a guide, the dictionary of    patterns that occur
              in this setting is described and their    analytical properties are
              characterized.  This work draws heavily    upon the theories of bifurcations of
              dynamical systems and models    of hybrid dynamical systems that combine
              continuous and discrete    components.  As needed, numerical algorithms are
              developed that    facilitate the simulation and analysis of multiple time scale
                 systems.  The initial emphasis of the mathematical work is upon    systems
              that have two slow variables and two fast variables.    Numerical
              investigations of conductance-based models for the    stomatogastric ganglion
              also are performed.  The results of these    studies are compared with data and
              used to guide the refinement    of the models.         Nervous systems of
              animals regulate and control muscular    activi ty such as locomotion.  Well
              developed theories enable the    construction of models for the electrical
              properties of nerve    membranes in these processes, but there is little
              understanding    of the dynamical principles used by organisms.  This project  
               investigates dynamical models of a small neural system consisting    of
              fourteen neurons that control rhythmic motions of the foregut    of lobsters. 
              This system is used because it is small enough that    unique properties of
              each neuron within the system have been    identified, but large enough that
              the network architecture of the    interactions among neurons is also
              important.  The system displays    a rich repertoire of rhythmic behavior.  The
              focus of this project    is on features of the behavior that involve different
              time    scales.  Mathematical theories have been successful at describing   
              universal properties of the dynamics observed in an astounding    array of
              physical and natural systems, but these theories need to    be extended to
              systems with more than one time scale.  The goal is    to construct
              classifications of dynamical patterns that are the    components from which the
              complex behaviors of neural systems are    formed.  Models of these systems are
              also complex.  Computational    investigations are required to predict their
              dynamical behavior.    This project seeks to implement algorithms that improve
              our    ability to extract useful information from the models and guide    the
              improvement of their fidelity.  Both the theoretical analysis    and the
              numerical methods that are developed encompass all models    of dynamical
              systems with multiple time scales and can be used    far beyond the context of
              the neural system that is the focus of    this study.
