Title       : Singular and Boundary Control of Multidimensional Diffusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9705017

Award Number: 9705017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Taksar taksar@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705017  Taksar    The proposed research lies within the area of optimal
              stochastic control.  It   deals with optimal control of diffusion processes by
              means of a free   boundary as well as optimal control at a reflection boundary
              of the   stochastic process.  This type of control naturally appears in the
              problems in   which there is no natural restriction on the rates of control and
              the optimal   control rates are infinite. (This type of control model serves
              also as a good   approximation for the situations when the rates are bounded
              but very large.)    The optimal policy is then to reflect the process from an a
              priori unknown   boundary. Natural models where such type of action arises are
              related to the    problems with additive input, where there are no a priori
              limits on the   control rates or as an approximation for the problems with
              optimal policy of   a "bang-bang" type. The proposed research consists of
              developing the   theory of the related PDE with gradient constraints, studying
              optimal   reflecting barriers in multidimensional cases, and applying the
              results to   different mechanical, manufacturing and financial models.    This
              research should provide a sound theoretical base for developing   optimal
              control algorithms for an automatic cruise control of a missile    subject to
              uncertain wind conditions or a space vehicle subject to small   perturbations
              in mechanical units. The developed technique will enable one   to calculate the
              position when the maximal correction force should be   applied as well as the
              optimal direction of this force. At the "ground level"   this theory will give
              a tool to derive optimal inventory levels for complex   flexible manufacturing
              systems as well as optimal timings for changes in   the  manufacturing
              processes. In the financial world this theory will provide   a method for
              finding optimal levels of funds for financial companies whose   assets are
              subject to random fluctuations. For example, in the case of a large   insurance
              company whose liquid assets  are constantly fluctuating due to   uncertainty in
              the times and amounts of incoming claims, it will be  possible   to calculate
              the optimal level of the reserve which should be maintained in   order to have
              the optimal balance between the risk and profit potential.
