Title       : Optical and Far Infrared Studies of Semiconductor Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9705064

Award Number: 9705064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Dobrowolska mdobrowo@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek K. Furdyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705064  Dobrowolska    This is a renewal proposal to study semiconductor 
              heterostructures.  Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) will be used to  fabricate
              three new semiconductor systems:  II-VI self-assembled  quantum dots (QDs);
              diluted magnetic III-V semiconductors; and II-  VI semiconductor microcavities.
              The self-assembled QD project  will focus on investigation of CdSe QDs grown on
              ZnSe.  Formation  of III-V magnetic systems will be attempted by MBE growth of 
              solid solutions of III-V compounds and Mn chalcogenides (e.g.,  MnTe). 
              Finally, fabrication of II-VI microcavities will focus on  MBE fabrication of
              distributed Bragg reflectors for ZnSe/ZnCdSe  quantum well structures.  The
              above systems will be investigated  by photoluminescence spectroscopy, optical
              absorption, and  magneto-optical  methods.  All three projects address
              fundamental  issues relevant to optoelectronic applications of semiconductor 
              heterostructures.  %%%  This is a renewal proposal to study semiconductor 
              heterostructures.  Thin film systems  consisting of alternating layers of
              dissimilar  semiconductors  ("heterostructures") play a critical role in
              technologically  important devices, such as light emitting diodes,
              semiconductor  lasers, and sensors.  Molecular beam epitaxy is a method of 
              forming such multilayers with unprecedented atomic-scale  perfection.  The
              present project will apply this method to three  new frontiers:  the formation
              of semiconductor structures on the  scale of 100 atoms in all three directions
              ("quantum dots"); the  formation of technologically important magnetic
              semiconductors  whose properties can be varied by magnetic field; and
              fabrication  of "microcavities" of immediate importance  to the operation of 
              blue light emitters.  Optical studies of these systems are  expected to pave
              the way toward new optoelectronic applications.  ***
