Title       : Structure of Local Minimizers in Superconductivity and Models for Phase
               Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9705774

Award Number: 9705774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Sternberg sternber@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705774    Sternberg          In this proposal, the principal investigator
              decribes a research  program in nonlinear partial differential equations and
              the calculus  of variations. The research topics come from three areas: the  
              Ginzburg-Landau model for superconductivity, the Cahn-Hilliard model   for
              phase transitions, and the structure  of stable solutions to 
              volume-constrained least area problems. A common goal throughout  the proposal
              is to study the existence, disappearance, and structure  of local minimizers to
              problems arising in continuum mechanics when  relevant parameters are altered.
              In the work centered on   superconductivity, the P.I. will focus on problems
              concerning the  complex relationship between the size of an applied magnetic
              field   and the behavior of vortices which appear within the superconducting  
              sample.  The projects related to phase transitions concern the   structure of
              transition layers bridging two (or more) phases within   the context of the
              Cahn-Hilliard theory of phase transitions. This   work is inextricably linked
              to the study of volume-constrained least   area problems. These geometry
              problems are quite subtle, and their  resolution should shed light on the
              structure of phase transitions in  the Cahn-Hilliard setting as well.        
              This proposal concerns research projects related to the study of 
              superconductors and to the study of phase transitions in fluids or   alloys. In
              the production of superconductors, a major concern is the   emergence of
              vortices which are little "defects" in the sample leading  to a loss of perfect
              conductivity. In this proposal, the P.I. will use  the so-called
              Ginzburg-Landau theory as a model for the superconductor  in order to
              investigate the emergence, disappearance, and placement of  these "defects"
              when the sample is subjected to a magnetic field.  In  the research devoted to
              phase transitions, the P.I. will study  mathematical models for binary alloys
              (Cahn-Hilliard theory) and for  two-fluid systems (van der Waals the ory). The
              goal is to understand  the possible shape of the boundaries between different
              phases of a   medium. Particular attention will be paid to the effect of the  
              boundary of the container holding the medium on the structure of these 
              so-called transition layers. These studies are related to questions  about the
              possible shape of bubbles confined to a container. Since  these bubbles tend to
              hug the wall of the enclosing container, one  wants to understand how the
              specific shape of the container will  affect the structure of the stable
              bubble.
