Title       : Inverse Boundary Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9705792

Award Number: 9705792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunther Uhlmann gunther@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705792    Uhlmann    The PI plans to consider several inverse boundary value
              problems arising  in applications. In these non-invasive methods one attempts
              to determine  the internal parameters of a body by making measurements at the
              boundary  of the body. An example of this is "Electrical Impedance Tomography".
              In  this case the measurements at the boundary are current and voltage 
              measurements, and one would like to determine the conductivity of the body.  
              The PI plans to consider the case of anisotropic conductivities and  non-smooth
              isotropic conductivities.  Another important unsolved problem  is whether one
              can effectively characterize all the possible outcomes of  voltage and current
              measurements for conductivities. The proposer plans to  investigate analog
              inverse problems arising in the mechanics of materials.  In particular one
              would like to determine the elastic parameters of an  elastic body by making
              measurements of displacements and tractions at the  boundary. The PI plans to
              consider the case of transversally isotropic  materials and also materials with
              residual stress.        The PI plans to consider several inverse boundary value
              problems arising  in applications. In these non-invasive methods one attempts
              to determine  the internal parameters of a body by making measurements at the
              boundary  of the body. For instance, electrical impedance imaging systems apply
               currents to the outside surface of a body and record the voltages that 
              result. This data is used to reconstruct and display an approximation to  the
              electrical conductivity inside the body. The electrical conductivity  of lung,
              air, blood, cardiac muscle, breast tissue, and breast tumors are  all
              different. For this reason electrical impedance imaging is being  tested as a
              method for monotoring heart and lung function as well as  screening for breast
              cancer. Other application of this inverse method is  non-destructive evaluation
              of materials, in particular in the detection of  internal cracks and corrosion
              in planes. T he design for these imaging  systems involve the analysis of
              forward and inverse problems for partial  differential equations.
