Title       : Controlled Topology and Topological Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9705168

Award Number: 9705168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank S. Quinn quinn@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9705168  Quinn       This project has two distinct components, in controlled
              topology  and topological field theory.  The controlled topology objective is 
              to understand better the failure of approximate fibrations to form a  bundle
              theory because the formation of pullbacks is obstructed.  Hughes and others
              have made precise the sense in which approximate  fibrations are the normal
              structure in homotopically stratified sets.  This makes the pullback problem
              central in the study of these sets.  Much is already known through the work of
              Hughes, Williams, Taylor,  Weinberger and others, but a more satisfactory
              version may be  possible.  The other topic concerns machine computation in
              topological  field theories defined on 2-complexes, 3-manifolds, and smooth 
              4-manifolds.  The 2-complex case is completely implemented, and  explorations
              are well along for field theories coming from mod p  representations of Lie
              algebras, for p up to 13.  The representation  theory of quantum groups needed
              for 3-manifolds has been implemented,  but exploration of the field theories
              waits on a more complete  understanding of the 2-complex case.  Both
              2-complexes and 3-manifolds  are considered test cases for the primary goal of
              the project, field  theories on 4-manifolds.  This, however, is still some
              years off.  Some work is also being done on topological questions on which
              field  theories might shed light: the "Andrews-Curtis" conjecture for 
              2-complexes, handlebody structures on 4-manifolds, and topological  isotopy of
              4-manifolds.       The context for the first topic is the study of stratified
              sets.  Most of the geometric objects occurring in nature are stratified: built 
              up of layers that are manifolds.  The biggest challenge is to understand  how
              the strata fit together.  For most types of stratified sets  (smooth,
              piecewise-linear, analytic) this fitting-together is  described using a bundle
              theory.  It is complex and hard to use  because the objects are complicated,
              but is effective and  well-understood.  Top ological stratified objects took
              longer to  describe, because it turns out the fitting-together cannot be given
              in  terms of a bundle theory.  This has been extensively studied, but we  do
              not yet have a fully satisfactory understanding.  The field  theories in the
              second part of the project are also referred to as  "topological quantum field
              theories."  They are rather idiosyncratic  theories specialized to low
              dimensions.  The ones under study are  algebraic (as opposed to analytic) and
              are constructed using  representations of groups or Lie algebras, or their
              deformations.  These, particularly the 3-manifold versions, became popular
              about a  decade ago.  At the time, we seemed not to know enough either about 
              deformations of Lie algebras or about 3-manifolds to get significant  new
              information from one about the other.  A particular obstacle was  the inability
              to compute "random" invariants.  This project, now in  its eighth year, has
              numerical computation as a first goal.  This is  going well, but the raw output
              is not very revealing.  The principal  activity at present is finding ways to
              use numerical data to obtain a  global qualitative understanding of a theory. 
              ***
