Title       : Theory and Applications of Random Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1998     
File        : a9705003

Award Number: 9705003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69402              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Luenberger luen@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Every student of elementary mathematics knows that if a quantity is multiplied
              each period by a positive number x, the result will evolve geometrically with
              the number of periods n as xn.  It is not much harder to show that if instead,
              the period multiplying factors Xk are identically distributed positive random
              variables, the  result will tend to evolve according to ean where a = E(lnx1),
              although it will fluctuate from this value.  This is the basis of the famous
              Kelly result used in investment theory.  A major (and deep) generalization of
              this result due to Bellman is that if a vector is repeatedly multiplied by
              positive random matrices Xk, each component of the results evolves as ena,
              although a is hard to compute.  This major result of Bellman's has been
              fruitfully applied to many random systems, including  those in biology,
              inventory control, and population dynmics.  It can also be applied in
              investment problems, including problems of industrial investment, which is our
              primary interest.  In many of the most important situations a vector is
              transformed by random nonlinear mappings Hk.  It might seem impossible to
              characterize the long term result in this case. However, we have extended
              Bellman's result to the nonlinear case-obtaining virtually the same conclusion
              concerning growth.  This deep result opens the door  to many interesting
              applications.  In this project we propose to further the theory of these
              processes, apply the results to interesting and important investment problems,
              and develop effective computational methods for  computing the relevant
              quantities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
