Title       : Investigation of Metal-C60 Interfaces and Layered Thin-Film Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9705224

Award Number: 9705224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur F. Hebard afh@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9705224 
              Hebard    This experimental project focuses on the properties of interfaces 
              involving  thin films of C-60, including alkali-metal-doped  C-60  solids,  and
               configurations  which  might  be  of  interest   in  electronic   devices.  In
               the  work,  C-60  will  be   deposited  sequentially or simultaneously with
              various metals, insulators or  semiconductors. A variety of deposition
              techniques will  be  used  including  thermal sublimation, ion-beam sputtering
              and  electron  beam   heating.  In-situ  characterization  will   primarily  
              be  accomplished  by  electrical transport  measurements  during  and  after 
              deposition. These measurements involve not  only  in-plane  transport   but  
              also  tunneling  and  electric   field   effect  measurements.  For  air-stable
              or passivated samples,  additional  characterization  by  x-rays,  AFM,  STM, 
              magnetotransport,  and  optical  and infrared absorption will be made. The high
               electron  affinity and the relative ease of intercalation of C-60  will  be 
              aspects  central  to  the  research projects.  One  project  will  involve 
              electron  tunneling in trilayer  structures  to  further  understanding of
              superconductivity in the alkali-doped  compounds  and to determine the
              interface-related vibrational and electronic  states and the expected
              relatively large Coulomb gap of molecules  isolated  in  the  tunnel  barrier. 
              This  research  project   is  interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  will  involve
               graduate   and  undergraduate  students  who  will  be  excellently  trained 
              for  careers in industry, government and academia.  %%%  This  experimental
              project is based on novel and potentially very  useful   electronic  conducting
               films  based   on   carbon-sixty  molecules.  Such molecules are like hollow
              spheres  comprised  of  sixty  chemically  bonded carbon atoms,  resembling 
              tiny  soccer  balls.   These  molecules  are  relatively  new  and  unexplored,
               especially  in   terms of their potential for forming  insulating, 
              electrically conducting, and even superconducting thin films.  It  has  been 
              possible  to  add  alkali metals  such  as  sodium  or  potassium  to 
              carbon-sixty to provide "electrical doping"  which  fosters  electrical 
              conduction  and  even  superconductivity  to  temperatures  up  to about 30
              Kelvin degrees. The  work  in  this  experimental project will, in part,
              involve "sandwich structures"  which could perform functions which might be
              useful in electronic  devices.  This  work will lead to a much better
              understanding  of  the   electrical  behavior  of  interfaces  between 
              conventional  metals, insulators, and semiconductors, with films of the carbon-
               sixty molecules, and will possibly lead to applications for  such  interfaces.
              This research project is interdisciplinary in  nature  and will involve
              undergraduate and graduate students who will  be  excellently   trained for
              positions in industry,  government  and  academia.  ***
