Title       : Polaron-Induced Local Distortions in Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9705117

Award Number: 9705117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank G. Bridges bridges@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9705117  Bridges    This  is  a  new  project  which proposes X-Ray  absorption 
              fine  structure  (XAFS)  measurements  on  systems  exhibiting   metal- 
              insulator   transitions  and  Colossal  Magnetoresistance   (CMR)  effects, 
              such  as  La1-xCaxMnO3.  In  these  oxides,  the  large  magnetoresistance near
              the ferromagnetic transition  temperature,  Tc,  is now attributed to a novel
              coupling between magnetism, the  electron  system and local lattice distortions
              and, in  a  recent  paper,  we  have  shown  that  the transition  from 
              metallic  to  insulating behavior correlates well with a rapid increase in  the
               amplitude  of  the  local distortions which are  believed  to  be  polaronic
              in origin.  However, the nature, symmetry and extent of  the  atomic 
              displacements are not yet known and are  needed  for  modeling these unusual
              transport effects.  XAFS measurements as a  function  of  temperature and
              magnetic field will  enable  us  to  probe  the details of the local structural
              distortions about  the  metal atoms and provide this crucial information.  %%% 
              This  is  a  new  project  which proposes X-Ray  absorption  fine  structure 
              (XAFS)  measurements on systems such  as  La1-xCaxMnO3  which   exhibit  novel
              features in their magnetic and  electrical  behavior  that appear  to be
              related to the atomic  structure  of  the   material.   Recent  theoretical 
              models  suggest  that  the  arrangement of the atoms become distorted at the
              same temperature  at  which  the magnetic properties disappear and it is 
              suggested  that  these distortions contribute to the large observed increase 
              in  the   resistance  to  the flow of  electrical  current.   Our  initial 
              study  supports  such a model,  but  details  about  the  arrangements of the
              atoms are not yet known.  We will  use  x-ray  absorption   techniques to
              investigate the  distortions  about  a  given atom at various temperatures and
              magnetic fields.  We  need  to  determine  which  atoms  are  distorted  and 
              the  range  and  magnitude   of the distortions to test and improve the  models
               of  this  unusual  behavior.   This  novel  connection  between   the 
              microscopic  atomic  arrangement and  the  electrical  properties  involves new
              physics and may lead to new applications since  such  materials are potentially
              useful to make devices for reading  and  writing information on computer disk. 
              ***
