Title       : Lie Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1997        
File        : a9705709

Award Number: 9705709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Wolf jawolf@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9705709  Wolf    Prof. Joseph Wolf will continue his research on Lie
              groups, harmonic analysis and representation, with some applications to complex
              analysis, Riemannian geometry, numerical analysis and control theory.  This
              includes (1) his work on double fibration transforms  and the structure of
              spaces of maximal compact subvarieties in flag domains, (2) his work on
              infinite dimensional Lie groups that are direct limits of finite dimensional
              groups, (3) his study of the Harish-Chandra--Schwartz space of a general
              semisimple Lie groups, (4) applications of his results with Milicic, Hecht and
              Schmid on equivalence of various constructions of representations of semisimple
              Lie groups, and (5) his line of   research connecting semisimple representation
              theory with certain aspects of applied mathematics.  Here (1) has already
              proved useful in automorphic cohomology, in indefinite metric quantization, and
              in geometric realization and understanding of certain singular representations
              of interest in physics.  The new work proposed is to complete the precise
              description of the linear cycle space and apply the result to concrete analytic
              properties of the associated double fibration transforms.  (2) is now at the
              point of understanding the direct limit analogues of the discrete series from
              both a geometric and an analytic viewpoint.  (3) is a matter of completing a
              very beautiful topic in harmonic analysis.  (4) is a question of direct reading
              of the character and growth properties of a representation from its defining
              basic datum.  And (5) combines methods of control theory with the theory of
              Riemannian symmetric spaces.  That line of research concentrates, at the
              moment, on the development of point placement techniques for observation of the
              heat equation on the sphere, along with various associated quadrature and
              approximation techniques.    These research projects all are investigations of
              the role of symmetry in pure and applied mathematics.  Symmetry simplifies
              calculations by eliminatin g variables or constraining their range, and the
              structure of the symmetry group and its representations imposes patterns that
              always lead to better understanding of complex situations.  Thus indefinite
              metric quantization, which is tightly connected to project (1), has
              applications in particle physics.  In fact it is essential for modern
              understanding of quantization of the photon and other particles that require a
              subquotient structure.  The point placement and quadrature aspects of (5) are
              closely allied to the development of non- invasive methods of observation and
              methods of efficient computation.  That sort of consideration comes up in many
              situations, such as medical applications of tomography and location of toxic
              spills.  All five projects are closely related.  In project (5), especially,
              methods developed for use in pure mathematics (specifically abstract harmonic
              analysis and differential geometry) turn out to have extremely interesting
              consequences for observability, controllability and   practical computation.
