Title       : Inference and Computation in Multi-Level Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1999      
File        : a9705156

Award Number: 9705156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl N. Morris morris@stat.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David van Dyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1038,1057,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9705156         INFERENCE AND COMPUTATION IN MULTI-LEVEL MODELS      Carl
              Morris     and     David van Dyk      Harvard University            Summary   
              Hierarchical and multi-level methods in statistics (Bayesian and   otherwise)
              have become ever more prevalent in modern statistical   practice, as better
              computational tools and computational advances make   these powerful methods
              more tractable.  This research will extend the   theory and computation for
              hierarchical models in general, and   especially for versions of them that seem
              promising for practical   applications, as suggested partly from the
              investigators' experience   with them for medical quality assurance,
              meta-analysis, image   processing, traffic engineering, and for other
              situations.  The   investigators will study and develop procedures for fast
              fitting of   exponential family models, of generalized linear models, and of  
              multivariate models.  They will work on making inferences and on   foundations.
               They will study and evaluate diagnostic methods needed to   assess the
              modeling assumptions made for the (second level)   distributions that govern
              the individual parameters.  Operating   characteristics and risk functions are
              to be calculated.  Mindful of   the computational burden of these methods, the
              investigators will seek   good mathematical approximations and the efficient
              implementation of   these more precise, computationally intensive methods.   
              While multi-level models are still new, they are the focus of much   research
              because their applications and potential applications abound in   scientific,
              engineering, commercial, medical, and governmental contexts.    Applications of
              hierarchical models have been and are being made to   image processing,
              agriculture, genetics, health services, and to many   other areas.  For
              example, the Principal Investigator's past research   has included using and
              adapting multi-level statistical models to   extract more accurate information
              from satellite imagery data by having   the t wo levels represent separately
              the measurement error distributions   and the uncertainty about the ground
              truth.  The investigator also has   used these models to assess more
              accurately, from non-experimental   traffic data, whether specified highway
              safety improvements actually   reduce accidents.  Two-level models are needed
              because direct   treatment-control comparisons made without them tend to be
              biased when   safety improvements have been made mainly at high hazard
              locations.    Concern for these and other applications of multi-level models
              motivate   this research, which is aimed at advancing their proper use and at  
              optimizing their computational efficiency.
