Title       : Development and Applications of Computational Methods of Spectral Analysis: From
               Quantum Dynamics Calculations to NMR Data Processing.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a0108823

Award Number: 0108823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Mandelshtam mandelsh@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Vladimir Mandelshtam is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
              Program to develop and apply novel theoretical/computational methods, ranging
              from data processing in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments to quantum
              chemical dynamics calculations.  The central technique that will be used and
              further explored is the Filter Diagonalization Method (FDM) for spectral
              analysis of time signals, along with variants that will be designed to target
              different types of spectral analysis problems.  The studies will include
              algorithm and code development, in particular the generalization to 2D, 3D, and
              4D NMR experiments, and various test calculations using real and synthesized
              data.  Moreover, the design of new experiments that are uniquely possible with
              FDM data processing will be explored in collaboration with experimental NMR
              groups.  The development and applications of numerical algorithms for quantum
              chemical dynamics will continue as well, focusing on physically important
              problems such as tunneling splittings and energy shifts (caused by the
              environment or isotope substitution).  For both numerically exact quantum and
              approximate semiclassical approaches, the general two-step scheme involving
              signal generation followed by signal processing will be approached with several
              methodologies.  Successful applications have the potential to reveal new
              information or lead to dramatic computational savings. 

The theoretical and
              computational methods developed in this spectral analysis research have broad
              application possibilities in science and engineering.  Along with enabling
              major improvements to data analysis in magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
              outcomes from this research can potentially impact diverse areas such as
              communications science and economics.
