Title       : Stakeholder Analysis Of Framing In Intractable Environmental Conflicts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0108705

Award Number: 0108705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Putnam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Stakeholders play a critical role in managing environmental issues. Their
              perspectives on the issues and their interactions with policy makers often
              shape the direction that an environmental situation takes, particularly when it
              escalates into a spiraling conflict. This project aims to depict the worldviews
              of stakeholders in intractable environmental conflicts. It focuses on how
              stakeholders frame or interpret the myriad of elements that comprise a
              protracted environmental conflict, including (1) how disputants define and
              label what the problem is, (2) who should control or decide on these issues,
              (3) how disputants identify with the environmental problem, (4) how they view
              other stakeholders, (5) what type of power or authority is being exercised, (6)
              what are their views of natural resources, and (7) what should be done about
              the conflict. In effect, this study investigates stakeholder differences in
              defining and privileging seven different elements of environmental framing:
              whole story, views of social control, stakeholder identity, characterization,
              views of power/authority, views of nature, and conflict management
              preferences.

This study will code data from interview transcripts of 156
              stakeholders, involved in four different environmental cases-resource
              allocation, anti-degradation, natural resource protection, and chemical
              pollution. It will develop profiles of stakeholder framing among groups such as
              developers, citizen activists, farmers and irrigators, environmentalists, local
              and regional regulatory agencies, state agencies, federal governmental
              officials, local city councils and officials, facilitators and mediators, and
              media reporters-profiles that move beyond broad-based descriptors. Then through
              the use of configural frequency analysis, the researchers will test clusters or
              configurations of frame types among stakeholders by examining similarities and
              differences in framing. Finally, the researchers will develop detailed
              descriptive analysis of these patterns of stakeholder framing within and across
              the four environmental cases.

Stakeholder analysis is a complex and
              important problem for environmental policy making. Research to date has
              centered on stakeholder attitudes toward environmental issues such as
              conservation and risk-taking. Very little work examines the way that
              stakeholders perceive or approach environmental conflicts, especially ones
              rooted in case situations that cross diverse environmental problems. This study
              has both theoretical and practical value in developing a rich understanding of
              stakeholder perspectives. At the theoretical level, this project tests a model
              of environmental framing that extends stakeholder analysis, and at the
              practical level, this project will develop profile analyses that can be used to
              train agency officials, conflict interventionists, and policy makers in
              understanding stakeholders. This understanding could move parties beyond
              stereotyping toward a model of collaborative learning in managing critical but
              highly divergent issues.

