Title       : Support for the Advanced Seminar on Paleodietary Research at the University of
               California, Santa Cruz
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0108981

Award Number: 0108981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8450               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Koch pkoch@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for the 6th Advanced Seminar on Paleodietary
              Research, to be held on the campus of the Univ. of California, Santa Cruz in
              September 2001.The Advanced Seminars have been the premier forum for high-level
              discussion
among anthropologists, geochemists, paleobiologists, and
              ecosystem
scientists about the ways that fossil chemistry can be used to
              reconstruct
the ecology, physiology, and migration patterns of humans and
              other
mammals.  Approximately 30 seminar participants will explore the
              diverse
chemical approaches to hominid paleobiology.  The list ranges from
              senior
scientists to graduate students and from archaeologists to
              chemists,
including speakers from 8 nations.  The speakers will examine the
              following
general topics: 1) how biological isotope signals are influenced by
              the
effects of growth dynamics and post-mortem alteration, 2) how isotopes
              can
be used to study the scale and pattern of human mobility, 3) new
              isotopic
tools for studying hominid diets and habitat use, and 4) how
              physiology and
nutritional status are reflected in the isotope composition of
              fossils.
For example, several speakers will focus on the ecology and diet
              of
australopithecines that are several million years old, determining
              the
extent to which these relatives of modern humans consumed meat
              versus
plants.  Another set of speakers will focus on the diets and
              food
processing technologies of modern humans over the past few thousand
              years.
A number of speakers will examine shifts in human migration patterns
              and
nutritional status, looking at the interplay between climate and
              cultural
change as causal agents.  As has been the case with all of
              previous
seminars, we will publish a set of papers resulting from the
              presentations,
preferably as a special issue of an archaeological journal. 
              The
publication will summarize important advances, making results available
              in
a centralized format to both specialists and non-specialists.  If the
              past
is any guide, the chemical approaches to human and animal
              ecology,
biogeochemistry, and environmental reconstruction explored in
              the
publication will extend to workers in many other fields.  For the
past 30
              years, anthropologists and archaeologists using chemical methods
have been
              blazing a trail, a trail that has recently been picked up by
wildlife
              biologists, terrestrial paleoclimatologists and global change
researchers. 
              The 6th Advanced Seminar on Paleodietary Research should
continue this
              tradition.


