Title       : Speciation and Dispersal of Fungal Symbiots of Insects (Harpellales) in Eastern
               North America and Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0108110

Award Number: 0108110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Lichtwardt licht@eagle.cc.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Merlin M. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract



	Harpellales, one of three orders of the class Trichomycetes,
              are fungi that live as symbionts in the guts of insects, particularly
              stoneflies (Plecoptera), mayflies (Ephemeroptera), and lower flies (Diptera:
              Nematocera).  Typically, the fungus is transmitted from larval insect to larval
              insect, raising questions about how the fungi are dispersed over great
              geographic distances.  Evidence exists that they may have a parasitic life
              stage in which cysts are formed in the ovaries of host insects that then
              disperse and deposit fungi in new habitats.  Details of the association of
              these fungi with host insects are poorly known as are relationships among the
              fungi and explanations for their origins and diversification.

	Because host
              insects include many species of ecological and medical importance (e.g.,
              mayflies and stoneflies, mosquitoes, black flies, biting midges), an
              understanding of parasitism that can result in sterilization of the host insect
              has great interest to entomologists.  Field and laboratory studies will help
              unravel the interactions between these fungi and their hosts, including a
              molecular informed phylogeny for the fungi that can help explain their
              diversification and origins.  This will permit a better understanding of a very
              enigmatic group of fungi, and make its species accessible to biologists
              interested in symbiosis, parasitism, historical biogeography, and possibly
              co-speciation.

