Title       : Tests of Newtonian Gravitation and the Equivalence Principle and Cryogenic
               Torsion Pendulum Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0108937

Award Number: 0108937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $742272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Riley D. Newman rdnewman@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1243      GRAVITATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A program of laboratory experiments in gravitation is to be continued and
              expanded, in parallel with continued development of the cryogenic torsion
              pendulum as a general tool for research in gravitational physics.   Much of
              this work will be done  in collaboration with the gravitational physics group
              of Professor Paul Boynton at the University of Washington.  

Research to be
              conducted includes:

Completion in the first year of a precision measurement
              of the gravitational constant G, with
target accuracy of 15 ppm.

Jointly
              with Professor Boynton's  group, a test of the inverse square distance
              dependence of the gravitational force for mass separation on the order of 15
              centimeters.

Jointly with Boynton's group, tests of the equivalence
              principle over various distance ranges,
for gravitational field sources which
              include laboratory masses, a nearby mountain, and the
sun.

These projects
              will be conducted in an underground laboratory that has been prepared with
              support from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in a former Nike missile
              bunker on an isolated environmental preserve near
Richland, Washington. 
              

In conjunction with these projects, the performance of the cryogenic
              torsion
pendulum will be progressively improved through development and
              refinement of seismic isolation, tilt control, temperature control, and fiber
              choice and preparation techniques.   

The cryogenic torsion pendulum being 
              developed is of potential value to any research in gravitation or other fields
              which requires the measurement of extremely small slowly varying
              forces.

This project provides research experience and training in a variety
              of widely applicable technologies, to undergraduate and graduate students as
              well as to a postdoctoral researcher.  

