Title       : Multilocus Tests of Speciation Models and Comparative Phylogeography of
               Australian Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0108249

Award Number: 0108249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott V. Edwards sedwards@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Beerli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0108249
Scott V. Edwards
Peter Beerli

A grant has been awarded to Drs.
              Scott Edwards and Peter Beerli at the University of Washington to apply
              molecular genetic tools to study the evolution of Australian birds.
              Specifically, the project will use genetic data to make inferences about (1)
              when in geological time a series of avian species diverged across an important
              ecological barrier in northern Australia, the Carpentarian barrier; (2) the
              size of the populations of the ancestral species from which this series of
              present-day bird species in Australia arose; and (3) the magnitude of genetic
              differences between populations of songbirds distributed across this barrier. 
              The research will use DNA sequence variation in a class of molecular genetic
              markers known as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at many different
              places in the genomes of these birds, as well as novel statistical methods, to
              make these inferences.

This project is significant because it will help
              clarify the timing and places of diversification of birds on an isolated
              continent (Australia), and thereby will facilitate comparisons with
              diversification of birds and other animals on other continents.  This project
              will distinguish between two competing theories for the origin of current-day
              animal species, one of which says that much of this divergence took place very
              recently, less than 2 million years ago, the other of which,  says that these
              divergence events probably took place much earlier.  The results will help
              document global patterns of biological diversification, relate these patterns
              to environmental change, and thereby provide an historical context for
              conserving and even predicting evolutionary history.  In addition, the data
              will provide measures of the amount of genetic variation within Australian bird
              species, thereby providing a gauge by which the genetic variability found in
              other species, including humans, can be compared.

