Title       : Evaluating the Effectiveness of Collaboration in Water Resource Planning in
               California: A Case Study of CALFED
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0108691

Award Number: 0108691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith E. Innes JINNES@uclink4.Berkeley.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will evaluate the effectiveness of collaboration in the contentious
              water-resource planning arena in California, through an in-depth study of
              CALFED, a large-scale effort to decide the guiding policies and management
              strategies for the largest estuary on North America's west coast. CALFED brings
              together federal, state and local agencies, as well as stakeholders, to develop
              a comprehensive and long-term program for restoring and managing this critical
              environmental and economic resource. Despite the deep tensions between these
              aspects of California's water system, the effort has already produced
              significant outcomes that are changing the way California's water resources are
              discussed and managed by fostering constructive dialogue among participants.

              
The principal objective of this study is to test three related hypotheses
              about collaborative policy dialogues. First, the better a dialogue meets
              certain collaboration conditions, the more likely it is to produce innovations,
              shared understandings, long term working relationships and politically
              acceptable solutions. Second, participants in collaborative dialogues change
              their views of the problem and of their own interests and options. Lastly, new
              norms, practices, and patterns of interaction emerge in some instances which
              spread beyond the individuals involved and persist over time. 

The research
              methods include in-depth interviews of CALFED participants, observation of
              meetings, and review of documents recording the debates and actions and
              providing supporting analysis for the discussions. The analysis will compare
              the more and less collaborative dialogues within CALFED in terms of their
              outcomes and effects on participants and on the practices and relationships
              among players. The researchers will also update the historical account of water
              policy and water issues in California prior to CALFED and will document the
              changes since CALFED. 

The underlying developmental pressures evident in the
              CALFED case are increasingly common and apply to water sharing situations
              throughout the US and to other multi-jurisdictional resource issues in many
              locations. Decision-makers, planners, and managers routinely must incorporate
              both environmental and economic concerns in their activities. The proposed
              research will build basic theory on these practices and on the conditions under
              which they do and do not work. 


