Title       : Collaborative Research: Top-down Analysis of Forest Ecosystem Structure and
               Functioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0108492

Award Number: 0108492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Vitousek vitousek@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Vitousek
0108492

This research will use advances in technology,
              theory, and vegetation-radiation models to determine the structural and
              chemical properties of tropical forest canopies from aircraft and spacecraft
              vantage points. The research will be carried out in forests of the Hawaiian
              Islands, that include unique species diversity, broad ranges of climates and
              soil types, and intensive ongoing biogeochemical research. Measurements of
              canopy structure and chemistry will be carried out at multiple ecological
              scales and across a range of Hawaiian forests conditions.  Remote sensing
              measurements will then be obtained from a helicopter hovering above the canopy,
              from the aircraft-based AVIRIS instrument at 20 km altitude, and from the
              spaceborne Hyperion sensor. Forest structure and chemistry in a broader set of
              ecosystems will also be evaluated with the aircraft and satellite sensors, and
              checked with intensive ground and helicopter measurements. This approach offers
              the possibility of assessing spatial variation in canopy characteristics and
              ecosystem properties from the top down. Rather than being limited to a few
              discrete sites, it should be possible to use these new remote sensing
              observations to identify the magnitude and structure of spatial variation in
              biogeochemical properties of ecosystems. This research also will contribute to
              integration of remote sensing, biophysical modeling, and ecosystem ecology, and
              to the education of students.  The results are expected to improve
              understanding of how forest canopies can be studied at large spatial scales,
              and how the measurements can be used to assess the contribution of different
              forest canopy conditions to ecosystem services in the region.  





