Title       : Transition Temperatures in Plasticity and Fracture of SiC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0108303

Award Number: 0108303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pirouz Pirouz pxp7@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project examines dislocations in single-crystal, single-polytype SiC and
              strives to establish their role in deformation and fracture. The approach is to
              produce fresh dislocations in SiC by deformation, investigate their morphology
              by TEM, and assess activation parameters of dislocation glide from yield
              behavior of the crystals. Emphasis is on dislocation formation, glide of
              partial dislocations, and relationships between mechanical and electrical
              properties of silicon carbide (SiC). SiC diode degradation is associated with
              the appearance of dark triangular shaped areas that correspond to stacking
              faults on parallel (0001) planes (sometimes forming 3C-SiC inclusions) similar
              to degradation of the early generations of laser diodes fabricated from GaAs
              and other III-V compound semiconductors by the occurrence of dark line defects.
              In these cases, recombination of electron-hole pairs is thought to provide the
              energy for formation of the lattice defects; in the case of SiC diodes, the
              recombination energy is used in the creation and motion of partial dislocations
              to produce stacking faults. More complete understanding of such effects
              requires knowledge of the activation energies for formation and glide of
              partial dislocations in SiC, and the efficiency of electron-hole recombination
              at preferred sites [e.g. kinks, anti-phase defects (APDs), or APD/vacancy
              complexes] on different partials. Additionally, it is planned to directly
              measure the brittle-to-ductile transition temperature, TBDT , in 4H- and 6H-SiC
              at different strain rates and compare the results with the transition
              temperature Tc as measured by deformation experiments. The range of
              temperatures for compression tests will be extended to assess whether a
              transition is present for deformations at higher strain rates.  The research
              aims to relate two different transition temperatures: one in the yield stress
              and the other in the fracture behavior of the crystals, and to relate both to
              atomic level processes. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in
              a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. It is
              expected that the project will provide useful data for growth and practical
              applications of SiC, a material with many potential applications in
              high-temperature, high-frequency, high-power devices, as well as in
              optoelectronics. An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. The project is expected to provide unique
              opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students through experiences made
              possible by a forefront research environment. 
*** 

