Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Communal Feasting and the Social Order
               at Late Classic El Coyote, Northwestern Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0108742

Award Number: 0108742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben A. Nelson bnelson@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
Under the direction of Dr. Ben Nelson, Mr. Christian Wells will collect data
              
for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue ongoing archaeological
              research 
at the prehispanic site of El Coyote, located in the Cacaulapa
              Valley of 
northwestern Honduras. This research will investigate the
              relationship between 
community feasting and the political organization of the
              polity that formed and 
collapsed between the seventh and tenth centuries AD.
              Archaeologists wish to 
understand the processes that integrate and
              differentiate individuals in 
ancient communities, with the greater goal of
              reconstructing past systems of 
government and their effects on the growth and
              change of societies. Mr. Wells' 
previous excavations in the main
              civic-ceremonial plaza at the site have 
revealed abundant evidence for food
              production and consumption on a large 
scale, suggesting that communal feasts
              were a central practice in the rulership 
of El Coyote. Such events would have
              served as a mechanism for polity 
integration, as well as a context in which
              exotic items were publicly displayed 
to enhance the social prestige and
              political authority of local leaders. With 
NSF support, Mr. Wells' doctoral
              dissertation research will examine the 
organization of feasting in the plaza,
              including what material culture was 
employed, where food consumption took
              place in relation to the temples that 
delimit the plaza, and which social
              segments of the polity participated. His 
research will incorporate
              archaeological excavation of the plaza and adjacent 
buildings, as well as
              trash middens that accumulated on the margins of the 
plaza. In addition, he
              will chemically characterize soil samples from the plaza 
to study the
              distribution of phosphorous and heavy metals, which will indicate 
the
              locations of activity areas. His research will also examine the composition
              
of ceramic vessel remains from the trash areas in order to illuminate the
              
different social groups that participated in plaza-oriented activities.
              
Archaeologists are interested in the practice of feasting and the social
              
relations that are reproduced during feasts. The examination of material
              
culture and soil chemistry at El Coyote is a direct method for the study of
              
this phenomenon, and will yield new information on the organization of
              feasting 
in ancient complex societies and the degree to which this practice
              was involved 
in the political and economic administration of El Coyote. In
              addition, the 
research will enhance our knowledge of the material signatures
              of feasting in 
the archaeological record and will assist in training a
              promising young 
scientist.


