Title       : A Conference in Honor of Wayne A. Fuller
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a0108882

Award Number: 0108882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Nusser nusser@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yasuo Amemiya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alicia L. Carriquiry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of the conference is to encourage intellectual discourse on
              emerging statistical topics
that honor Wayne Fuller's forty plus years of
              contributions to statistics and fields of application. To do
so, we have
              several goals for the conference:
1. To advance statistical knowledge in the
              areas of time series analysis, measurement error models,
and survey sampling.
              To achieve this goal, we have invited a distinguished slate of statisticians
              who
will present their work in three sessions.
2. To highlight the importance
              of applications and the impact that statistical developments have in
              other
fields of inquiry. For this purpose, we have invited a set of
              researchers who will discuss the
influence of Fuller's work in various areas,
              including dietary assessment, small area estimation, econometrics and
              economics.
3. To provide a friendly and open environment in which young
              statisticians can present their work and
interact with senior statisticians.
              We plan to achieve this goal by inviting researchers in the early
stages of
              their careers to present a talk in one of the invited sessions or in the
              special poster area
that will be dedicated to young investigators.
4. To
              gather statisticians from all over the world for a two-day celebration of
              statistics in general and of
Fuller in particular. A lively exchange of ideas
              and knowledge, a definition of future directions for
research in these
              important areas, and a fostering of communication and collaboration
              among
researchers at different stages of their careers and from different
              geographic locations are lasting
results from the conference that we hope to
              produce.
