Title       : Inter-annual Seed Rain Variability, Dispersal Limitation, Seed/Seedling
               Mortality in a SE Asian Rainforest: Implications for the Maintenance of Tree
               Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0108388

Award Number: 0108388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Hubbell shubbell@dogwood.botany.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. Joseph Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will test whether mast-fruiting is important to the coexistence of
              over 800 species of trees in a mega-diverse Southeast Asian rainforest at the
              Pasoh Research Forest in peninsular Malaysia.  Mast-fruiting is the
              simultaneous seed drop of many tree species in a relatively short time. 
              Periods of mast-fruiting are separated by irregular intervals of 3-9 years with
              little or no seed production.  Mast-fruiting is thought to have evolved as a
              predator escape response to heavy mammalian seed predators in these forests. 
              This study will be strictly comparable to a 13-year study of the dynamics of
              seed rain and seedling germination in a neotropical forest on Barro Colorado
              Island (BCI), Panama, which does not exhibit mast-fruiting.  Seed traps and
              seedling plots will be deployed throughout the Pasoh Forest.  Seed rain in the
              traps will be quantified each week for each tree species over a 5-year period. 
              Species abundances and composition will be compared between adjacent seed traps
              and seedling plots.  This will allow an evaluation of the strength of seed and
              seedling mortality factors during the seed to seedling transition.  Strong
              density- and frequency-dependent seed and seedling mortality characterized the
              BCI site.  Although these are considered good candidates as primary mechanisms
              of coexistence, it is unclear if the phenomenon is general or specific to BCI. 
              The proposed research is critical for understanding if tree diversity in
              different tropical forests is maintained by the same mechanisms.  This
              knowledge is important for managing tropical forests and preserving their
              biodiversity.
