Title       : The macroscopic response of composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0108626

Award Number: 0108626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graeme W. Milton milton@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0108626
PI: 			Milton, Graeme
Institution:
              		University of Utah 
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: The macroscopic response of composites

This
              proposal aims to investigate the macroscopic response of materials, focusing on
              four topics. The first topic concerns creep in a two phase composite given that
              one knows the behavior of the constituent phases. The problem is to obtain
              bounds on the range of creep that might occur, and to identify microstructures
              having the maximum and minimum creep. The second topic concerns the complex
              dielectric constant of homogeneous or heterogeneous materials which governs how
              a material reflects, transmits and absorbs radiation. Given measurements of the
              complex dielectric constant over a range of frequencies, the problem is to say
              something definite about the response of the material over an interval of
              frequencies outside the measured range. The third topic, which represents a
              continuation of previous work, is to explore the range of values the average
              strain can take in a composite which is subject to a fixed average stress, as
              the microstructure is varied. The objective is to bound this range, and to
              identify optimal structures that generate strains at the boundary of the range
              of admissible values. Such structures should be useful as ``stress guides'' for
              channeling stress to desired locations. The particular question of what
              microstructures make the best possible hydrostatic compression to shear
              converters will be investigated. The fourth topic is to explore the properties
              of a rather exotic class of microstructures, called partial differential
              microstructures. These may turn out to be the best microstructures for solving
              certain optimal design problems.
 
A better understanding of the macroscopic
              response of materials is of central technological importance. This importance
              stretches across the board, from understanding the macroscopic response of
              engineered materials (of critical importance to the defense, automotive, and
              aerospace industries), to understanding the macroscopic response of
              polycrystalline and porous rocks (relevant to earthquake prediction and to the
              oil industry), to understanding the macroscopic response of sea ice (important
              to climate modeling), to understanding the macroscopic response of biological
              materials (such as tissues, bones, shells and tendons). This proposal will
              enhance our understanding in ways that will (1) facilitate the development of
              new materials having unusual properties that are achieved by tailoring the
              microstructure; (2) provide limits on the response of composite materials, that
              could be essential for assessing the safety of such materials in desired
              applications; and (3) predict certain aspects of the response of materials to
              radiation outside frequencies where the response has been measured, which could
              be important if the material is biological and if one wants to know if
              radiation could be harmful outside frequencies where its effects are
              known.

Date: May 30, 2001

