Title       : Novel Semiconductor-Based Epitaxial Magnetic Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0108605

Award Number: 0108605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Tsui ftsui@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on the synthesis and properties of a new class of
              epitaxial heterostructures containing multi-component magnetic alloys and
              semiconductors.  It is aimed at integrating magnetic materials and
              semiconductors, in order to explore phenomena involving both charge and spin
              degrees of freedom, for both fundamental, basic scientific studies and
              technological applications.  The systems to be investigated will include
              ternary alloys containing transition metals (TM), Mn, and group B elements (Z),
              i.e. TMx-Mny-Zz, which will be coupled with conventional semiconductors, e.g.
              Si, Ge, and GaAs.  The former include some predicted half-metallic Heusler
              alloys with fully spin-polarized conduction states, and may also include some
              magnetic semiconductors, both of which are excellent candidates for spin
              injection and analysis.  The interactions between carrier charge and spin, and
              their long mean-free-path and spin coherence length in semiconductors are
              expected to give rise to many novel phenomena and spin device concepts that are
              not available in conventional heterostructures and can revolutionize electronic
              and memory devices.  However, the field is limited by the lack of materials
              systems, and by the complex nature of the multi-component systems.  The
              proposed approach is combinatorial molecular beam epitaxy synthesis and
              characterization of the structure, magnetism and transport effects.  The
              strength of the proposal is in epitaxial synthesis and the systematic approach,
              from which new materials and properties will result.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students involved in the project will be trained rigorously in
              novel synthesis and characterization that are essential for the current and
              future technologies.  Pre-college summer research projects for K12 teachers and
              students will also be conducted to introduce these groups to the technology
              issues involved in this research.
%%%
This work is focused on the synthesis
              and properties of a new class of heterostructures containing single crystalline
              films of magnetic alloys and semiconductors.  It is aimed at exploring
              phenomena involving both the charge and spin of electrons for both fundamental,
              basic scientific studies and technological applications.  Current
              state-of-the-art systems process the electron charge and spin separately.  An
              example of the former is the microprocessor that uses only the charge to do
              logic operations; in contrast the magnetic hard disc processes only the spin. 
              The separation of the two makes these systems intrinsically slow and bulky,
              while integrating the two can revolutionize information technology, for
              example, making electronic and memory devices substantially faster and more
              compact. However, the field is limited by the lack of materials systems, and by
              the complex nature of the multi-element systems. The suitable materials
              candidates must be selected from an enormous number of possible combinations.
              The proposed approach is to systematically process and screen a large number of
              new materials and their properties in parallel, the so-called combinatorial
              approach, such that for the first time libraries of new materials and
              properties will be generated rapidly. Materials to be discovered from this work
              for the intended integration are expected to be the multi-element magnetic
              alloys having all of their conduction electrons polarized while compatible with
              conventional semiconductors like silicon.  The new materials will make it
              possible to process both the charge and spin simultaneously, leading to novel
              quantum phenomena and device concepts.  Graduate and undergraduate students
              involved in the project will be trained rigorously in processes and techniques
              that are essential for the current and future high technologies.  Pre-college
              summer research projects for K12 teachers and students will also be conducted
              to introduce these groups to the technology issues involved in this
              research.
***
