Title       : Assessing The Fine Root And Mycorrhizal Components Of Net Primary Production
               Across A Tropical Rain Forest Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a0108389

Award Number: 0108389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine E. Lovelock lovelock@serc.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Assessing the fine root and mycorrhizal components of net primary production
              across a tropical rain forest landscape

Allocation to fine root production
              has been estimated to be the largest fraction of C allocation by plants and
              thus may represent the largest carbon input to soils. Yet for tropical
              evergreen forests there is very little information on fine root production, and
              there have been no studies of the fungal component of belowground NPP.  In this
              one-year project the investigators will develop a methodology for estimating
              the mycorrhizal component of belowground production by assays for the fungal
              glycoprotein glomalin, a protein that is produced exclusively by symbiotic
              arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.  The PIs will use forest plots along a soil
              fertility gradient in old-growth lowland rain forest in Costa Rica. The results
              will determine whether glomalin can be used as an indicator for carbon
              allocation to symbiotic fungi, and will contribute to a more comprehensive
              process-level understanding of the carbon cycle than has been attained to date
              for any tropical forest.  The study will have wide applicability for analyses
              of regional variations in tropical forest productivity, for managing
              human-influenced tropical ecosystems, and for predicting the responses and
              global role of tropical forests under changed global climate and atmospheric
              conditions.


