Title       : Radical Ion Rearrangements - Principles and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0108907

Award Number: 0108907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Tanko jtanko@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              James M. Tanko, of the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Polytechnic
              Institute and State University, is studying the principals and applications of
              radical ion rearrangements. Professor Tanko is exploring the structural
              features which govern the rate of rearrangement of radical anions derived from
              carbonyl compounds as well as the influence of solvent and counterion on these
              rearrangement reactions. Study of the oxidation potentials of cyclopropyl- and
              cyclobutylamines and determination of rate constants for the ring opening
              reactions of radical cations generated from their oxidation may shed light on
              the biological oxidations catalyzed by monoamine oxidase. Both electrochemical
              and laser flash photolysis methods will be used to generate the desired ions.
              Information regarding the driving force for ring opening will be obtained from
              appropriately constructed thermodynamic cycles, while theoretical methods will
              be used to provide information regarding the structure of radical ions and to
              estimate thermodynamic properties in situations where such information cannot
              be obtained experimentally.

Molecules bearing both a net charge (either
              positive or negative) and an unpaired electron appear as key intermediates in
              many chemical and biological processes. Development of an understanding of the
              structure and dynamics of these so-called radical cations and anions is central
              to elucidation of the fundamental details of how such processes occur. With the
              support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor James M.
              Tanko, of the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
              State University, is carrying out studies of the preparation, structure, and
              reaction chemistry of radical anions and radical cations. Through a combination
              of experimental and theoretical approaches, Professor Tanko is shedding light
              on the nature of these elusive intermediates, addressing fundamental issues of
              organic reaction mechanism and leading to a deeper understanding of the
              function of biological catalysts such as monoamine oxidase.
