Title       : The phylogenetic Biology of the Paleotropical Tree Genus Lithocarpus (Fagaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0108690

Award Number: 0108690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Manos pmanos@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Paul Manos of Duke University is studying the predominantly paleotropical
              tree genus Lithocarpus (ca. 300 species) to better understand the biological
              significance of variation in fruit morphology and DNA sequences across a
              diverse landscape.  Modifications of the common acorn-like fruit typically mark
              subgroups within the genus, but such changes appear to have evolved more than
              once.  The study will explore new quantitative methods to characterize changes
              in fruit shape and compare and combine these data with DNA sequences to test
              whether certain fruit types have multiple origins.  The widespread distribution
              of Lithocarpus on the continent of Asia and throughout the Malayan Archipelago
              also provides an excellent opportunity to pursue the genetics of plant
              demography using chloroplast DNA variation, a maternally inherited marker that
              tracks seed movement.  By sampling individuals throughout the range of the
              genus, the study will address the relationship between plant migration and
              geological/paleoecological change.  A variety of methods will be used to test
              explicit hypotheses of refugial areas and migration routes based on
              paleoecological data.  Trees will be sampled to examine genealogical structure
              within populations through contrasting nuclear and cytoplasmic molecular
              markers with reference to taxonomy, geography, and differential patterns of
              genome evolution.
The study of organismal diversity and molecular evolution in
              tropical tree species requires a framework built upon thorough knowledge of
              natural history, taxonomy, morphology, and genealogical relationships.  Species
              in the oak family present a broad spectrum of opportunities to study diversity
              in form and patterns of plant migration and gene flow.  Tropical woody plants
              are poorly studied in this regard and a variety of basic biological questions
              have never been addressed in the ecologically important relatives of the oaks.
              Given the amount of carbon storage, ecosystem services, biodiversity, and
              physical structure provided to the tropical rainforest by this tree community,
              this study would be one of first of its kind to apply several powerful
              molecular techniques to an important tropical genus.  


