Title       : Collaborative Research: Total Evidence Phylogeny of Gobioidei (Teleostei:
               Perciformes) and Cladistic Biogeography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0108416

Award Number: 0108416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine E. Thacker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

TOTAL EVIDENCE PHYLOGENY OF GOBIOIDEI (TELEOSTEI: PERCIFORMES) AND
              CLADISTIC BIOGEOGRAPHY 

The fish suborder Gobioidei includes more than 2000
              extant species of small fishes found throughout the tropical, subtropical, and
              temperate regions of the world, in freshwater and nearshore marine habitats.
              Many gobioids live on or near the bottom, often in burrows.  Many others are
              reef-dwellers, a few are oceanic, and some estuarine representatives have the
              ability to breathe air. Their wide distribution and great diversity of form and
              ecology make gobioids ideal for studies of broad questions in vertebrate
              evolution and biogeography. However, the incredible gobioid diversity has also
              hindered investigations of their evolutionary relationships, and no
              comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis for gobioids has been advanced.  Previous
              studies have focused on small groups of taxa or restricted suites of
              characters, and because of the fishes' small size, the morphological characters
              identified are often reductive and highly variable. The closest relatives of
              Gobioidei are unknown, and the classification has been in flux. Currently, the
              roughly 270 gobioid genera are classified in nine families, some containing
              only a single genus. The larger families (Eleotrididae, Gobiidae) are almost
              certainly not natural groups, and the relationships of species within those
              families, and among families, are unknown.

This study seeks to resolve
              gobioid relationships using a total evidence approach and focusing primarily on
              basal gobioid groups and outgroups.  DNA sequence data from five genes (four
              mitochondrial and one nuclear) will be combined with osteological and
              myological characters.  The data will be analyzed separately and combined, and
              the resultant phylogeny will then be used to produce a classification for the
              suborder. The phylogeny will be used to examine the historical biogeography of
              gobioids, using cladistic biogeographical techniques to discover congruent
              patterns of area relationships and examine the origins of gobioid
              diversification. The common assumption that gobioids originated in a marine
              environment and diversified into freshwater once or repeatedly will be
              investigated by mapping the distribution of habitats on the taxon
              cladogram.

Gobioid fishes have been studied for over a century but the group
              is so large, diverse, and widely distributed that a comprehensive phylogenetic
              and biogeographic study has never been attempted. This study will provide the
              first such comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis and provide the basis for
              exploring the biogeography of a major group of fishes. It will also provide a
              historical foundation for future studies that will examine ecology, adaptation,
              and development, using the potential of this diverse group as a model for
              research on many aspects of evolutionary biology.

