Title       : Household Valuation of Curbside Recycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0108159

Award Number: 0108159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Aadland aadland@econ.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Steady growth in per-capita municipal solid waste during the past two decades
              has spurred a dramatic increase in the number of curbside recycling programs
              nationwide.  As a result, local planners have at their fingertips a wealth of
              information on the costs of operating a variety of curbside recycling programs.
               They do not, however, have comparable information on the willingness of
              households to pay for and participate in curbside recycling.  This type of
              "benefit-side" information is crucial in estimating the extent to which
              household monthly fees in a given community might be increased in order to
              cover the costs of operating its curbside recycling program, as well as the
              effect that changes in the fee have on household participation rates.  It is
              particularly useful information for communities that are seriously considering
              the implementation of a voluntary curbside recycling program, where a household
              pays for the service only if it has signed up for it.

Using state-of-the-art
              contingent valuation methods, we will survey a large number of households
              across a wide variety of communities (e.g., those currently with and without
              curbside recycling) and curbside recycling programs (e.g., voluntary vs.
              mandatory programs).  Our primary goal is to estimate the value of curbside
              recycling to a typical household.  Using advanced econometric techniques, we
              will also estimate the effects that various household- and community-specific
              characteristics have on this value.  This will be the largest and most accurate
              study of household recycling behavior to date.  By incorporating the most
              recent advances in contingent valuation methods, our study will help advance
              the understanding of how best to elicit household information on environmental
              goods such as recycling.  Most importantly, our results will provide local
              planners with valuable information regarding the benefits of recycling
              necessary to undertake cost-benefit analysis.

