Title       : Quantitative Investigations of Backward Masking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0108905

Award Number: 0108905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Francis gfrancis@psych.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate quantitative theories of backward visual masking;
              the project results will promote development of new experiments and theories of
              cognition and perception.  Backward visual masking is used throughout cognitive
              and clinical psychology as a tool to interrupt various stages of cognitive
              processing.  Because masking is used in virtually all areas of experimental
              psychology, it is important to understand how it works.  Previous work has
              identified three general methods of masking that account for important aspects
              of experimental data.  The project will use mathematical theorems and computer
              simulations to identify fundamental properties of systems that use these
              methods.  These properties will be connected to existing data and to existing
              models of backward masking.  The fundamental properties will also be used to
              generate predictions under new backward masking conditions.  The project will
              test these predictions with new experiments that are able to compare
              alternative general methods of backward masking.  An additional analysis will
              explore current mathematical models of backward visual masking to determine how
              these models behave relative to the general methods.  This analysis will
              identify which part of a model's behavior is due to its use of a general method
              and which part is due to the specific attributes of that model.  The project
              will provide a better understanding of the types of mechanisms that are
              involved in backward visual masking.  Such understanding will allow
              experimentalists to develop more precise tests of cognitive systems and will
              allow modelers to develop more accurate theories of cognition and perception. 
              In addition, the research project will provide information about backward
              masking that will be applicable to any situation where people interact with a
              rapidly changing world.  Thus, results from the project will apply to
              situations where people are, for example, driving cars, reading text, flying
              planes, and working on computers.
