Title       : Further Investigations of ODDSIMS, a New Method of Dating Hydrated Obsidian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0108956

Award Number: 0108956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee R. Riciputi i79@ornl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Elam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence M. Anovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most common artifacts at many archaeological sites across the world
              are tools, ornaments and weapons made from a volcanic glass called obsidian.
              This versatile material was highly prized by ancient and prehistoric peoples
              due to its fracturing properties, its lusterous appearance and its sharp
              cutting edge. When properly fractured, raw obsidian blocks can be "flaked" into
              a variety of tool forms. An additional property of obsidian that makes it
              valuable to archaeologists is the fact that the fresh surfaces of a newly
              flaked obsidian tool interact with water in the atmosphere and ground,
              producing a "hydration rim", the thickness of which is dependent on time. In
              1960, a USGS geologist, Irving Friedman, developed a method of dating obsidian
              artifacts by measuring the width of the thin hydrated rims (around .002 to .01
              mm thick) with an optical microscope. Dr. Friedman named his technique
              "obsidian hydration dating" or OHD. Unfortunately, despite the promise of the
              method to produce inexpensive and accurate dates, it has failed far more often
              than it has succeeded.

In 1998, NSF awarded a grant to a team of researchers
              at the University of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National Laboratory who had done a
              preliminary reassessment of OHD using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to
              precisely measure the concentration of hydrogen in the hydrated rim as a
              function of depth from the surface.  This technique provides not only precise
              measurement of the width of the interaction rim, but data on the glass-water
              chemistry as well. During the three years of NSF support, the team carried out
              further research on both obsidian that was experimentally hydrated under
              controlled laboratory conditions and independently dated archaeological
              specimens (mainly from Mesoamerica).  As part of the laboratory work, the team
              developed a new type of reaction vessel system for performing in-laboratory
              hydration of fresh samples, and is currently under patent review. 

Thus far,
              the team's has made a number of crucial observations and discoveries. First,
              they demonstrated that optical measurement is inherently imprecise and cannot
              be used for accurate dating. Second, they showed that the rate equations used
              in traditional obsidian dating are incorrect, as the rate of hydration is not
              constant with time, but rather varies with age.  Third, they noted that the
              glass is absorbing only hydrogen and not the whole water molecule as previously
              thought, indicating that the mechanics of the hydrogenation process are far
              more complex than previously assumed, requiring significant re-evaluation of
              glass-water interaction theory.  Fourth, the team was able to demonstrate that
              using the shape and depth of the hydrogen concentration profile, a series of
              artifacts from the Chalco, Mexico site could be precisely and accurately dated.
              However, this method requires at least one independently dated artifact from
              any particular site for calibration.  Fifth, SIMS analysis suggests that the
              hydrogen isotope ratios of the rim may preserve information on the average
              temperature of hydration, which is a crucial factor controlling hydration
              rates.  If confirmed, this would provide a means of constraining hydration
              temperature, and would allow obsidian dating to be a completely independent
              method.  Finally, the results of this study suggest that the long-term
              durability of nuclear waste glass forms should be re-evaluated, as previous
              breakdown models may be based on flawed assumptions.  

The research team has
              been awarded an additional three years support to continue this exciting and
              important research. Objectives of the project for the next three years include:
              1) to understand the interaction chemistry and structure of the hydrogenation
              zone; 2) refine the hydration model to make it a fully independent and robust
              dating method; 3) determine if temperature data can be extracted from obsidian
              artifacts; and 4) test the method at various archaeological sites.  To
              accomplish these goals, the team will expand their research to Old World
              obsidian (Melian obsidian from Greece) and have already established ties with a
              team of Greek archaeologists (University of the Aegean) to obtain the necessary
              samples. This makes this project truly international in scope benefiting not
              only U.S. scientists in multiple disciplines (e.g. archaeology, geology,
              chemistry, physics, materials science), but scientists throughout the world.

