Title       : Phylogenetics and Plastid Genome Evolution of Vanilloideae (Orchidaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0108100

Award Number: 0108100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131417             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Cameron kcameron@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kenneth M. Cameron at The New York Botanical
              Garden to continue his laboratory and field studies on the evolution and
              classification of the orchid subfamily Vanilloideae, which includes Vanilla
              planifolia -- the only orchid species out of approximately 25,000 that has
              significant agricultural value.  These are considered an ancient lineage of
              relatively primitive orchids that are found worldwide in distribution.  They
              have always been considered critical to fully understanding the evolution and
              classification of the large orchid family, but have resisted attempts to
              shoehorn them into traditional subfamilies.  Previous molecular research by Dr.
              Cameron has shown these vanilloid orchids to represent a separate, distinct
              subfamily that is the most primitive of all but two genera of orchids. 
              However, the relationships of the species within the subfamily are still
              unclear.  These findings emphasize the evolutionarily pivotal position occupied
              by these plants and the need for further, in-depth systematic
              investigation.
	Specifically, the research will include a molecular component
              that will focus on constructing a solid evolutionary tree for the subfamily
              using DNA sequences from a suite of nuclear, chloroplast, and mitochondrial
              genes.  However, the molecular aspect of the project will not be limited to DNA
              sequencing.  In addition, select genes and their products from within the
              chloroplast genome will be studied in detail to better understand the pattern
              and process of degeneration of the photosynthetic apparatus among the non-green
              taxa that live as parasites on soil fungi.  Already, Dr. Cameron has
              investigated three different classes of photosynthesis genes, and has
              discovered that two of the three (rbcL and psaB, but not atpB) are
              characterized by significant deletions in some of the non-photosynthetic taxa,
              and extremely high rates of mutation in others.  These findings suggest that
              the vanilloid orchids are in the early stages of chloroplast genome
              degradation.  They are, therefore, an ideal group of organisms in which to
              study this biological phenomenon.  Finally, in addition to molecular research,
              new studies on floral morphology and pollination biology in the group will be
              initiated.  Many of the vanilloid taxa are characterized by complex flowers
              with prominent petal ornamentation in the form of mobile scales and bristles. 
              These structures, in particular, are unlike any other in the orchid family. 
              They deserve careful examination in order to understand their form, function,
              and evolutionary derivation.  
The vanilloid orchids have been long recognized
              as an economically valuable and unique group of plants, but several aspects of
              their natural history have been the source of controversy among biologists.  A
              more thorough knowledge of this pivotal group undoubtedly will be valuable to
              our understanding of the evolution and diversity within the second largest
              family of flowering plants on Earth.  Despite the economic importance of
              Vanilla to humankind, there exist few thorough systematic investigations of
              these plants.  Comparative morphological, anatomical, and pollination studies
              of the group are also lacking.  For these reasons, the combined results of
              these morphological and molecular studies should provide a solid phylogeny of
              Vanilloideae for which nomenclatural issues, patterns of biogeography, trends
              in floral morphology, and genome evolution can be examined.  Few of the
              vanilloid orchid species take to cultivation.  As a consequence, many are
              endangered or already extinct.  It is imperative and warranted, therefore, that
              systematic research continues on this fascinating and pivotal group of orchids
              if their unique interactions with fungi and animal pollinators are to be
              understood before they are lost to habit destruction and overcollecting.


