Title       : Bacterial Diversity Patterns along Gradients of Primary Productivity in
               Freshwater Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0108556

Award Number: 0108556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297317             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brendan J. Bohannan bohannan@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              "Bacterial diversity patterns along gradients of primary productivity in
              freshwater ecosystems"

	
	One of the most striking aspects of life is that
              it is distributed unevenly across the Earth.  Some regions (such as lowland
              areas and the tropics) have a high diversity of plant and animal life; others
              (such as mountain tops and the polar regions) appear nearly devoid of life. 
              Differences in available environmental energy are a major cause of such
              patterns.  However, it is unknown whether the diversity of the largest group of
              organisms on Earth (microorganisms) also varies with available energy. 
              Preliminary observations suggest that a relationship may exist between
              bacterial diversity and available environmental energy in aquatic ecosystems. 
              The goal of this project is to verify these preliminary observations.  More
              specifically, bacterial diversity will be estimated in ponds that differ in
              available energy.   Because most bacteria from environmental samples cannot be
              grown in the laboratory, bacterial diversity will be assessed using molecular
              techniques that do not require bacterial growth under laboratory conditions. 
              Bacterial diversity will be estimated by extracting bacterial ribosomal genes
              from pond samples and sequencing these genes.   Bacterial taxonomic diversity
              will be estimated from the sequence diversity of these genes.  The diversity
              within a single bacterial functional group also will be estimated by extracting
              and sequencing amoA genes from pond samples.  The amoA gene is unique to
              bacteria that oxidize ammonia.  The diversity of these bacteria will be
              estimated from the sequence diversity of these genes.  This study will be the
              first comprehensive attempt to measure bacterial diversity along a gradient of
              available energy.  It has the potential to generate fundamental new knowledge
              concerning the distribution of microorganisms and could impact fields as
              diverse as environmental management and the search for novel pharmaceuticals.

