Title       : Phylogenetics of Diploid and Allopolyploid Hibiscus Sect. Furcaria (Malvaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0108231

Award Number: 0108231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Small rsmall@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0108231
Small
	One of the primary foci of the field of plant systematics is to
              understand the genealogical relationships among present day species, and to
              understand the processes that gave rise to those species.  This project is
              focused on a group of species in the genus Hibiscus in the 
plant family
              Malvaceae (the Mallow family).  This group of Hibiscus, taxonomically
              classified as Hibiscus section Furcaria, includes over 100 species that are
              distributed worldwide.  Ten of these species are known to be diploid (having
              the "normal" two sets of chromosomes), while the remainder are polyploid having
              four, six, eight or ten sets of chromosomes.  These polyploids are hypothesized
              to have originated through hybridization between two different species followed
              by chromosome doubling in the offspring.  In this group the polyploid species
              are more numerous than the diploid species, perhaps due to the genetic
              diversity provided by the extra sets of chromosomes.  The goal of this project
              is to first elucidate 
relationships among the diploid species in this group. 
              Subsequently selected polyploid species will also be analyzed - each polyploid
              will contain genes from each of its parents, some of which are likely to be
              diagnostic, which will allow the identification of the hybridizing parents of
              each polyploid species.  Ultimately these data will be used to address the
              classification of the species into taxonomic groups, to study the geographic
              patterns inherent in those relationships, and the evolution of morphological
              characters.  The data to be employed in these analyses include nuclear
              ribosomal genes and chloroplast gene markers, as well as DNA sequences from
              nuclear-encoded genes of the alcohol dehydrogenase gene family.
	Molecular
              biology has provided researchers access to a wealth of genetic data, in
              particular DNA sequences, for analyzing relationships among species.  Plant
              systematists have relied primarily on sequences from two sources: chloroplast
              DNA and nuclear ribosomal DNA, both of which are genetically tractable and easy
              to isolate.  There is a vast resource of DNA sequences that have remained
              relatively untapped, however, in the rest of the plant nuclear genome.  These
              types of sequences have been largely ignored by systematists primarily because
              they are more genetically complex and thus more difficult to isolate and
              characterize.  This additional experimental effort, however, can be outweighed
              by the quantity 
and quality of data available from these sequences.  Previous
              work by Dr. Randall Small on cotton and related species (genus Gossypium, also
              in the Mallow family) has shown that these types of sequences can be reliably
              isolated and can be exceptionally useful for systematic studies.  These studies
              were expedited by the wealth of knowledge of cotton genetics because of its
              importance as a crop plant.  To facilitate the transfer of such knowledge from
              well-known groups like Gossypium to less well characterized wild species groups
              (such as Hibiscus section Furcaria) the current project will use an
              understanding 
of the alcohol dehydrogenase gene family developed in Gossypium
              to address species relationships Hibiscus section Furcaria.  Thus, this project
              provides a direct test of the transferability of information gleaned from a
              genetically well characterized group (Gossypium) to a less well understood
              group (Hibiscus section Furcaria).


