Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Analysis of Risk Management in the
               Korean Venture Capital Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0108938

Award Number: 0108938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11500              (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Marcus marcus@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0108938
Marcus  / Chung
	This dissertation research project by a cultural
              anthropology student examines how recent attempts in South Korea to establish
              and promote the growth of venture capital industry have been shaped by salient
              Korean cultural institutions. The project will study risk management in the
              venture capital industry, defined as firms that fund technology-intensive
              enterprises characterized by high risk with the potential for high return, as
              affected by traditional Korean values of the primacy of social relations over
              finance; the quality of human relations; and the quality of emotional
              reactions. Prior to the establishment of a venture capital industry in South
              Korea, entrepreneurs usually relied solely on their own savings, often from
              informal credit associations, gifts and loans from family and friends, and
              sometimes credit from lending institutions, to finance their business projects.
               Many of the strategies used to understand and minimize the risk of capital
              loss involved the cultivation of culturally specific social bonds.  Using a
              variety of qualitative methods, this project will describe and assess the
              degree to which these culturally informed social practices inform venture
              capital investment in four firms: a foreign venture capital company; a domestic
              venture capital company; a start-up communication company seeking funding; and
              a more traditional rotating credit association. Hypotheses relating the
              specifically "Korean" nature of transactions to the level of foreign
              involvement in the relationship will be tested. The new knowledge created by
              this project will help locate the intersection between cultural and
              capitalistic frameworks in this domain of business.  By understanding Korean
              influences on venture capital investment, we will further our understanding of
              the influence of US culture on similar business.  In addition, the research
              advances our knowledge of this important region of the world, and contributes
              to the training of a young social scientist. 

