Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Friction Stir Welding of Superplastic Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0108894

Award Number: 0108894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed S. Lyons lyons@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony P. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0108894
Lyons

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between Dr. Jed Lyons and Dr. Anthony Reynolds, both in the Department of
              Mechanical Engineering at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, South
              Carolina, and Dr. Hanadi Salem, Department of Mechanical Engineering, the
              American University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to develop manufacturing
              technologies for structural metals for the transportation industry. 
              Specifically, research will be conducted to develop a fundamental understanding
              of the effects of friction stir welding (FSW) on the superplastic forming (SPF)
              behavior and ambient temperature properties of Al-Cu-Li sheets. FSW is a new
              solid-state welding process.  Its advantages relative to traditional fusion
              welding techniques are primarily attributable to the fact that no melting is
              required.  SPF alloys are good candidates for FSW due to the need to maintain a
              dynamically recrystallized fine grain microstructure.  Preliminary
              collaborative work by the PIs indicates that SPF behavior can be retained in
              superplastic Weldalite 049 and 2095 aluminum alloys after FSW.  An
              understanding of the role of FSW process variables on the constituent
              properties and microstructure through the weld nugget and adjacent
              thermo-mechanically affected zones (TMAZ) is required in order to make the
              process commercially viable.  Research techniques and instruments to be
              employed include an instrumented friction stir welding machine,
              thermo-mechanical testing facilities for measuring tensile properties and SPF
              behavior, computer vision technology including digital image correlation and
              microstructural characterization with scanning electron microscope (SEM),
              transmission electron microscope (TEM) and optical microscopy and x-ray
              spectroscopy analysis. 

Scope: The project supports collaboration between
              two teams of investigators to carry out an important research project. The US
              team will be responsible for determining and investigating the FSW process
              conditions and for making the welds.  They will test the FSW process at various
              conditions of weld and with various weldalite alloys with variable copper and
              lithium contents and different thickness.  Dr. Salem will, with the assistance
              of a US graduate student, run the SPF tests and perform TEM investigations. 
              Dr. Salem will also direct one of her graduate students at AUC in completing
              the optical and SEM examinations for the same alloys. Using the resources at
              both the University of South Carolina and the American University in Cairo,
              this project contributes to the development of combined FSW/SPF processes that
              enable the net-shape fabrication of complex multi-sheet structural components
              from custom blanks.  The project will include two US scientists and one US
              graduate student who will gain experience in international cooperative
              research.  The proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative
              research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under
              the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
              engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.

