Title       : Quantifying the Role of Pollinator Mediated Selection in the Evolution of
               Pollination Syndromes in Silene (Caryophyllaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0108285

Award Number: 0108285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Fenster cf25@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michele R. Dudash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will quantify whether flower traits such as shape, color, scent,
              floral 
display, and nectar rewards reflects an adaptive response by plants to
              specific animals pollinators. Three Silene species (carnation family) will be
              investigated that differ in flower traits and a priori appear to be adapted to
              different types of animal pollinators, including bees, moths and hummingbirds.
              Through observations and manipulations we will determine how important
              different pollinators are to the reproductive success of each species and
              whether a particular group of pollinators actually selects for the present
              suite of floral traits found in each of the three species.

The goal of the
              project is to understand the role of pollinators in promoting floral diversity
              in the plant kingdom. For example, flowers visited by hummingbirds are
              generally red, scentless and flower during the day, while moth pollinated
              flowers are often white, richly fragrant and open at night. Thus we hope to
              quantify whether hummingbirds and moths favor plants that have greater
              expression of traits associated with either hummingbird or moth pollination and
              whether this leads to greater reproductive success of the plants. Whether we
              find that a species is successfully pollinated by many types of animals or only
              by specific pollinators will have conservation implications. In the former
              scenario, the loss of animals may decrease plant reproductive success. However,
              in the later case, the loss of specific pollinators my result in the loss of a
              plant species.

