Title       : Faces of the Nunamiut: Tourist Art and Traditional Knowledge in Northern Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0108816

Award Number: 0108816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anna M. Kerttula                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret B. Blackman mblackma@brockport.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brockport
	      
	      Brockport, NY  14420    716/395-2211

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses cultural and economic aspects of the making of
              distinctive caribou skin masks by the Nunamiut Eskimo of Anaktuvik Pass,
              Alaska.  Devised in the 1950's for the tourist trade and remaining little
              changed to the present, these masks and the motives underlying their making
              present a unique research opportunity.  The masks have cultural significance
              well beyond their souvenir status.  Mask-making has been, and continues to be,
              essential to the local economy.  The masks have become a prominent feature of
              the Alaskan tourist art market and constitute a village "signature" recognized
              throughout and beyond Alaska.  Production of these masks draws upon traditional
              knowledge of the land and animals of the central Brooks Range in Alaska, a
              knowledge that is slowly being lost.  Finally, the history and development of
              mask making in Anaktuvuk Pass is synonymous with recent cultural change among
              the Nunamiut.  The project will address these issues through a comprehensive
              study of masks and mask-making in Anaktuvuk Pass.  This study will: 1) document
              the origin and development of mask-making; 2) document, for comparative
              purposes, selected museum collections of masks; 3) obtain, in narrative form,
              perspectives of current mask-makers on their individual work and on mask-making
              in general; 4) document photographically the processes and products associated
              with mask-making; 5) detail the economic aspects, locally and within the larger
              Alaskan tourist market, of mask-making; and, 6) investigate relationships among
              mask-making, cultural identity and traditional knowledge of Arctic fauna, with
              emphases on the fur-bearers that provide raw materials for the masks.  This
              project presents an unusual opportunity to investigate the development of a
              significant tradition while the individuals tied to its origins are still
              alive.  It will advance our understanding of, and provide a case study in,
              economic anthropology, ethnography of art, economic development, and cultural
              change.  Results will be presented in a publisheable book-length manuscript to
              be submitted to the University of Washington Press.
