Title       : Organoboron Derivatives of Group 4 Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0108969

Award Number: 0108969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Ashe ajashe@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Arthur J. Ashe, III, Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
              Chemistry Division for the study of heteroaromatic compounds involving group 13
              and 15 elements, their use as ligands to form zirconium complexes, and the
              development of these complexes as olefin polymerization catalysts. Previous
              research has demonstrated that boratabenzene zirconium complexes can serve as
              homogeneous catalysts for the polymerization of olefins. Building on this
              result and by analogy to ansametallocenes that are known to be active
              catalysts, a series of metal complexes containing heteroaromatic ligands will
              be designed with the goal of obtaining highly active and stereospecific olefin
              polymerization catalysts. Specifically, new oxaborolides, thiaborolides and
              azaborolides will be synthesized. These compounds along with  boratabenzenes, 
              which are bridged through boron or carbon-(2), will be used as ligands to form
              Group 4 metal complexes, which will be evaluated as polymerization catalysts.
              Additionally, the conversion of aminoboranediyl bridged zirconocenes to highly
              active and stereoselective Ziegler-Natta catalysts will be
              studied.

Transition metal complexes promote very selective catalytic and
              stoichiometric transformations of organic compounds. Much of the unique
              reactivity at the metal center is a reflection of the density of electrons
              surrounding the metal and this electron density can be controlled by adjusting
              the groups that are attached to the metal. A very common 'group' contains a
              ring of carbon-hydrogen units in what is called an 'aromatic' arrangement. In
              this project a series of metal complexes will be prepared in which an
              'aromatic' group composed of carbon-hydrogen and boron species is attached to a
              metal. This will permit the electron density about the metal to be carefully
              adjusted in order to promote specific chemical and catalytic behavior and will
              set the ground work both to understand existing processes and to rationally
              design new catalysts.

