Title       : Molecular and Morphological Systematics of the Spider Infraorder Mygalomorphae
               (Araneae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0108575

Award Number: 0108575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshal C. Hedin mhedin@sciences.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason E. Bond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The spider infraorder Mygalomorphae includes tarantula, baboon,
              trapdoor, purse web, and funnel web spiders.  While not as diverse as its
              sister lineage the Aranemorphae ("true" spiders, for example the orb weavers),
              mygalomorphs are rich in species (over 2,500 species in 280 genera placed in 15
              families) and use silks to build an amazing diversity of nests.  These silk
              constructs, generally regarded as primitive, include trapdoors, collars,
              turrets, tubes, funnels, sheets, and space filling webs.  Although these
              spiders show many interesting and unstudied patterns of morphology and show
              classic biogeographical patterns (e.g., members of the same family occurring in
              New Zealand, Madagascar, South Africa, and southern South America), much of the
              phylogeny of this group remains unresolved.   Furthermore, all mygalomorph
              phylogenetic studies to date have relied solely on morphological characters,
              thus lacking independent
corroboration.  This study examines mygalomorph
              phylogeny using an integrated set of both morphological and molecular
              characters.   Specimens collected in North, South, and Central America,
              Southern Africa, Asia, and Western Australia will be used in conjunction with
              specimens from major museum collections, for molecular, morphological, and
              natural history studies.  Digitized images of all morphological characters
              scored and detailed natural history notes will be made available on the World
              Wide Web as part of a myglomorph internet database.  

The resulting
              phylogeny will support studies of  the origin and diversification of silk use
              and spinning structures, the relationship between silk use, habits and
              convergent evolution, and the influence of miniaturization on morphological
              change.  This is the first analysis of molecular sequence data for this
              important taxon.  And two graduate students will be trained in spider
              systematics, an area with inadequate existing expertise.

