Title       : Dissertation Research: Continuity and Change at Cerro la Cruz: A Study of
               Architecture on the North Coast of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0108986

Award Number: 0108986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark Erickson cerickso@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Clark Erickson, Ms. Melissa Vogel will collect and
              analyze data for her doctoral dissertation.  She will conduct archaeological
              excavations and continue mapping at the site of Cerro la Cruz on the north
              coast of Peru.  Ms. Vogel's research will examine the relationship between
              architecture and sociopolitical change, through a diachronic analysis of the
              expansion and modification of Cerro La Cruz, a hillside walled settlement on
              the north coast of Peru.  Supplementary data such as ceramics will provide
              indicators of cultural affiliation, while botanical remains and soil samples
              will be analyzed for indications of dietary or environmental changes. These
              various lines of evidence will be combined to reconstruct the events which
              occurred at Cerro La Cruz.  For the archaeology of the Andes, this project will
              provide a method for testing and revising current models of sociopolitical
              organization during the late Middle Horizon (AD600-1000), a time of great
              social and political change in the region.

These periods of cultural
              transition are important for understanding the development of human societies. 
              From a historic or prehistoric perspective, archaeology can explore the ways in
              which people have adapted to fluctuating social and political conditions. The
              built environment is an essential focus of anthropological research, especially
              for understanding architecture and the use of space as it reflects and shapes
              social life. Changes in architectural form and style are often taken as indices
              of societal change.  Some styles of household architecture have been shown
              ethnographically to reference ethnicity or other aspects of community identity,
              while the enlargement of public buildings or temples may mark the accession of
              a new ruler.  In this project, the relationship between architectural change
              and social life can be investigated at one site, during a period that is
              thought to involve widespread social and political upheaval. Rather than the
              traditional "top-down" approach of examining political relations from the
              perspective of those in power, this study will emphasize the perspective of
              local people in their interactions with an outside political entity.  A
              thorough spatial analysis of the expansion and modification of Cerro La Cruz as
              a possible manifestation of sociopolitical change will provide a critical test
              of earlier models of Andean political organization.  From the perspective of
              the social sciences, the results of this case study will contribute to our
              understanding of the catalysts for culture change and how local people adapt
              during periods of transition.  Ms. Vogel's research will increase our knowledge
              of a poorly understood period in Peruvian prehistory and will also contribute
              to the training of a promising young scientist.


