Title       : Phylogeny, Andean Biogeography, and Multivariate Evolution in Phyllotine Rodents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0108422

Award Number: 0108422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott J. Steppan steppan@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	This project consists of two integrated parts: a detailed
              reconstruction of the evolutionary history of the populations that make up
              several closely related species of leaf-eared mice (Phyllotis), and a test of
              whether those species share the same inherent tendencies for the evolution of
              morphology. I will sequence at least 5 genes, some inherited from just the
              mothers, some from just the fathers, and some inherited from both, for over 200
              mice collected from more than 100 localities throughout the Andes and nearby
              areas where Phyllotis lives. Those gene sequences will be used to estimate the
              evolutionary genealogy, or phylogeny, for those populations. This phylogeny
              will show the role that the Andes or other physical features have played in
              promoting speciation, estimate rates of gene flow across the species ranges,
              and test models of speciation. At the same time, we will establish controlled
              breeding colonies for 4 of the species. These breeding programs are needed to
              calculate the heritability of morphological traits and how much those traits
              are correlated with each other due to genetic control and developmental
              processes. These genetic parameters, summarized by the genetic
              variance-covariance matrix, G, will be compared among the species to determine
              if they remain constant over evolutionary time-scales. If the environmental
              effects on those G matrices is small or consistent, then the morphological data
              (32 measurements of the skull) will be combined with already collected
              measurements from more than 30 populations, and analyzed using the phylogeny
              discussed above, for a detailed exploration of the evolution of those inherent
              tendencies that are described by the G matrix.
	This study will address
              several critical questions in evolutionary biology. Most importantly, it has
              been suggested that microevolution (population and quantitative genetics) is
              decoupled from macroevolution (the long term changes we see among species).
              Perhaps the best method to unify these two fields is through quantitative
              genetics, but to do so requires that the G matrix evolves in a predictable
              manner. This will be the most comprehensive and phylogenetically based study to
              test that question. Additionally, this study will be the first to explore the
              biogeographic history of the southern Andes and southern South America in a
              comprehensive manner. Because geographic populations of Phyllotis are very
              distinct from each other genetically, their phylogenetic history can be
              estimated in great detail. That will allow robust tests of several 
models of
              how new species originate. By integrating a detailed phylogeny with the
              comparative quantitative genetics, we will also be able to test the interplay
              of geography, population history, and quantitative genetics to produce
              morphological evolution and diversification of species. Few if any studies have
              combined all these types of data to address these questions.



