Title       : Signal Evolution and the Origins of Biodiversity in African Mormyridae Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0108372

Award Number: 0108372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Hopkins cdh8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              During a pilot project funded by the NSF International Program, researchers at
              Cornell University, working in Gabon in Central West Africa, have discovered a
              new species flock of weakly electric fishes in the genus Brienomyrus of the
              family Mormyridae.  So far they have discovered approximately 34 new species. 
              All of these new fishes were uncovered during two field trips to the river
              basins of Gabon, in West Africa's equatorial rainforests.  They are often
              morphologically cryptic, so they cannot be easily distinguished.  What makes it
              possible to recognize different forms is their distinctive electric organ
              discharges (EODs) that facilitate identification in the field.  EODs are
              essential for species recognition and reproductive isolation.  There are three
              goals for the research program.  First, the researchers hope to continue the
              successful fieldwork in Africa with new studies in Gabon, Ivory Coast, and the
              Congo in order to more extensively document the biodiversity of this species
              flock.  They will collect specimens, make biogeographic distribution maps, make
              EOD recordings, and collect tissue samples for DNA analysis. Second, they will
              study the nature of sensory processing of the species-specific EOD waveforms of
              these fishes by making electrophysiological recordings from electroreceptors,
              when the receptors are presented with naturalistic electric discharges. 
              Finally, they will do behavioral studies using the technique of playback to
              explore the stimulus preferences of females to EODs of electric fishes from
              conspecific and heterospecific individuals.

Proposed Research.  The
              researchers will use DNA sequences derived from multiple loci including both
              mitochondrial and nuclear genes to produce a species-level phylogeny for the
              newly discovered Gabon clade of Brienomyrus.  They propose using multi-locus
              DNA fingerprinting techniques with amplified fragment length polymorphisms
              (AFLP) to provide hundreds of binary allelic characters for phylogenetic
              analysis.  The species-level phylogenies will be used to reconstruct the
              evolution of the electric organs within these clades.  A centerpiece of the
              study of the evolution of this species flock is a good molecular understanding
              of the evolutionary relationships of existing forms.  From this, patterns in
              the evolution of signal diversity can be explored.  In addition to the
              species-level phylogenies the field data will provide the first detailed
              information on geographical distribution patterns of these electric fishes.
              Integration of biogeography with phylogeny and electrical recordings will
              permit a detailed analysis of reproductive character displacement in EODs and
              geographic variation in EOD waveforms within species.  A complete taxonomic
              revision of the genus Brienomyrus will be done to recognize the 34 putatively
              new taxa in a group that currently lists only 11.   Recognizing the importance
              of international cooperation, the Cornell researchers will initiate
              collaboration with Gabonese fish researchers.  Because of the central
              importance of electric signals in the systematic biology of mormyrids, the
              researchers will also create a web-site database of electric organ discharges
              that researchers can access to obtain field recordings of EODs from voucher
              specimens.   The database will be used to archive and catalogue thousands of
              similar EODs collected during more than 20 years of field work in Africa, and
              it will set a national standard for recording signals tied to a systematic
              collection.

Impact.  These studies should have broad interest to researchers
              working in evolutionary and systematic biology.  To discover a new species
              flock has intrinsic interest, especially when it concerns a well-known
              vertebrate group, but this particular group has potential interest to
              neurobiologists interested in comparative sensory and motor systems biology. 
              The studies of behavior, neurobiology, systematics, and evolution of the
              Gabon-clade mormyrids will give us a better understanding of the mechanisms of
              evolution of new species.  

