Title       : Evolution of Phoresy and Feeding Associations in the Mite Order Parasitiformes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0108359

Award Number: 0108359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes S. Klompen klompen.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


	The origin of parasitism is one of the enduring questions in
              biology.  Because parasitism has arisen multiple times among mites, they are an
              excellent taxon in which to study this phenomenon   Mites show also many other
              types of associations, allowing hypotheses on transitions among diverse types
              of associations.  Phoresy is of particular interest, as it is a common
              phenomenon in mites.  In this type of association one organism (a mite) uses
              another organism (insect or vertebrate) to move from one place to another.  It
              does not involve feeding on the host, or development during the period of
              transport.  Various authors have proposed that phoresy might be a precursor to
              feeding associations such as parasitism, and the goal of this project is to
              test that idea.  The test group is the mite order Parasitiformes, the smaller
              of the two mite orders, currently including about 77 families. Testing the
              phoresy to parasitism hypothesis can be done by determining whether lineages
              that are parasitic nest within lineages that are phoretic, a pattern predicted
              under this hypothesis.  This approach requires good knowledge of historical
              relationships, but unfortunately, knowledge of such relationships in this group
              is incomplete.  A large part of the project is therefore devoted to deriving
              well supported hypotheses of relationships within Parasitiformes.  This will be
              done using a combination of morphological and molecular data.  Molecular data
              consist of sequence data for parts of the 18S and 28S nuclear ribosomal RNA
              genes, and the nuclear protein coding gene Elongation Factor 1-alpha.

This
              group is of general biological interest in part because it includes  ticks of
              medical importance and the economically important bee parasite Varroa.  Both
              parasitism and phoresy are common within Parasitiformes making it a good
              candidate for this project.   By providing rigorous hypotheses of relationships
              among Parasitiformes, this research will improve our understanding of numerous
              ecologically, medically, and economically important mites and make this  group
              of mites available as a model system for broad questions in evolutionary
              biology.


