Title       : Phylogeny and Biogeography of the Gondwanan Mistletoe Family Loranthaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0108229

Award Number: 0108229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Nickrent nickrent@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0108229
Daniel L. Nickrent

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Daniel Nickrent
              at Southern Illinois University Carbondale that will fund molecular
              phylogenetic and biogeographical (= phylogeographical) research on a group of
              parasitic plants called mistletoes.  Although related to the Christmas
              mistletoes (family Viscaceae), this family (Loranthaceae) differs in several
              ways including flower morphology, pollination mechanisms, and geographic
              distributions.  Whereas Viscaceae are thought to have originated on the
              northern Laurasian landmass, Loranthaceae evolved on the southern
              supercontinent called Gondwanaland. The origins of a number of plant families
              can be traced to Gondwanaland, and one (Nothofagaceae - the southern beeches),
              has been considered a model for examining the biogeographical history of the
              southern landmasses. Surprisingly, despite knowledge of its morphology, fossil
              history and phylogeny, the evolutionary origin of Nothofagus remains
              controversial. The research proposed here will use Loranthaceae as another
              model group that can be used to investigate similar biogeographical questions.
              Loranthaceae provide several advantages over other plants in that they have
              limited ability for long-distance dispersal (a factor that can complicate such
              biogeographic analyses) owing to their parasitic habit and host requirements .
              Endemic and relictual loranth genera occur on all the continents that were
              formerly part of Gondwanaland, thus offering many opportunities to conduct
              modern phylogeographical analyses.

The proposed study has four primary
              objectives: 1) to use nuclear and chloroplast gene sequences to generate a
              molecular phylogeny of Loranthaceae; 2) to use the above molecular phylogenetic
              results to test existing biogeographical hypotheses for the family based upon
              chromosome number; 3) to use the resulting phylogeny to examine evolutionary
              patterns in morphological features such as the inflorescence, and 4) to provide
              a revised classification of the family. This work will attempt to be
              comprehensive in scope, thus sampling all or nearly all of the existing 73
              genera in the family. These objectives will be achieved by building
              phylogenetic trees from DNA sequence data. These trees will then be transformed
              into taxon distribution (area) cladograms that can then be analyzed using a
              variety of procedures based upon cladistic principles.

This work is
              significant because Loranthaceae represent the largest family in the sandalwood
              order, a family for which no modern classification or phylogeny exists. These
              mistletoes are a major component of tropical and subtropical ecosystems in the
              southern hemisphere and have been the focus of research from diverse fields
              such as pollination biology, cytology, coevolution with birds, and
              biogeography. For these reasons, a phylogeny of the family will prove extremely
              valuable to others wishing to place their data in the proper evolutionary
              context. For example, interpretation of inflorescence morphology has
              traditionally proven extremely difficult in many plant groups. Loranthaceae
              show a wide range of inflorescence types and a well-resolved molecular
              phylogeny will allow one to determine, for example, whether simple
              inflorescences arose via reduction from more complex ones or whether evolution
              proceeded with the opposite polarity. This research will be a component of the
              education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in field,
              laboratory, and analytical methodologies. Many of the loranth genera are
              susceptible to extinction owing to human-caused habitat destruction or other
              unknown factors. Thus the proposed collection of loranth DNA represents a
              unique and valuable resource not only for phylogeographic studies but also from
              the perspective of gene-banking. This project helps meet the challenges of the
              biodiversity crisis, as summarized by the Systematics Agenda 2000, by
              generating a predictive classification system on Loranthaceae, a parasitic
              plant group that can serve as indicators of ecosystem integrity and function.
