Title       : RUI: Evolution of the Endemic Lizard Fauna of New Caledonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0108108

Award Number: 0108108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron M. Bauer aaron.bauer@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd Jackman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              New Caledonia is an ancient island in the South Pacific that supports a
highly
              endemic terrestrial biota. Among vertebrates, lizards are particularly diverse
              (~ 20 genera). The evolutionary history of the endemic New Caledonian lizards
              will be reconstructed in order to evaluate how events over the last 80 million
              years have interacted to yield high biodiversity in a small insular setting.
              Drs. Bauer and Jackman at Villanova University will reconstruct phylogenies for
              all New Caledonian lizards based on a combined data set of morphological and
              molecular characters (DNA sequences). Phylogenies will be used to erect
              hypotheses about the geographic distributions of the organisms through time. A
              molecular clock will be invoked to distinguish between older lineage splits
              associated with the fragmentation of New Caledonia from Australia in the Late
              Cretaceous and qualitatively later divisions indicative of over-water
              dispersal. The historical biogeography of New Caledonia will be examined by
              combining phylogenetic information from reptiles with that from other organisms
              showing similar patterns of diversification within the island. Regions of
              congruent distribution of these taxa will be recognized as areas of endemism
              that will be analyzed using several current analytical biogeographic
              approaches.
	This research will provide a robust phylogenetic background for
              subsequent studies of the evolutionary morphology and ecology of the
              New
Caledonian lizards and will serve as the foundation for more detailed and
              sophisticated biogeographic studies of this biodiversity hotspot. The DNA
              sequence data collected will be made available for the use of other
              researchers, and museum material will be deposited in collections in the United
              States, Australia, and France for future studies. The project will promote
              international research cooperation (United States, Australia and New Caledonia
              [a French territory]) and will foster the professional development of
              undergraduates and a postdoctoral associate, as well as strengthen the research
              environment at a primarily undergraduate institution.


