Title       : Function and Regulation of the Bradyrhizobium Japonicum nolA Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0108955

Award Number: 0108955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Stacey staceyg@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recent research has identified several large families of prokaryotic global
              regulators.  Results from the PI's laboratory have shown that members of the
              LysR, two-component, and MerR families of transcriptional regulatory proteins
              regulate Bradyrhizobium japonicum nod gene expression.  Regulation of nod gene
              expression in B. japonicum may represent an interesting and useful model system
              in which to explore the interactions between these global regulatory systems. 
              The focus of this project is the MerR orthologue, NolA.  Recent results show
              that this protein is a central player in the repression of nod gene expression
              in response to a variety of novel signal molecules.  NolA mediates its
              repressive effects by induction of NodD2, which represses nod gene expression. 
              Results from the PI's laboratory indicate that NolA expression is responsive to
              the level of intracellular, tetrameric Nod signal produced in B. japonicum. 
              Therefore, NolA is a component of a unique feedback, regulatory loop that
              controls nod gene expression.   Nol1A expression is induced by a cell density
              factor (CDF, a glycosylated flavonoid) and a plant-produced signal that is
              destroyed by chitinase treatment.  The objectives of this research project are
              to 1. confirm the chemical structure of the CDF, explore its activity, and
              survey other bacteria for the presence of such a novel, quorum sensing
              molecule; 2. identify other genes involved in NolA action using a combination
              of genomic and mutagenic approaches and 3. isolate and chemically characterize
              the chitin-like plant inducer of nolA expression.  These studies should clarify
              the role of NolA in nod gene expression.  The results obtained, when added to
              other on-going research, should give a more complete picture of nod gene
              expression in B. japonicum and may serve as a paradigm for other complex
              regulatory systems where global regulatory networks impinge on the expression
              of a single operon.  The B. japonicum-soybean symbiosis is an important model
              system for exploring the cell signaling pathways between host and symbiont. 
              The ultimate goal of this work is a clearer understanding of the integration of
              regulatory mechanisms involved in the global regulation of cellular metabolism.
              
