Title       : The Relationship Between Thymic Nurse Cells and Macrophages During MHC
               Restriction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0108778

Award Number: 0108778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry C. Guyden jerry@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary:

Thymic nurse cells (TNCs) are epithelial cells with the
              ability to internalize immature thymocytes into specialized intra-cytoplasmic
              vacuoles.  The function of this interaction during thymocyte development is the
              focus of this proposal.  TNCs have been shown a) to bind and internalize
              immature abTCRlowCD69- double positive thymocytes, b) to rescue a subset of the
              internalized population from apoptosis, and c) to allow a subset of the rescued
              population to mature to the abTCRhiCD69+ stage of development.
These data
              suggest that TNCs play a pivotal role in determining the fate of developing
              thymocytes.  To specific aims of this project are:

(1)  To determine the
              relationship between macrophages and TNCs during MHC restriction, we will
              monitor the intra-thymic and intra-TNC location of CFDA-stained macrophages
              (after homing to the thymus from the peritoneum) during the process of MHC
              restriction.  We will determine the temporal relationship of macrophages with
              intra-TNC thymocytes using Nomarski and fluorescence microscopy.  These studies
              are important because the process of MHC restriction determines the profile of
              T cells that function within the mammalian immune system.  This unusual
              arrangement of the cells is like no other developmental system reported to
              date.  Future studies of this unique
cellular complex should yield
              unprecedented insights into T cell development.

(2)  To determine the role
              of the TNC/macrophage interaction during MHC restriction, we will use H-Y
              transgenic mice to establish a direct correlation between TNCs and the process
              of MHC restriction.  Each developing thymocyte in these transgenic animals
              produces a cell surface abTCR that recognizes the male specific H-Y antigen. 
              The vast majority of male transgenic thymocytes are deleted through negative
              selection while an
abnormally high percentage of positive selection is
              detected in female transgenic animals.  TNCs are directly involved in these
              processes.  Female H-Y transgenic mice have large TNCs that contain 5 times as
              many cytoplasmic thymocytes.  There are 40 times as many TNCs in female versus
              male H-Y transgenics.  This correlates well with the increased percentage of
              positive selection found in female animals.  Further, the male transgenic
              animals have very few TNCs.  The male TNCs are small and almost half of their
              cytoplasmic thymocytes are apoptotic, which would result from the high level of
              negative selection reported to occur in the H-Y transgenic mouse.  These data
              imply a direct involvement of TNCs in the process of MHC restriction. Using the
              CDFA-staining technique, macrophages will be obtained from male H-Y transgenics
              (which express the HY antigen that drives negative selection) and delivered
              into female H-Y transgenic mice.  Changes in TNC complex numbers and sizes will
              be determined by immunofluorescence staining of thymic sections as well as by
              enzymatic dissociation of the thymus and microscopic analysis.  Profile changes
              of developing thymocytes
in injected animals will be determined using FACS
              analyses.




