Title       : Nonequilibrium Pattern Formation In Erosion Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0108494

Award Number: 0108494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert-Laszlo Barabasi alb@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0108494
Barabasi
Ion-beam sputtering, the removal of material from the surface
              of solids through the impact of energetic particles, is a widely used thin film
              processing technique.  Due to its relevance to a number of experimental
              techniques, measuring tools, cleaning and patterning methods, the morphological
              features of surfaces eroded by ion bombardment have been much investigated of
              late.  On the other hand, ion-beam sputtering is attracting increased interest
              as a potential candidate for nanoscale surface patterning.  Erosion with
              oblique ion beams has been known to create regular self-organization ripples,
              potential templates for quantum wires.  But the interest in this technique has
              boomed recently following the recent demonstration that normal sputtering can
              lead to regular nanoscale islands or quantum dots.  The observed high density
              islands, whose size can be tuned with the ion energy, display a high degree of
              spatial ordering and form a regular hexagonal lattice.  These results signal
              the emergence of a novel and powerful technique for surface patterning with a
              number of desirable features that include material independence, tunable
              feature size, as well as suitability for inexpensive mass fabrication.  To turn
              these advances into a viable patterning technology, we need to develop a better
              understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the surface morphology. 
              Therefore, the research goal of this grant is to obtain a coherent
              understanding of the primary physical factors contributing to the morphology of
              surfaces eroded by ion bombardment.  

The research will use a combination of
              numerical and analytical tools to model the morphological evolution during ion
              bombardment.  Since Bradley and Harper have calculated the ripple wavelength in
              agreement with experiments, it is generally accepted that continuum theories
              offer a surprisingly useful tool in addressing the surface morphology in ion
              sputtering.  The PI has shown that nonlinear phenomena play a crucial role in
              determining the long-time features of the surface morphology, being able to
              account for ripple stabilization and quantum dot formation.  These tools will
              be expanded to obtain better agreement with experiments, aiming to reproduce
              not only the large scale features, but also the island shapes and spatial
              ordering.  In parallel, discrete microscopic models will be developed to
              understand the effect of various microscopic processes (surface diffusion, atom
              detachment, reattachment, etc) on the surface morphology.  The simultaneous use
              of the continuum and microscopic approaches is expected to play a crucial role
              in uncovering the generic features of both pattern formation and roughening. 
              These tools will be used to investigate several problems of immediate
              experimental and technological interest.  

First, preliminary theoretical
              work indicates that the size dispersion, as well as its dependence of the
              sputtered quantum dots, depends on erosion time, and exists an optimal time at
              which the dispersion is minimal.  This time dependence of the dispersion on the
              erosion parameters (such as ion energy, ion cascade parameters and temperature)
              will be investigated, aiming to determine the optimal condition for island
              formation.  Second, recent experiments have demonstrated that regular islands
              appear if the surface is rotated.  Investigations will be made into the
              conditions under which the size dispersion benefits from sample rotation. 
              Third, the sputtering yield, a key quantity for various surface
              characterization methods, is greatly affected by the surface morphology. 
              Methods will be developed to predict the dynamic coupling between the
              morphology and the yield.  This research is expected to lead to a comprehensive
              comparison between the continuum theory, modeling results and experiments, and
              could offer critical theoretical guidance to turn ion sputtering into a mature
              patterning technology.  
%%%
Ion-beam sputtering, the removal of material
              from the surface of solids through the impact of energetic particles, is a
              widely used thin film processing technique.  Due to its relevance to a number
              of experimental techniques, measuring tools, cleaning and patterning methods,
              the morphological features of surfaces eroded by ion bombardment have been much
              investigated of late.  On the other hand, ion-beam sputtering is attracting
              increased interest as a potential candidate for nanoscale surface patterning. 
              Erosion with oblique ion beams has been known to create regular
              self-organization ripples, potential templates for quantum wires.  But the
              interest in this technique has boomed recently following the recent
              demonstration that normal sputtering can lead to regular nanoscale islands or
              quantum dots.  The observed high density islands, whose size can be tuned with
              the ion energy, display a high degree of spatial ordering and form a regular
              hexagonal lattice.  These results signal the emergence of a novel and powerful
              technique for surface patterning with a number of desirable features that
              include material independence, tunable feature size, as well as suitability for
              inexpensive mass fabrication.  To turn these advances into a viable patterning
              technology, we need to develop a better understanding of the fundamental
              processes that affect the surface morphology.  Therefore, the research goal of
              this grant is to obtain a coherent understanding of the primary physical
              factors contributing to the morphology of surfaces eroded by ion bombardment. 
              
***

