Title       : Study of Acceleration and Transport of Energetic Ions in the Heliosphere via
               Energetic Neutral Atoms (ENA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0108160

Award Number: 0108160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ke Chiang Hsieh hsieh@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jozsef Kota  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will perform a study of acceleration and transport of
              energetic ions in the heliosphere via energetic neutral atoms (ENA) by
              comparing observation with simulation. The study encompasses the heliosphere
              and its immediate interstellar environment. The main effort is to continue
              development of simulations of the production of ENA by the dominant ion
              populations of the anomalous cosmic rays (ACR) at and beyond the termination
              shock of the solar wind and of the corotating interactions regions (CIR) in the
              inner heliosphere. Previously, the investigators have shown that the use of
              energetic neutral atoms (ENA) in the study of space plasma can provide the
              needed global view of the distribution of energetic charged particles in the
              entire heliosphere, especially in regions not easily accessible to space
              missions. The approach complements all existing in situ investigations.
              Simulating the production of ENA requires modeling the parent ion population.
              Modeling of the ion populations needs understanding of ion acceleration and
              transport as well as the ambient magnetic-field configuration. Comparing
              simulated distribution of ENA with the observed, then, provides a
              self-consistent global view of ion acceleration and transport. The main goals
              of the research are more realistic ACR and CIR simulations, simulation of
              production of ENA by other inner heliospheric ion populations, and simulation
              of production of energetic helium atoms in ACR, CIR and other populations.
              Since the University of Arizona is a student-centered research university, the
              project will involve the participation of one undergraduate and one graduate
              student.
