Title       : Comparative Phylogeography of Lowland New Guinea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0108247

Award Number: 0108247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Dumbacher jdumbacher@nzp.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew L. Mack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Fleischer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              New Guinea's lowland tropical forests are vast and are largely connected. 
              Animal species living in lowland forests are often common and continuously
              distributed throughout these lowlands (in essentially a ring around the central
              mountain ranges of New Guinea).  However, lowland forest species often show
              tremendous amounts of genetic or phenotypic variation.  We hypothesize that
              this variation is due largely to geographic or geologic history, and we propose
              several testable hypotheses that might account for this variation (including
              specific historical events or dispersal barriers, habitat differences, and
              multiple competing evolutionary processes). We will use analyses of
              mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequence variation from six common, widespread
              focal bird species to determine which evolutionary models best explain the
              pattern and sources of variation in New Guinea's lowland forests.

This study
              will be the first to employ modern genetic data and analyses to the
              phylogeography of lowland New Guinea.  We expect these data to identify lowland
              biogeographic provinces heretofore unrecognized, and it will therefore have
              important implications for conservation planning.  Our biological evidence will
              provide independent estimates of the timing of geologic events.  In addition,
              this study will employ and critically examine new phylogeographic analyses that
              are still maturing.  We hope to critically examine the assumptions and uses of
              these tests in complex geographical regions, such as New Guinea.  Finally, the
              project will train 6-8 New Guinea biology students who will receive practical
              experience in field techniques, systematics, and evolutionary biology.

