Title       : Collaborative Research: Prey Movement in Hazardous Environments: Studies in a
               Tropical Stream Fish System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0108439

Award Number: 0108439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265622             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Gilliam james_gilliam@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal Number DEB-0108439
James F. Gilliam
North Carolina State
              University


RUI:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  PREY MOVEMENT IN HAZARDOUS
              ENVIRONMENTS:  STUDIES IN A TROPICAL STREAM FISH COMMUNITY


The goal of
              this study is to explore the effects of two phenomena, predators and individual
              variation, on the dispersal of a tropical stream fish. Their effects on
              dispersal are unknown.  The first question addresses whether increasing
              predator threat, with the addition of predatory fish species, slows dispersal
              rate of the prey species through threatened zones of a river (a previous study
              found that a predatory fish increased rather than suppressed prey movement). 
              The second question evaluates if individual boldness in the tendency to explore
              beyond the home range contributes to dispersal rate within a population and if
              so, whether individual differences are inherited.  Fieldwork will be done in
              natural streams in Trinidad that contain the prey species, but which differ in
              the number of predator species that they contain.  Movement in each stream will
              be determined by mark-recapture procedures.  Individual variation in boldness
              will be evaluated through behavioral assays, and its heritability assessed by
              rearing offspring of movers and non-movers. To directly determine whether
              individual variation in boldness contributes to dispersal rate in nature, a
              reciprocal transplant experiment will be done in two sister tributaries of a
              river in which movers in one tributary will be exchanged for stayers in the
              other. If boldness is an individual characteristic, the two streams should
              eventually contain populations that differ in rates of dispersal. The results
              of the proposed studies with fish are expected to open new avenues to
              understanding the factors that affect the dispersal in natural habitats of
              tropical rivers.

