Title       : Systematics Of The New World Grasshopper Subfamily Melanoplinae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0108358

Award Number: 0108358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217164             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Otte otte@say.acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT



	This research involves a taxonomic revision of grasshoppers of
              the subfamily Melanoplinae, accounting for 37% of the known species north of
              Panama in the Americas.  This project includes collaborative activities among
              scientists in the U.S., Argentina, and Mexico, and will generate new
              collections of material from northern Mexico, Mato Grosso, Brazil, and
              highlands of Ecuador.  Existing classifications of New World grasshoppers are
              almost all wholly or substantially artificial.  Phylogenetic analyses in this
              study will form the basis for a natural, predictive classification.  Special
              emphasis will be placed on the large and important genus Melanoplus.  Described
              species of this genus account for more than half those of the subfamily and
              perhaps 20% of American species remain undescribed.  The project will result in
              a clarification of relationships among species groups and genera of the
              subfamily; production of comprehensive electronic taxonomic "publications"
              including catalogs and interactive, web accessible diagnostic keys; collection
              of new specimens and species; an analysis of evolutionary patterns within this
              diverse group.

	Accurate identification and predictive classifications for
              melanopline grasshoppers will be a valuable resource for many biologists. 
              These animals are of interest to a wide range of researchers for several
              reasons.  Among them are documented rates of speciation more rapid than known
              for any other terrestrial environment.  Species of the subfamily annually
              consume 6-12% of available forage and are serious pests in crops and gardens. 
              Currently, it is difficult to identify species or to distinguish among those
              that are harmful, beneficial, or neutral with regard to agriculture. 
              Increasingly, these insects are of interest to conservation biologists as well.
               The reference materials produced will have both research and teaching
              applications.

