Title       : Characterization of a Newly Discovered Symbiosis between Bacteria and Leeches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0108163

Award Number: 0108163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Siddall siddall@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Perkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB- 0108163
Mark A. Siddall
Susan Perkins

A grant has been awarded to Drs.
              Mark Siddall and Susan Perkins of the American Museum of Natural History to
              study the historical relationship between leeches and their bacterial
              symbionts. Species that rely on nutritionally poor diets are often reliant on
              obligate bacterial endosymbionts.  Vertebrate blood is deficient in B vitamins
              and some amino acids.  A broad array of blood-feeding invertebrates harbor
              bacterial symbionts providing some of these essential nutrients to their hosts.
              Leeches are known to have symbionts in organs that open into the esophagus just
              in front of the crop where blood is stored.  A diversity of leeches will be
              collected from North America, South America and South Africa. Using DNA
              sequences amplified and sequenced from the isolated bacteria and from leeches,
              the project will answer significant issues regarding the evolutionary origin of
              the bacteria and the degree to which they have coevolved with leeches that
              harbor them.  Modern phylogenetic analyses will determine the degree of
              cospeciation through time by comparing the evolutionary tree topologies from
              the two associated groups.

Preliminary data indicate that these bacteria
              living inside the leech epithelial cells are closely related to Agrobacterium,
              Rhizobium and Sinorhizobium species including those forming symbioses for
              nitrogen fixation in leguminous plants (e.g., beans).  If bacteria from
              different species of leech are each others' closest relatives it would suggest
              that they have retained a tight coevolutionary association with each other
              through time.  The alternative is independent acquisition of different
              bacterial associates by different groups of leeches.  What is particularly
              intriguing about this symbiotic association and the phylogenetic position of
              the bacteria is the implication that these intracellular symbionts may be
              playing a role in nitrogen metabolism for their leech hosts. Furthermore the
              results should help to answer questions regarding the evolution of
              blood-feeding in annelid worms. 

