Title       : The First Near-Complete Skull of a Late Cretaceous Multituberculate From North
               America: Testing Hypotheses of Relationship and Vicariance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0108294

Award Number: 0108294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16355              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne I. Weil annew@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The first near-complete skull of a Late Cretaceous multituberculate to be
found
              in North America will be described in detail. This is a skull of Meniscoessus
              robustus, discovered in the Maastrichtian Hell Creek Formation of South Dakota.
              The specimen preserves finely detailed external structures of the basicranium,
              ear region, nasal region, and palate. Internal features of the braincase and
              skull cavities will also be visible, without destructive analysis, through the
              use of high-resolution X-ray computed tomography (CT scanning). In addition,
              the site that yielded this skull produced partial skull and mandibular
              fragments of several individuals of the same species. Study and description of
              these more fragmentary specimens will make possible the assessment of
              intraspecies ariation. Because the mammalian skull is a rich source of
              morphological data useful in phylogenetic analysis, this material will allow
              evaluation of the hypothesis that Late Cretaceous Asian multituberculates
              belong to an endemic clade, an hypothesis that was not fully testable while no
              contemporaneous North American skulls were known. Although North America and
              Asia were joined by a land bridge for at least part of the Late Cretaceous, and
              there was faunal exchange among dinosaurs, there may have been barriers to
              mammalian dispersal, leading to the development of phylogenetically distinct
              mammalian faunas. 

The new material will provide a wealth of data useful in
              determining the relationships among North American multituberculates.
              Meniscoessus robustus has been hypothesized to be closely related to the
              Paleocene Catopsalis and Taeniolabis; now that a skull of Meniscoessus is
              available to be compared to those of Taeniolabis, we can discover whether this
              is indeed a single lineage that survived the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction, or
              whether it is an instance of extinction followed by immigration of a similar
              form.  This will contribute to an improved and more reliable classification of
              mammals.

