Title       : The Design of Optimal Social Interaction for Repeated Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0108932

Award Number: 0108932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Lagunoff lagunofr@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The theory of  repeated games  is a vital tool for understanding how groups
              overcome collective action problems. In such problems, decisions that are
              optimal for the individual may fail to be optimal for the group. So-called
              "free rider problems" manifest themselves, for example,  in attempts to collude
              in oligopolistic industries, in attempts to achieve multilateral tariff
              reductions in trade negotiations,  and  in attempts to cooperate when group
              effort is required in voluntary participation problems.   In repeated games,
              the use of intertemporal sanctions can be used to re-align individual
              incentives with collective incentives. It is well known that collectively
              optimal outcomes can be sustained in these cases if the participants are
              sufficiently patient.  Unfortunately, in many cases the players are not
              patient. In these cases "full cooperation" often cannot be sustained.  However,
              situations do exist in which the pattern of interaction in the game can be
              chosen to maximize the likelihood of collectively desirable outcomes.

One
              example of this is found in the design of team projects in firms. A manager
              must choose the size and makeup of the team, given the characteristics of the
              pool of lower level managers at the firm. Once chosen, individual effort can be
              mutually enforced by repeated contact. Another example is in residential
              planning. Local spillovers between neighbors are common. Mowing the lawn,
              leaving one's porch light on, or volunteering to maintain communal gardens are
              examples of positive spillovers.  A city planner who knows something about the
              aggregate population characteristics must choose among developers' plans, each
              of which proposes a number and spatial arrangement of houses. Some plans may be
              more conducive to facilitating "neighborly cooperation" than others.   

This
              project examines the tradeoffs involved in determining which interaction
              pattern is optimal, and how the answer depends on the particulars of the
              environment.  In the simplest type of such a problem, in  each period every
              individual has a binary choice between a "cooperative" and an "uncooperative"
              or "free-riding" action.  The project investigates how the size of the group
              and the  degree of social connectivity within the group matters for achieving
              socially desirable outcomes. The project describes and examines  two models of
              optimal interaction for repeated play. The first limits a planner's choice to
              group size. Randomly determined discount factors introduce unobserved 
              differences  in the population. A planner, knowing only the aggregate
              distribution of discount factors, chooses group size m to maximize expected
              average  payoff to the group, given the anticipated  strategic interaction 
              within the group. The second model generalizes the first to allow the planner
              to determine, not only group size, but also the pattern of social linkage
              within the group. The planner's choice determines  both the pattern of
              spillovers and the pattern of information flows.

The present project also
              extends the investigation to analyze: (a) the effect of correlation in the
              types (discount factors) of individuals, particularly when congestion and
              crowding play a role; (b) the role of communication as a way of increasing
              social interaction in the optimal solution; and (c) the effect of complexity of
              equilibrium sanctions on the optimal pattern of interaction.



