Title       : Structures and Properties of Hydrogen-Containing Defects in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0108914

Award Number: 0108914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Stavola mjsa@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Hydrogen-containing defects in semiconductors continue to be the subject of
              intense theoretical and experimental study because of their fascinating
              microscopic properties and the important role they play in determining the
              properties of electronic materials and devices.  This individual investigator
              award will provide support for a project to investigate hydrogen-containing
              defects in Si.  The project consists of several complementary thrusts for which
              recent advances make new studies attractive.  The first concerns new
              opportunities for the study of H2 molecules in semiconductors by vibrational
              spectroscopy.  Other studies are concerned with the structures, vibrational
              properties, and formation mechanisms of deep-level defects that are complexed
              with hydrogen.  The primary goal of the project is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of hydrogen in semiconductors and its interactions with other
              defects and impurities.  A variety of techniques will be employed, including
              vibrational spectroscopy, uniaxial stress, and electron irradiation of Si
              containing H2 molecules.  This experimental research program provides an
              excellent means to train students in experimental semiconductor physics.  The
              work focuses on important, current problems in semiconductor materials research
              and provides graduate and undergraduate students a solid foundation for
              successful careers in industrial research and development.
%%%
Hydrogen in
              semiconductors has been of interest for many years because of the important
              effect hydrogen can have on the electrical properties of device materials.  For
              example, hydrogen is a frequent unintentional contaminant that can have
              deleterious effects on the controlled doping and reliability of semiconductor
              materials.  Alternatively, hydrogen can have beneficial effects in low-cost
              materials that are highly defective.  For example, hydrogen is intentionally
              introduced into solar-grade Si to increase the efficiency of solar cells.  The
              mechanisms by which hydrogen passivates defects and participates in defect
              processes remain poorly understood.  This individual investigator award will
              support a project having the primary goal developing a fundamental
              understanding of hydrogen in semiconductors and its interactions with other
              defects and impurities.  This experimental research program provides an
              excellent means to train students in experimental semiconductor physics.  The
              work focuses on important, current problems in semiconductor materials research
              and provides graduate and undergraduate students a solid foundation for
              successful careers in industrial research and development.
***

