Title       : Functional Architectures for Electron Transfer in Solution and on Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0108945

Award Number: 0108945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew B. Zimmt Matthew Zimmt@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Matthew B. Zimmt, of the Department of Chemistry at Brown University,
              is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his
              studies of functional architectures for electron transfer in solution and at
              electrodes. A molecular scaffold will hold an electron donor and acceptor at a
              fixed distance and orientation without providing significant electronic
              coupling. Function will be introduced into this "test bridge" by attaching
              materials of interest to the scaffold, directly between the donor and acceptor.
              The donor/acceptor coupling provided by these molecular "test elements" will be
              determined through measurement and analysis of photoinduced electron transfer
              rate constants. A variety of test elements, representing structures found in
              biological and technological electron transfer systems, will be examined.
              Analogous introduction of function at electrode surfaces will also be explored,
              through the design, synthesis, and analysis of molecules which bind
              specifically to electrode surfaces.

Electron transfer events occur in many
              important processes in chemistry and biology as well as in technological
              applications. Beyond their ubiquity, electron transfer reactions are of
              fundamental interest for their unique structural, thermodynamic, and medium
              dependence. The nature of the material lying between the electron donor and the
              electron acceptor exerts a considerable influence on the dynamics of the
              electron transfer event. The nuclear and electronic structures of the
              intervening material determine the nature of the transfer event, which may
              involve a hop into bound states of the material (conduction) or tunneling
              through virtual states of the material. By designing materials whose structure
              is susceptible to specific external stimuli and with the support of the Organic
              and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Matthew B. Zimmt, of the
              Department of Chemistry at Brown University, is exploring the possibility of
              rationally controlling the nature and dynamics of electron transfer processes.
