Title       : 2001 Electronic Materials Gordon Conference; Connecticut College, New London,
               CT; July 15 - 20, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0108104

Award Number: 0108104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne L. Gladfelter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A Gordon Research Conference on Electronic Materials will be held July 15-20,
              2001 at Connecticut College. The conference will focus on the most exciting
              developments in synthesis, processing and usage of electronic materials. There
              will be extensive contributions representing nanoscience, new materials, and
              device concepts based on semiconductor, organic, polymeric, and biological
              materials. Presentations on new deposition methods, such as atomic layer
              deposition, will emphasize the increasing need for atomic level control of
              interfaces. The program is organized around invited speakers, discussion
              leaders, co-chairs, and co-vice-chairs; both contributed papers and posters are
              scheduled. Objectives are to stimulate communications among the broad community
              of researchers who address Electronic Materials research from a variety of
              disciplinary backgrounds--chemistry, physics, engineering and materials
              science, and to formulate and delineate critical research necessary to further
              basic understanding and move concepts closer to technological success. The
              conference is expected to provide an effective forum for discussion of critical
              scientific issues surrounding Electronic Materials. Topics include: Nanoscale
              Materials and Molecular Electronics; Patterning Strategies; Organic
              Optoelectronic Devices, Biological Computing and Bioelectronics; Deposition and
              Properties of Dielectric Films; Layered Inorganic and Organic Structures;
              Dendrimers and Conducting Polymers in Devices; Semiconductor Surfaces and
              Microelectronic Processing; and MEMS and Miniaturization. Along with the
              opportunity to assess the field and future directions, it is expected that new
              ties will be established between universities, research institutions, and
              industry. 
%%%
An evaluation of the progress and status of Electronic
              Materials research issues associated with growth and processing of a variety of
              electronic materials including semiconductor, organic, polymeric, and
              biological materials and device related structures along with current
              assessments of the most important developments will be of great value to the
              understanding and enhanced utilization of materials in computing, data
              processing, and communications. 	 
***

