Title       : A Decision-Making Framework for Stream Restoration from Acid Mine Drainage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0108652

Award Number: 0108652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas E. Flores nicholas.flores@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane M. McKnight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Waldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Acid mine drainage is a common feature of the Rocky Mountain Region of the
              United States and in many other regions of the world.  Acid mine drainage has
              been referred to as the greatest water quality problem facing the Western
              United States.  The fact that so many mines are abandoned makes acid mine
              drainage a truly public problem.  This research provides a decision making
              framework to help determine where to begin restoration activities.  The heart
              of the framework is the measurement of the public's preferences for cleaning up
              acid mine drainage at the watershed level.  The framework employs scientific
              information and economics to develop and evaluate acid mine drainage
              restoration alternatives within the watershed.  The framework provides an
              avenue for measuring preferences for both quantifiable and non-quantifiable
              ecological information.  Though the research uses a case study approach, the
              design is easily transferable to other watersheds thanks to the use of
              technology.

The heart of the problem, and the decision making framework, is
              choice between alternative restoration plans.  Restoration plans differ by the
              area of the watershed targeted for restoration and the level of restoration. 
              When researchers use innovative and thoughtful communication protocols of the
              consequences of alternative restoration plans, citizens are able to make
              meaningful choices between restoration alternatives.  Individual choices
              regarding the most preferred restoration alternatives are used to estimate the
              public's preferences over restoration alternatives.  The main benefit of using
              this flexible framework is that although the model is based on economic
              principles, the information provided facilitates a broader range of
              perspectives.  The framework allows analysis of restoration according to
              majority/plurality rule decisions, economic efficiency, and distributional
              considerations.

To demonstrate the framework, the research provides a case
              study of Colorado's Snake River Watershed which is located in Summit County,
              Colorado.  The case study is developed in close cooperation with the Snake
              River Basin Task Force, the group charged with making recommendations for
              addressing the problem of acid mine drainage in the Basin.  Ecological data
              collected through a separate U.S. EPA-funded research project is used to
              determine baseline conditions.  A random sample of Summit County residents are
              used as subjects in the choice experiment.  The choice experiment is
              administered using two different administration modes by split-sample design. 
              One group has the option of participating in the choice experiment over the
              Internet from home, over the Internet from a workstation provided by the
              project at the Keystone Community Center, or by mail.  A second group
              participates in a mail-only format.  This split-sample design facilitates
              investigation of the effectiveness of sampling for experiments that offer
              Internet access as well as mail participation relative to mail-only
              participation.  The information from the choice experiments and the
              split-sampling design provides the basis for conducting future similar research
              in the Snake River Basin as well as other watersheds affected by acid mine
              drainage.


