Title       : Novel States of Quantum Hall Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0108451

Award Number: 0108451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert A. Fertig fertig@pa.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
0108451
Fertig
This award supports theoretical research to explore a
              possible explanation for highly anisotropic metallic states revealed in
              experiments on high quality quantum Hall systems, and a possible mechanism for
              producing non-Fermi liquid metallic states.  The proposed research has four
              aims: (1) to develop quantitative models of stripes that allow one to assess
              what kind of ordering is really present at low temperatures when fluctuations
              are included; (2) to understand how this system might avoid localization (Fermi
              liquid) and pinning (charge density wave); (3) to understand the transition
              between bubbles and stripes, particularly when disorder is present, and to
              search for new pinning behavior and possibly glassy behavior in these unusual
              systems; and (4) to explore new physics associated with interlayer phase
              coherence when a second layer is introduced.  Various field theoretical
              techniques, numerical simulations, and renormalization group methods will be
              used to carry out the research. 
%%%
This award supports theoretical research
              that pursues a possible explanation of exotic metallic states of electrons
              confined to two-dimensions and layers of such electrons. The research will
              focus on unusual metallic states that have been observed in experiments on
              quantum Hall systems. It is supposed that in these systems electrons
              participate in novel bubble phases and striped phases that are analogous to
              phases found in liquid crystals. Because of the good theoretical tools
              available for studying quantum Hall systems, these may prove to be a controlled
              proving ground for exploring striped phases more generally. The study of
              striped quantum Hall phases may illuminate the origins of unusual metallic
              states and striped phases observed in the high temperature superconductors. The
              award will support postdoctoral training in state-of-the-art methods in
              condensed matter theory.
***

