Title       : Phylogenetics of Acanthaceae: A nested approach to resolving relationships of
               Acanthaceae and their closest relatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0108589

Award Number: 0108589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160534             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucinda A. McDade mcdade@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Daniel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Lucinda McDade of the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences and Dr.
              Thomas Daniel at the California Academy of Sciences are conducting a
              collaborative study to resolve phylogenetic relationships at several levels
              within the diverse (>4,000 species), largely tropical plant family Acanthaceae
              and between these plants and their closest relatives in the order Lamiales
              (mints and relatives).  The primary source of data will be DNA sequences from
              chloroplast and nuclear genes; in addition, morphological information
              (including pollen) and chromosome counts will also be acquired whenever
              possible.  The work to be accomplished has four goals; these were chosen to
              test hypotheses regarding relationships, to interpret morphological evolution,
              to contribute toward understanding the evolution of pollinator relationships in
              Acanthaceae, and to provide data for continued studies of molecular evolution. 
              Goal 1 is to identify the closest living relatives of Acanthaceae.  Goal 2 is
              to establish the precise phylogenetic placement of the black mangrove genus
              Avicennia.  These plants have been shown by previous work to be closely related
              to Acanthaceae.  Goals 3 and 4 are to clarify relationships within two
              sublineages of Acanthaceae, Acantheae and Justicieae.  Taxon sampling and data
              gathering strategies will complement existing and on-going projects, with field
              work in Madagascar providing critical new samples along with material from
              Africa and South America from colleagues there.  Regions of DNA to be sequenced
              were determined by the level of relationships to be resolved:  higher level
              work (goals 1 and 2) requires sequences from relatively slowly evolving loci,
              whereas work within Acanthaceae (goals 3 and 4) requires sequences from gene
              regions that are evolving more rapidly.      
	The species richness, extreme
              morphological diversity, and nearly worldwide distribution of Acanthaceae mean
              that achieving the goals of this project will have impact beyond systematics. 
              In the context of phylogenetic relationships, derived characters can be sorted
              from primitive characters to clarify both the pattern of morphological
              evolution and suggest testable ideas about process.  Plants interact with
              environments as morphological beings and thus morphology is key to
              understanding ecological and evolutionary processes.  For example, by
              interpreting morphological evolution, the stage is set for studies of the
              evolution of pollinator relationships.  Acanthaceae have been thought of as
              Gondwanan in origin, but it is clear that biogeographic history has been much
              more complicated than simple vicariance. The research proposed will point to
              groups of tractable size with which to address historical biogeography. 
              Finally, it is clear that there are fascinating problems of molecular evolution
              in this group.  The non-coding DNA regions for which sequences are available
              are not evolving in a clock-like fashion throughout the group.  Adding
              sequences for protein-coding genes (part of the work to be accomplished during
              this project) will not only provide better resolution of phylogenetic
              relationships but will also advance knowledge of the relationship between
              morphological and molecular diversity.    


