Title       : Systematics of Polemoniaceae Subfamily Cobaeoideae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0108459

Award Number: 0108459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry A. Prather alan@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Larry Prather of Michigan State University is exploring the process of
              diversification in the tropical subfamily Cobaeoideae of the Polemoniaceae
              (Phlox family) by providing comprehensive taxonomic and phylogenetic studies of
              all the species and by combining morphological, ecological, and phylogenetic
              data to explore patterns of evolution in the lineage. The tropical subfamily,
              as defined here, includes five genera: Acanthogilia, Bonplandia, Cantua, Cobaea
              and Huthia. Taxonomic studies will be based on herbarium, field, and greenhouse
              studies and will include new data on morphological variation, pollen and seed
              morphology, distribution, ecology, chromosome numbers, pollination,
              reproductive biology, biogeography, and phylogeny. Morphological phylogenetic
              studies will be complemented by molecular studies using nuclear (ITS)
              and
chloroplast DNA sequences (trnT - trnL 5' and trnL 3' - trnF spacer
              regions, and partial ndhF coding region). Prather, graduate student Anna K.
              Wiese, and J. Mark Porter of Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden, will perform
              twelve weeks of South American fieldwork to document morphological variation
              and pollination systems. Phylogenetic data will be combined with comparative
              morphological studies in at least two sets of species that have convergent
              floral morphologies associated with similar pollination mechanisms.  These
              analyses will help to discern how homology and character evolution contribute
              to the repetitive evolution of similar floral syndromes. 
Groundbreaking
              evolutionary and ecological studies have been performed on
members of the
              plant family Polemoniaceae, yet little is known about the tropical members of
              this group. Several of these species have important cultural contributions;
              they have been in cultivation since the time of the Incas, who used these
              beautiful plants to adorn their temples. One species, Cantua buxifolia, is the
              national flower of both Bolivia and Peru. These species are distributed in the
              neotropics and occur in environments from desert to rainforest; many are narrow
              endemics and are threatened with extinction, thus this study will provide the
              basic information needed for conservation of these species. Preliminary studies
              suggest that several new species may be described as a part of this study, thus
              furthering our understanding of tropical diversity. This study will also
              provide insight into the mechanisms and pattern of evolutionary
              diversification. For example, at least two sets of species that are unrelated,
              but that have the same floral shape, size, and color, will be studied in detail
              so that we can learn how these similar morphologies arise multiple times. These
              studies will provide insight into how these evolutionary patterns develop not
              only in the Polemoniaceae, but
in plants in general. 


