Title       : RUI: Continued Investigation of the Ambient pH Signal Transduction Pathway of
               Aspergillus Nidulans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0108749

Award Number: 0108749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Denison denisosh@eckerd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eckerd College
	      P O Box 12560
	      Saint Petersburg, FL  337332560    813/867-1166

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1136,1156,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Cells of microorganisms as well as human cells encounter changes in
              environmental pH.
 Responses of cells to altered environmental pH may involve
              changes in gene expression.  A system for the
regulation of gene expression by
              environmental pH was first identified in the filamentous
Ascomycete fungus
              Aspergillus nidulans. Components of this regulatory system include
the pacC
              gene-encoded zinc-finger transcription factor and the products of the palA, B,
              C,
F, H and I genes, which lead to activation of the PacC transcription factor
              at alkaline pH.
This system ensures that extracellular enzymes are produced
              under conditions of pH
where they can function: acid phosphatase under acid
              conditions and alkaline
phosphatase under alkaline conditions, for example.
              The pH regulatory system is also
important for alkaline adaptation (survival
              in alkaline environments) and for conidial
development in A. nidulans. The
              aims of this research are to discover new
components of this regulatory system
              and to further define the roles of known
components. Research on the A.
              nidulans pH signalling pathway has contributed to the
larger field of cell
              signalling. For example, the palB gene product was the first example
of a
              calpain, calcium-activated cysteine protease in a microorganism and in a
              specific
signalling pathway.  The study of pH regulation in the model organism
              A. nidulans has also helped the understanding of pH regulation in fungi of
              medical and economic importance.  The study of pH
regulation is most advanced
              in A. nidulans. This fact and the availability of well-
developed genetics
              tools and resources make A. nidulans one of the best systems for the
study of
              this important eukaryotic regulatory pathway. In this research,
              a
recently-developed gene library will be used to identify high copy number
              suppressors of
A. nidulans strains with mutations in the pH regulatory
              pathway. With this library, the
expression of A. nidulans genomic DNA inserts
              is under control of the inducible niiA
(nitrite reductase) promoter. As the
              plasmid used to construct the library also has the
AMA1 sequence, which allows
              extrachromosomal maintenance of plasmids, isolation of
plasmids from
              Aspergillus transformants is straightforward. Significant preliminary
results
              have already been achieved in this study. For example, 166 putative copy
              number
suppressors of a pacC loss-of-function mutation have been obtained. An
              assay for palB
protease activity will also be developed and work will be
              completed to determine the
cellular location of the palI gene product, which
              may function as the pH-sensing protein.
For this study, a palI-green
              fluorescent protein gene fusion construct has been made. In
addition to the
              contribution to scientific knowledge of the proposed research, the
              project
will make an important contribution to education. As undergraduate
              students will
participate in this research, it will provide valuable training
              for future scientists and
educators.
