Title       : Macro Evolutionary Trends in Tortoise Beetle Host Use and Shield Defenses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0108213

Award Number: 0108213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredric V. Vencl fvencl@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Futuyma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1182,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Beetle diversity exceeds that of any other animal or plant group. Their
              inordinate success is related to two factors: herbivory and dietary
              specialization. Plant chemistry and predation are thought to be major factors
              responsible for the repeated evolution of dietary specialization. However,
              their relative importance, and the degree to which they interact to favor
              specialization, are unknown. This project will test a model of diet evolution,
              the 'nasty' host plant hypothesis (NHPH), which states that an herbivore's diet
              becomes restricted to fewer plants as it increases its dependence on dietary
              sources of chemistry that confer protection from predators. 
	Tortoise beetles
              (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) are a widespread, hyper-diverse group of
              leaf-eating insects that feed upon hosts in over 10 mono- and dicotyledonous
              plant families. The most remarkable aspect of their biology and the project's
              study system - the larval shield - is a mobile appendage that can deflect
              attacking enemies. Shields are not only barriers, but because they are laced
              with host-derived, noxious metabolites, they also function as chemical
              defenses. Shields can be removed, chemically neutralized, augmented with test
              compounds, and then can be reattached without harming the larvae. The PIs will
              combine these micro-manipulation techniques with bioassays, and a resolved
              beetle phylogeny, to test the predictions of NHPH.
	The project's three aims
              are: (1) to experimentally test if, as NHPH predicts, the defenses of
              specialized species are more effective against major predators than are those
              of their congeneric, oligophagous relatives; (2) to determine if specialists
              make more efficient use of the host's chemistry for defense than do congeners
              feeding on the same plant, and; (3) to determine if selection by predators has
              been intense enough to produce patterns of escalation, due to the inclusion of
              novel, uniquely host-derived compounds that serve to increase the effectiveness
              of shield defenses. Chemical screening of shields and host plants will
              determine shield composition and compound origin (host-derived or de novo
              synthesis). In field bioassays using a suite of natural predators, the PIs will
              compare the efficacy of shields and of compounds found in them. The PIs will
              map shield chemical characters onto the beetle phylogeny, infer
              ancestor-descendent relationships, and test NHPH's central tenet that predation
              should produce a sequential host-shift pattern that yields increasingly
              effective shields - a process that would ultimately result in the colonization
              of fewer, but more chemically noxious hosts.
	Identification of the factors
              guiding host shifts across the tortoise beetles radiation is critical to
              understanding the evolution of plant-insect associations. This project will
              yield greater empirical insight into the origin of herbivore dietary
              specialization as a net response to selection by both an herbivore's predators
              and by its host's chemistry. In the limit, the PIs want to know how the
              evolution of dietary specialization has enhanced the rates of beetle speciation
              that produced much of Earth's biodiversity.


