Title       : From Solitons to Precessional Dynamics and Chaos - Nonlinear Spin Waves in Thin
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0108797

Award Number: 0108797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Patton patton@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with response of thin magnetic films to microwave radiation. 
              Microwaves can produce novel responses in the films, such as magnetic envelope
              (MME) solitons.  The thin films provide a powerful and versatile "test bed" for
              the study of high frequency nonlinear dynamics and  the fundamental properties
              of the envelope solitons.  The results are relevant to microwave nonlinear wave
              propagation in magnetic films and spin-off applications of these effects in
              microwave and millimeter wave thin film signal processing.  In addition, there
              is substantial interest in dynamical nonlinear magnetization processes
              associated with flux reversal and spin injection in multi-layer films.  The new
              program will focus on: (1) direct measurement of the spin waves associated with
              or generated by MME solitons; (2) the use of new time and space resolved probe
              techniques to measure the spatio temporal and wave vector make up of these
              pulses on a nanosecond or subnanosecond time scale; and (3) the nonlinear
              magnetization dynamics associated with modulational instability and chaos, free
              precession, and spin wave generation by spin injection.   Graduate students and
              post-docs associated with the project receive excellent training in technical
              magnetism, using cutting-edge research tools.  They are well equipped for
              careers in academe, industry or government.
%%%
This project studies the
              properties of correlated magnetic dipoles (similar to tiny compass needles) in
              magnetic thin films.  In magnetic field, the dipoles rotate, or precess, much
              like the precession of a spinning top due to gravitational field. This leads to
              so-called nonlinear effects when the precession angle is large.  Chains of such
              precessing dipoles can be used to form nonlinear pulses in the form of
              solitons.  Such soliton pulses are very robust and can propagate without
              spreading.  The precession can also lead to a switching in the direction of the
              overall magnetic moment of a film.  Both solitons and switching can lead to
              other nonlinear effects such as the generation of new pulses and additional
              waves of precessing spins at different frequencies.  The unique feature of the
              work is in the use of special probes to map the precession dynamics on a
              nanosecond time scale and a sub-millimeter distance scale.  The results will be
              useful for the understanding of nonlinear dynamics in general, with long range
              applications in microwave signal processing and magnetic information storage.
              Graduate students and post-docs associated with the project receive excellent
              training in technical magnetism, using cutting-edge research tools.  They are
              well equipped for careers in academe, industry or government.

