Title       : Do Riparian Habitat Disturbances that Alter Cross-habitat Resource Subsidies
               Magnify Effects of Nonnative Fish Invasions on Stream Food Webs?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0108222

Award Number: 0108222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt D. Fausch kurtf@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0108222
Fausch
Habitat destruction and biotic invasions are the two
              leading agents of global environmental change causing loss of species
              worldwide.  An estimated 40-50% of the land on Earth has been degraded by human
              actions, and more than 90% of riparian zones adjacent to streams have been
              altered.  Nonnative species invasions cost $137 billion annually worldwide to
              control.  Habitat degradation and species invasions occur simultaneously in
              most ecosystems and are believed to interact strongly, but there is little
              experimental evidence to help predict what kinds of habitat disturbances will
              facilitate invasions or increase their effects.  The field experiments proposed
              here test the idea that riparian habitat disturbances that reduce inputs of
              terrestrial invertebrate prey from forests to headwater streams during summer
              magnify the direct and indirect effects of invading fish on stream food webs. 
              In addition, effects of the fish invaders on stream invertebrates are predicted
              to reduce reciprocal subsidies of emerging aquatic insects from stream to
              forest during fall through spring.  If so, this will demonstrate the potential
              for habitat loss and fish invasions to have negative indirect effects on
              terrestrial consumers like birds and spiders.  Experiments by Japanese
              ecologists showed that excluding terrestrial insects from a stream in northern
              Japan using a canopy (to mimic the usual result of riparian habitat
              disturbance) caused native trout (charr) to deplete herbivorous stream
              invertebrates, producing a 'top-down' trophic cascade that increased algal
              biomass.  Further research showed that inputs of forest terrestrial insects
              (TI) to the stream during summer supplied about 50% of the annual energy budget
              of fishes, and that aquatic insects emerging from the stream supplied about 25%
              of the annual energy budget of forest birds. Rainbow trout, a
              globally-important nonnative stream fish, are rapidly invading streams in
              northern Japan, apparently exclude native charr, and specialize on TI. 
              Therefore, the current experiments will compare controls with native charr
              alone in replicate stream reaches to two treatments, one where rainbow trout
              are added, and another with rainbow trout added but TI excluded using stream
              canopies.  Direct effects of rainbow trout are predicted to reduce native charr
              growth, abundance, and ultimately to exclude native species via emigration and
              mortality.  Exclusion of TI as well is predicted to intensify effects of
              rainbow trout on native charr, reduce benthic invertebrate biomass and species
              richness, and reduce aquatic insect emergence that supplies forest consumers. 
              Predicted indirect effects include foraging shifts by charr that further reduce
              benthic invertebrate biomass, increase algal biomass via a trophic cascade, and
              reduce cross-habitat flux of emerging aquatic insects that subsidize forest
              consumers.  This will be the first large-scale experiment to test the idea that
              human disturbance in one habitat can exacerbate effects of an invasion in
              another.  A richer understanding of the interactions between habitat
              disturbances and biotic invasions in complex real-world food webs is needed to
              foster more complete theory in both fields, and to aid natural resource
              managers attempting to conserve native fish, invertebrate, and bird
              diversity.

