Title       : Molecular Adaptation and Gametic Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0108965

Award Number: 0108965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $468000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the role that accessory gland proteins play in
              fertilization, particularly in the context of gametic competition.  It is known
              that these proteins play a pivotal role in sperm success, because Drosophila
              (fruit flies) mutants that lack the ability to produce accessory gland proteins
              have much reduced fertility.  These mutants also exhibit characteristics that
              suggest that accessory gland proteins are particularly important in the
              sequestration and storage of sperm by females.  In insects, normal females may
              store sperm from a single mating for several weeks, an attribute that is
              particularly important for sparsely distributed animals.  Genomic methods are
              being employed to identify all of the genes encoding accessory gland proteins,
              and comparison of the DNA sequences of related species will allow
              identification of which parts of the molecules are evolving most rapidly.  In
              addition within-species polymorphism in the Acp genes will be assessed and
              tested for its association with variation in gametic competitive ability.
              

This project is a renewal and extension of a project that received prior
              support from NSF, and it has served as a vehicle for training and education of
              many students.  Seven undergraduates have worked in the laboratory directly on
              this project, and 3 have become co-authors on publications.  Postdoctoral
              fellow Alberto Civetta secured a faculty position at the University of Manitoba
              on the basis of the work he did on the project.  In the coming years, student
              involvement will continue to be vital. The method of constructing a cDNA
              library and aligning multiple random genes of species X with known sequences of
              species Y, devised under the past NSF support, has received widespread
              attention as a means to exhaustively identify genes expressed in specific
              tissues and simultaneously to identify those that are undergoing the most rapid
              turnover.

