Title       : Development of an Integrated Network for Distributed Databases of Mammal
               Specimen Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0108161

Award Number: 0108161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1464040            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara R. Stein bstein@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Patton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Specimen data about mammals exist in a large number of institutions.  Until now,
              there has been no integrated approach so that a researcher might move through
              various collections for research.  Here, seventeen natural history institutions
              have come together to build and support a part of biodiversity informatics in
              an open, collaborative manner.  The system will facilitate open access to the
              data from a web browser, which will enhance the value of the collections and
              also conserve curatorial resources.  The design paradigm can be extended and
              modified by other groups interested in other species sets.  The networked
              information system will permit the participating institutions to support the
              global use of collection data in research, education, and informed decision
              making.  This factual information about the earth's biodiversity will be
              readily available to help maintain and wisely manage the earth's natural
              resources.  The distributed database for mammal collections will represent the
              first time that many of these data are available online, together.  The
              simplicity of the design will provide a low-cost opportunity for any
              institution to participate.
