Title       : Collaborative Research: Molecular Systematics of the Avian Order Gruiformes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0108568

Award Number: 0108568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Houde phoude@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0108568
Peter W. Houde

A collaborative grant has been awarded to Dr.
              Peter Houde at New Mexico State University and Dr. Carey Krajewski at Southern
              Illinois University to determine the genealogy of one of the most diverse
              groups of birds known, the Order Gruiformes.  Genealogical relationships of
              families within the order will be assessed by comparing DNA sequences of
              several genes.  Past patterns of anatomical divergence and geographic origins
              will be inferred from the pattern by which characteristics of living species
              have changed genealogically. The ages of major groups will be estimated from
              levels of difference between their DNA sequences.  Individual genes and
              anatomical characters can provide misleading information about genealogy
              because of "convergence", so gruiform genealogy will be reconstructed from a
              large body of independent data, all of which will be evaluated for its
              consistency with the rest.  Subsets of the data that are inconsistent will be
              scrutinized for functional and developmental correlates.  This, in turn, will
              elucidate processes of convergence between lineages, both at the level of genes
              and that of anatomy.  

Gruiformes have singular importance in understanding
              the timing and geography of bird origins in general, because they are extremely
              diverse and geographically widespread.  Many families appear to be relics of
              the long bygone Age of Dinosaurs when the continents were arranged quite
              differently than they are today.  Gruiforms present many examples of
              convergence, providing an unparalleled opportunity for studying the processes
              that cause it. There is probably no other group of vertebrate animals whose
              relationships are so poorly understood, yet for which there is a comparable
              wealth of data on anatomical characteristics.  There is also preliminary
              evidence for convergence at the genetic level, a phenomenon that has barely
              even been acknowledged in previous research.  Thus, this group presents a truly
              unique opportunity for understanding the correlation between genetic and
              morphological change through time. 


