Title       : Solutions and Grids from Genuinely Multidimensional Residual Distribution
               Schemes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0108540

Award Number: 0108540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Roe philroe@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bram van Leer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth G. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Fluctuation-splitting method for solving first-order partial differential
              equations is a distributive scheme based on evaluating residuals over piecewise
              linear simplex elements. The nature of the distribution step matches as closely
              as possible the local physics, thereby achieving minimal numerical dissipation.
              It is known how to implement this program is two space dimensions but new
              physics arises in three dimensions. In supersonic flow this is due to the
              replacement of characteristic lines by bicharacteristic surfaces, and in both
              supersonic and subsonic flow by the appearance of helicity, the streamwise
              component of vorticity, which interacts with the acoustics. We will attempt to
              design distribution schemes around the system version of the linear wave
              equation, which is the simplest model problem to exhibit these features, and
              which is embedded in the Euler equations. Application to the Euler equations
              themselves will be by means of a local linearization that is well
              established.

Many phenomena in nature and technology are well enough
              understood that the mathematical equations describing them can be written down,
              but to actually solve these equations requires huge computer resources.
              Examples that could be cited include the flow round an aircraft, the evolution
              of a galaxy, or the future of the weather. Especially in the last decade, the
              computer resources available for such projects has grown enormously, but the
              scientific appetite for computing power remains unsatisfied. When new machines
              become available, they may initially lie idle for some fraction of the day, but
              are soon fully utilized, typically within a month. To extract the most
              information from given resources, it is important that attention be paid to the
              set of instructions (the algorithm) by which the computer processes the data,
              both from the viewpoint of efficient arithmetic and also with regard to the
              process that converts the mathematical equations into arithmetical form (the
              scheme). Numerous schemes of varying sophistication exist, but new ones are
              continually sought, and this research seeks to extend the scope of one
              particular scheme that is based on trying to mimic the physics as directly as
              possible with few arbitrary decisions. It is hoped that the result of this will
              be to reduce the amount of computer storage space needed to model a given
              physical situation with given accuracy. Focus will on complex fluid flows in
              which an important role is played by rotating vortices. Such flows are at
              present very difficult to compute efficiently, Advances in this area would be
              especially beneficial to the prediction of flow round an aircraft in its
              take-off or landing configuration, and to computing the flows around
              helicopters.  

