Title       : Infrared Photorefractive and Light-Emitting Polymers for Optical Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0108696

Award Number: 0108696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasser Peyghambarian nnp@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Kippelen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sumitendra Mazumdar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Objectives. We propose an experiment - theory effort focused on the development
              of two classes of multifunctional organic materials to be used for information
              technologies. The first class of ma-terials consist of infrared compatible
              photorefractive polymers that are suitable for reconfigurable filters, switches
              and interconnects. The second class of materials are pi-conjugated polymers
              with emission in the infrared. This effort will capitalize on our past
              experience in developing photorefrac-tive and light emitting polymers through a
              combination of many-body calculations incorporating electron-electron
              interactions on these materials and the characterizations of their electrical
              and nonlinear optical properties. The operation of existing photorefractive and
              light emitting polymers is restricted to the visible region of the spectrum
              which prevents their use in telecommunication.

Approach. To extend the
              spectral sensitivity of photorefractive polymers to the infrared we will use
              multiphoton absorption to generate photoconductivity from high energy
              two-photon excited states in either a pi-conjugated polymer matrix or an
              electro-active chromophore dopant. Theo-retical work will be performed in
              identifying two-photon states from which enhanced photogener-ation efficiency
              is expected. These results will also guide the design of one-photon
              photorefractive polymers with sub-millisecond response time. The search for
              pi-conjugated polymers with photo-luminescence in the infrared will build on
              our recent discovery of the principle that excited state ordering conducive to
              light emission at low frequencies is obtained in pi-conjugated polymers with
              large molecular unit cells. The specific structural requirement is that there
              exists molecular conju-gation transverse to the direction of conjugation along
              the polymer chain, leading to longitudinal confinement and transverse
              delocalization of the optical exciton. Experimental studies will be con-ducted
              on soluble derivatives of poly(isothianaphthene), which satisfy the structural
              requirement for infrared emission.

Significance and Impact. The proposed
              infrared compatible photorefractive and light emitting polymers will enable new
              devices for telecommunication technologies. In spite of the rapid advances made
              in the area of organic optoelectronics, existing organic materials amid devices
              operate largely in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Our work
              will extend the spectral range of applications, and it is expected that the
              outcomes of our research will have strong impact on the device physics of
              organic materials. The aim is not to compete with the technology utilizing
              con-ventional inorganic semiconductors, but to develop new functionalities and
              applications, utilizing the unique processing capability of organic materials.
              Importantly, the strong coupling between experiment and theory will lead to
              enhanced understanding of the fundamental processes of photo-generation,
              multiphoton absorption and light emission in organics, an area that is still in
              its infancy. Finally, the proposed research provides a unique multidisciplinary
              framework to integrate research and teaching. Students working on the project
              are exposed to chemistry, optics, engineering, and the fundamental physics of
              nonlinear absorption, charge-injection, charge- and energy-transfer, and light
              emission.


