Title       : Dissertation Reseach: Determinants of Form in the Pubis of Middle/Late
               Pleistocene Anatomically Modern Humans and Neandertals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0108645

Award Number: 0108645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Churchill churchy@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The front portion of the birth canal (the superior ramus, or SPR) of the
              Neandertal pelvis differs from the modern human SPR in three ways: it is much
              longer, it is much thinner, and Neandertal males (not females) possess the
              longest SPR. These differences run contrary to what is expected, based on
              overall patterns of bony differences between Neandertals and modern humans. 
              Many hypotheses accounting for the shape of the Neandertal SPR have been
              offered, but the biomechanical data needed to test them have been
              lacking.

	Four questions will be addressed by this study: 1) do the reported
              patterns of shape differences hold true in light of a fuller sampling of SPR of
              later hominids [Neandertals + modern humans]? 2) how much does the SPR vary in
              recent humans? 3) can any of the existing hypotheses for SPR vari-ation in
              later hominids be rejected or supported? 4) can the trunk torsion hypothesis,
              the only hypothesis to address all of the observed shape differences seen in
              the SPR of later hominids, be rejected or supported? 

	Recent fossil
              discoveries have greatly increased the available number of SPR of later
              hominids, while the increased availability of CT scanners allows a more
              thorough analysis of internal SPR anatomy.  This project will use CT scanners
              to gather the cross-sectional data needed for testing hypotheses of SPR
              function and variation. Nearly every pre-Holocene (older than 8,000 BC)
              Eurasian later hominid SPR will be examined, as will a large and diverse sample
              of recent humans in order to assess the modern range of SPR variation. 

	The
              SPR plays a role in childbirth, locomotion, posture, and muscular force
              transmission between ab-domen and thigh.  This project will help clarify the
              biomechanical role of the SPR in Neandertals, as well as the extent to which
              SPR differences between Neandertals and modern humans may be indicative of
              functional and behavioral differences.

