Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: "Federal-State Divided
               Government. Consequences for the Mexican Federal System"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0108740

Award Number: 0108740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6624               (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Bingham Powell bpow@trol.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation examines how increased
              party competition --- specifically the emergence of federal-state divided
              government --- has transformed the Mexican Federal System during the nineties.
              Riker (1964) suggests that one of the conditions that helps to maintain the
              federal bargain is if one national party controls the federal executive and
              shares with other parties control over the state executives, or, what might be
              called federal-state divided government. The rationale behind this proposition
              being that the constant possibility for the relevant parties to become the next
              federal or state leaders actually prevents them from invading each other's
              areas of responsibility.

The hypothesis, however, presents a problem for
              testing because, in democratic federal systems, federal-state divided
              government is a common occurrence --- or at least, a very tangible threat. For
              this reason, the Mexican case offers a unique opportunity for testing because
              it is only recently that the party system has become truly competitive.

The
              dissertation consists of two main parts. The first part deals with the
              transformation of the Mexican federal system. Using qualitative and
              quantitative analysis, the project explores whether the increasing presence of
              non-PRI governors transforms the operation of the federal system (legislative
              activity, Supreme Court decisions, and activities of federal and state
              ministries). With econometric models, and qualitative analysis, the second part
              investigates if federal-state divided government has affected the selection,
              design and implementation of policies (specifically, allocation of fiscal
              resources, public health, public education, and management of natural
              resources). The second part of the project relies heavily on field research
              (archive work and interviews) in the Mexican states of Baja California Norte,
              Chihuahua and Sonora. 

Upon completion, the project will shed light on the
              operation of federal arrangements with an authoritarian history that have
              undergone a democratization process recently (e.g. Argentina, Brazil, Russia).
              We should also gain a deeper understanding of the relationships between
              democratization, increased party competition, and the federal system. The
              project will examine a critical but overlooked consequence of democratization
              processes: changes in the relationships among the center and the regions, and
              the consequences of these changes for policy. The data and information
              collected will be provided to the scholarly community at large.

