Title       : FRG: Organoapatite-Coated Titanium Foam: A Biohybrid for Skeletal Repair
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0108342

Award Number: 0108342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel I. Stupp s-stupp@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Dunand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Brinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a Focused Research Group(FRG) award co-funded by the Polymers, Ceramics
              and Metals Programs in the Division of Materials Research.  Effective, rapid
              and permanent skeletal repair is one of the grand challenges of bioengineering
              and biomaterials research.  Load-bearing bone repair is critical in cases of
              aging-related surgery, accident, disease, and trauma.  Current metallic implant
              technology usually relies on solid implants with a porous coating to enhance
              cell attachment.  Difficulties with stress-shielding and interface failure as
              well as prolonged recovery times however persist.  Here, this Focused Research
              Group proposes to make a significant contribution in this area by creating a
              novel biohybrid implant material for bone repair.  The biohybrid will consist
              of a biocompatible titanium foam with pores coated with bioactive
              organoapatite, in which a biological phase will be grown to provide a
              biomimetic system with improved strength, stiffness and attachment to the
              skeleton.
%%%
In the first stage, a fully porous titanium scaffold will be
              fabricated by a novel process based on the superplastic expansion of argon
              bubbles in a titanium matrix.  In the second step, the inner and outer surfaces
              of the titanium scaffold will be coated with organoapatite, containing small
              quantities of organic molecules.  Self-assembling molecules and supramolecular
              clusters will be used to bind the organoapatite to the metal surface.  In the
              third step, bone growth will be induced by rotating the implant in an aqueous
              solution containing rat calvaria cells.  In-vitro testing will assess ability
              to fully integrate bone into coated Ti foam and the influence of microstructure
              on mechanical properties and cell ingrowth will carefully studied.  Each of the
              processing steps will be studied in detail, from which models will be developed
              to predict biologically and mechanically optimal biohybrids.  The
              microstructure of the implant will be studied at each step with particular
              emphasis on (i) pores in the foamed materials (pore, size, volume fraction,
              shape and connectivity), (ii) coating morphology and microstructure in the
              biohybrid, and (iii) cell characteristics in the complete biohybrid.  The
              mechanical properties of the implant will also be studied at each step, with
              emphasis on both the macroscopic scale (overall strength, stiffness, fatigue
              resistance) and the microscopic scale (metal/ceramic/bone interfaces).  The
              experimental results will be validated using analytical and numerical mechanics
              models.  The processing, microstructural and mechanical models will be
              integrate to allow for the design of an optimal biohybrid.

