Title       : Mitochondrial Phylogenomics: Investigation of Fish Phylogeny and Nucleotide
               Character Sampling in Large-scale Phylogenetic analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0108201

Award Number: 0108201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Broughton rbroughton@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mitochondrial phylogenomics:  Investigation of fish phylogeny and nucleotide
              character sampling in large-scale phylogenetic analysis

	Molecular
              systematics employs variation in DNA to reconstruct historical
relationships
              among organisms and investigate evolutionary processes that
have given rise to
              the earth's biodiversity.  The growing volume of DNA
sequence data and the
              increasing number of characters and/or species that
may be included in
              evolutionary investigations have placed greater
importance on methods of
              phylogenetic analysis and experimental design.  It
is intuitive that the more
              data that can be applied to a phylogenetic
question, the greater the
              probability of recovering an accurate estimate of
the phylogeny.  Although
              phylogenetic accuracy may be positively correlated
with the number of species
              sampled from a particular group, a fundamental
question in molecular
              systematics remains: How many nucleotide characters
are required to resolve
              the phylogeny of a given number of species,
particularly when all (or most) of
              the extant members of a group have been
sampled?  This project will employ a
              large, robust phylogeny to investigate
the sensitivity of phylogenetic
              analysis to nucleotide character sampling.

The ray-finned fishes (class
              Actinopterygii) exhibit extreme diversity
with more extant described species
              than all other vertebrate groups
combined and are of major ecological and
              economic importance.  Despite
extensive morphological study, phylogenetic
              relationships among many
actinopterygian lineages remain unclear.  This
              project will compile a data
set of complete mitochondrial genomes from 73
              species of ray-finned fishes,
including representatives of 32 (out of 42)
              orders and extensive sampling
from the two largest orders, Cypriniformes and
              Perciformes.  Mitochondrial
genomes are small chromosomes that are inherited
              independently of the
majority of DNA found in the nucleus.  The clonal,
              maternal inheritance of
mitochondrial DNA makes it particularly useful in
              phylogenetic studies.  
	
Mitochondrial genome sequences, along with nuclear
              gene sequences, will be
used to generate a robust hypothesis of phylogenetic
              relationships among
the most important lineages of ray-finned fishes.  This
              data set will
reveal patterns of diversification among fishes and provide
              important
insights on the evolution of early vertebrates.  The mitochondrial
              data, in
conjunction with the best phylogenetic hypothesis, will then be used
              to
investigate nucleotide sampling properties in phylogenetic
              analysis.
Sub-samples of different numbers of species will be drawn from the
              group of
73 species.  For each sub-sample, the number of nucleotides required
              to
recover the correct phylogeny, with various levels of support, will
              be
determined.  The influence of several important evolutionary parameters
              on
phylogenetic accuracy will be investigated.  These parameters include
              a)
the frequency of variable nucleotide sites in the sample; b) the amount
              of
evolutionary divergence among taxa; c) the amount of evolutionary
              rate
variation among included lineages; and d) the extent and distribution
              of
nucleotide compositional bias among sampled taxa.  The results will
              provide
a deeper understanding of the behavior of nucleotide data in
              phylogenetic
analysis and should identify a range of nucleotide sample sizes
              required
for accurate estimation of phylogeny as a function of the number of
              taxa
under investigation and relevant evolutionary conditions.  Such
              objective
criteria for experimental design will be of practical benefit to the
              field
of molecular systematics by providing guidance in budgeting and
              allocation
of resources and by improving the efficiency and accuracy of
              molecular
phylogenetic studies.


