Title       : Phylogenetic, Biogeographic, and Monographic Studies of Asian Core Araliaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0108536

Award Number: 0108536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Wen jwen@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      Previous biogeographic studies of the Northern Hemisphere have
              emphasized the relationships of eastern Asia to other major areas, such as
              eastern North America, western North America, Europe, and western Asia.
              Biogeographic patterns within eastern Asia, however, have rarely been
              investigated using modern phylogenetic evidence.  Most intercontinental studies
              treat the vast area of eastern Asia (often including the Himalayas) as a single
              biogeographic unit or an area of endemism, but this is certainly a gross
              oversimplification.  Many floristic observations and studies clearly
              demonstrate that eastern Asia is biogeographically very diverse.  In turn, the
              lack of testable hypotheses for biogeographic patterns within Asia has hindered
              more general understanding of the evolution of intercontinental biogeography of
              the Northern Hemisphere.  The proposed study intends to employ a large Asian
              group of the plant family Araliaceae (the ginseng family) as a model to examine
              biogeographic relationships within Asia, emphasizing eastern and South Asia and
              the Himalayas.  This region is herein referred to as "Asia" for the convenience
              of discussion.  This "Asian Araliaceae group" comprises about 18 genera with a
              wide distribution throughout "Asia," and several of the subgroups within the
              Asian Araliaceae exhibit parallel distributional patterns across this region of
              interest.  Thus, the Asian Araliaceae represent an ideal system to examine both
              individual and general biogeographic patterns within "Asia".  
	The goals of
              the proposed study by Dr. Jun Wen and her colleagues in the U.S. and China are
              to (1) construct a robust genus-level phylogeny (evolutionary or genealogical
              relationships) of the Asian Araliaceae based on evidence from morphology,
              nuclear ribosomal DNA, and chloroplast DNA; (2) construct species-level
              phylogenies for two major lineages of the Asian Araliaceae:  the
              Eleutherococcus - Macropanax - Metapanax group and the Brassaiopsis - Trevesia
              - Hedera group using four molecular data sets (sequences of nuclear ribosomal
              ITS, and chloroplast ndhF, atpB-rbcL spacer and trnC-trnD regions); (3) examine
              the biogeographic relationships of eastern and South Asia and the Himalayas
              based on phylogenies of at least three lineages of Araliaceae in this region
              (two groups mentioned above, and the Aralia - Panax complex currently being
              investigated by Dr. Wen); (4) re-evaluate the traditional taxonomic
              classification and generic delimitations of taxa within the Asian Araliaceae,
              including an assessment of morphological character evolution; and (5) provide a
              monograph of Aralia sect. Pentapanax, including the establishment of an
              internet page on the systematics of the Asian Araliaceae.  Results from the
              proposed study will have several important implications.  This will be one of
              the first studies to examine the biogeography of the vast region of eastern and
              South Asia and the Himalayas using a phylogenetic framework for a particular
              plant group. The phylogenetic analyses of the Asian Araliaceae will facilitate
              further systematic, evolutionary, and biogeographic studies in Asia as well as
              in the ginseng family worldwide. 


