Title       : Phylogeny, Development, and Taxonomy of Setaria and its Relatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a0108501

Award Number: 0108501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Kellogg tkellogg@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	The cereal crops foxtail millet and pearl millet, and noxious weeds
such as
              green foxtail and sandbur are all closely related members of the
grass family,
              and are part of a group of 310 species descended from a
single ancestor. 
              These plants are all characterized by odd "bristles"
interspersed among their
              flowers; the bristles are highly modified
branches.   This project will
              determine the precise relationships among as
many species as possible in the
              "bristle group" using DNA sequences from
the nucleus and the chloroplast.   At
              the same time, the development of the
seed head (inflorescence) and flowers
              will be studied for a precise
description of how the species differ.   Along
              with this, the graduate
student supported on the grant will determine how many
              species are in the
foxtail millet group, what the species look like, and will
              write
identification guides to them.   Because there is already information
              on
the species in North and South America, this part of the project will
              focus
on Asia and Africa.
	The information gained in this project will
              connect directly with
other information already available on foxtail millet
              and the panicoid
grasses.  The genes that control morphological variation in
              foxtail millet
are under active investigation, and some of these are similar
              to known
genes in maize.   It should soon be possible to describe
              morphological
variation in the clade in terms of the genes involved.  This 
              will help
answer questions about how species and larger groups are formed. 
              The
resulting study will provide a direct and explicit link between
              phylogeny,
developmental morphology, and taxonomy, and will provide a
              framework for
work on the evolution of development
