Title       : Intraband Spectroscopy and Dynamics in Semiconductor Nanocrystals Colloids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0108101

Award Number: 0108101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe Guyot-Sionnest p-guyot-sionnest@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Electrons injected in the conduction band of a quantum dot exhibit strong
              intraband transitions in the mid-infrared and this is interesting for potential
              applications.  This individual investigator award provides support for a
              project to discern and control the mechanisms that influence the energy,
              coherence and lifetime of the intraband transitions, in particular the role of
              phonons and surface states, issues that are currently unclear.  The project
              deals with colloid quantum dots prepared by solution chemistry that allow for
              the modification of the surfaces.   This should provide an important element of
              control in the electron dynamics.  The characterization of the spectroscopy and
              dynamics of the electrons involves steady state and picosecond time-resolved
              optical studies using lamp and infrared laser spectrometers.  This project,
              combining wet organometallic chemistry along with extensive charaterization of
              the nanostructures, offers an excellent opportunity for training graduate
              students in a frontier area of optical material science. 
%%%
Electrons
              inside a nanoscopic semiconductor particle are very sensitive to infared
              radiation and this is interesting for potential applications in the
              mid-infrared, from lasers to detectors, and night-vision.  This individual
              investigator award provides support for a project to discover and control the
              mechanisms that influence the infrared response of the electrons. This will be
              necessary in order to take advantage of the flexibility with which the optical
              response of the electron can be "engineered" via the size, shape and
              composition of the nanostructure.  Chemistry is used to make the semiconductor
              particles in solutions.  These solutions readily exhibit the effects of quantum
              mechanics via their strong colors, and they can be processed to make more
              practical gels or thin films with identical properties.  This project combines
              chemistry and optics of nanomaterials and it offers an excellent opportunity
              for training graduate students in this technologically promising area of
              material science.
***



