Title       : Diversification of Self-incompatibility Alleles in the Rosaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0108173

Award Number: 0108173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua R. Kohn jkohn@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Two distantly related plant families, the Solanaceae (potato family) and
              Rosaceae (rose family) use the same molecular method to reject self pollen.
              This project will examine diversification at the self incompatibility (S-)
              locus in the Rosaceae to test hypotheses about differences in S-allele
              evolution in the two families. Preliminary data indicate that alleles in the
              Rosaceae are quite young and that non-overlapping sets of alleles occur in the
              two subfamilies investigated. This stands in stark contrast to the lack of
              turnover and ancient alleles seen in the Solanaceae. This project will
              determine if these differences generally hold or are peculiar to the groups of
              Rosaceae that have been sampled and evaluate equilibrium and non-equilibrium
              hypotheses to explain family-level differences. This project will also use
              sequence and gene structure information to determine whether use RNases for
              self incompatibility in these two families is due to common ancestry or
              parallel evolution. 

Loci involved in self-nonself recognition exhibit the
              highest levels of genetic variability known. Examples include the
              self-incompatibility loci of flowering plants, fungi, and clonal marine
              invertebrates, and the disease fighting major histocompatiblity loci (MHC) of
              humans and other vertebrates. Extreme variability is due to the types of
              selection, generally called balancing selection, that act on such genes.
              Understanding the evolution these genes is important for many fields. First,
              the much greater time depth of variation allows historical inference that
              reaches farther back in time than is possible when using other genes.  Second,
              analysis of diversification patterns at these genes provides information on the
              selective forces that drive their evolution. Third, examination of patterns of
              selection at the molecular level provides insight into as yet poorly understood
              aspects of the molecular basis of self recognition. 

