Title       : Microbial Communities: Advantages of Multicellular Cooperation; May 3 - 5, 2002,
               Tucson, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0108284

Award Number: 0108284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett P. Greenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Costerton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1089,1114,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               

Microbial communities- complex, self-assembling entities composed of
              various types of microorganisms- profoundly affect human society in many ways. 
              Examples include those that promote plant growth, those that are responsible
              for ruminant digestion, and those that carry out the controlled degradative
              processes used to treat sewage and break down environmental pollutants.  Most
              microbial processes upon which the well-being of the biosphere depends are
              carried out by well-integrated microbial communities with a high level of
              structural sophistication and developmental control.  While a microbial
              community may resemble a multicellular organism because it has a primitive
              circulatory system and a degree of cellular specialization, it differs from
              these life forms in significant ways.  The community is not assembled from a
              single genome, as is a plant or animal, but from a large number of genomes that
              are programmed to cooperate in community formation. These ubiquitous
              communities are not killed by starvation or limited by reproductive
              necessities, so perhaps it should not be surprising that they are among the
              most successful inhabitants of all ecosystems on earth, including the most
              hostile and extreme.

If scientists are to understand microbial communities
              sufficiently to control their development or to manipulate them for the benefit
              of society, they must understand their "embryology" and their "physiology."  A
              colloquium entitled "Microbial Communities:  Advantages of Multicellular
              Cooperation" will convene May 3-5, 2002, in Tucson, Arizona, to generate a
              consensus on the state of the field and to develop recommendations for its
              advancement.  The colloquium will bring together experts in microbiology,
              bioinformatics, signaling, and ecology. Following the colloquium, a report will
              be prepared-in both print and electronic formats-that will be analytical and 
              comprehensive, and will offer practical recommendations for the
              future.






