Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: On-Line Tonal Tuning of a Variable Inertia
               Vibration Absorber
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0108951

Award Number: 0108951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Behrooz Fallahi fallahi@ceet.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed A. Seif  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5944,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0108951
Fallahi

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. Behrooz Fallahi and Dr. Mohamed Seif, both in the Department of
              Mechanical Engineering, Northern Illinois University, Dekalb, Illinois, and Dr.
              Said Megahed, Mechanical Design and Production Department, Cairo University,
              Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to study the dynamics and control of a new class of
              adaptive Tuned Vibration Absorber (TVA: variable effective inertia absorber). 
              The approach has two facets: spectral analysis of the excitation and online
              tuning of the absorber.  The spectral analysis reveals the frequency content of
              the excitation.  The online tuning uses the frequency content of the excitation
              to reposition a moving mass for tonal vibration suppression.  The analytical
              work, involving linearization of equations and study of its effect, will be
              supplemented by experimental study to assess the effectiveness of the proposed
              tonal tuning method.  The novelty of the method is that the absorber tuning is
              done online for tonal vibration suppression, that moving a secondary mass
              changes absorber resonant frequency, and that the dynamic equation is derived
              with time dependent control parameter.

Scope: The proposed technique may be
              widely implemented in industrial cases such as civic structures, airplane
              wings, submarine hulls, and helicopter cabins.  The stability of the vibration
              suppression device is always guaranteed.  The US and Egyptian collaborator have
              strong records of research and experience in mechanical dynamic systems,
              vibrations and control, and application to robotics and automating systems. 
              The two sides complement each other, as Dr. Megahed is particularly experienced
              in modeling and simulation, while the US team is particularly strong in the
              planning and execution of the experiments and in the analysis of the data.  The
              proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
              of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
              Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities.

