Title       : Evolution of the North American Whiptail Lizards (Teiidae: Cnemidophorus) and
               Re-evaluation of Unisexual Origins: A Multi-genic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0108484

Award Number: 0108484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tod W. Reeder treeder@sunstroke.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5922,5977,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0108484
Reeder
     Whiptails (genus Cnemidophorus) belong to the lizard
              family Teiidae.  Whiptails range widely throughout the New World, extending
              from the U.S. southward to Argentina.  However, their greatest diversity is in
              the arid and semi-arid regions of the Southwest U.S. and Mexico where they are
              a conspicuous component of the reptile fauna.  Whiptails are an ecologically
              important lizard group, which is reflected by numerous ecological and life
              history studies.  Whiptails have been one of the most extensively studied group
              of lizards, third only to Sceloporus  (spiny and fence lizards) and Anolis
              (anoles).  Besides their abundance and geographic proximity to North American
              biologists, another reason whiptails have been intensively studied is the
              occurrence of parthenogenetic all-female species (of likely hybrid origin). 
              Approximately one third of the species are unisexual, with the majority of
              these all-female species (=unisexuals) occurring in the southwestern U.S. and
              northern Mexico.  While whiptails have been extensively studied and much is
              known about their biology, ecology, and natural history, the phylogenetic
              relationships among whiptails is still poorly understood.  Also, in northern
              Mexico, much confusion exists regarding the species limits within three major
              species complexes.  Many populations cannot be allocated to current subspecies
              or species.  It is unclear whether the confusion arises from extensive
              hybridization between some taxa or whether new, undescribed taxa exist.  And
              finally, while biologists have spent some effort studying the origins of the
              unisexuals in this group, the maternal and paternal ancestry of many lineages
              is still ambiguous.   DNA sequence data can be used to address these issues of
              phylogeny, species limits, and unisexual origins within the North American
              group of whiptails.  However, before molecular data can be collected, tissue
              samples are still needed from many bisexual and unisexual whiptail populations
              and/or species.  Extensive fieldwork will be conducted in the Southwest U.S.
              and Mexico by Dr. Tod Reeder of San Diego State University and his colleague
              Dr. Adrian Nieto Montes de Oca in Mexico, to obtain the necessary tissue
              samples.  Samples will be collected from essentially all North American
              bisexual and unisexual whiptail taxa.  Once tissues are available, DNA sequence
              data will be gathered from rapidly evolving mitochondrial and nuclear genes.
 
                 Besides addressing specific issues in whiptail phylogeny, species limits,
              and unisexual origins, the results of this research have broader scientific
              significance.  The whiptail phylogeny can be used to re-evaluate the extensive
              biological/ecological data on whiptails using modern comparative/phylogenetic
              approaches and provide new insights on the evolution of this diverse group. 
              Unisexuals occur in other animal groups; thus, more background data will be
              generated on the origins and persistence of unisexuals in nature.   This will
              be one of the first studies to use rapidly evolving nuclear intron sequences to
              study hybridization and speciation.  Thus, this study will test the utility of
              these gene regions for addressing issues in these areas that have been of long
              interest to evolutionary biologists.  Undergraduate and graduate students will
              be involved in all aspects of this project.   Students will gain valuable
              experience in modern field and laboratory techniques, learn basic concepts in
              evolutionary and systematic biology, and acquire skills in the presentation of
              research results (through oral presentation and written manuscripts).


