Title       : CAREER: Crystal Morphogenesis via a Polymer-Induced Liquid-Precursor (PILP)
               Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0094209

Award Number: 0094209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $507541             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie B. Gower lgowe@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research project in biomimetic materials chemistry is to apply
              low temperature, aqueous-based processing methods towards the development of
              new techniques for crystal engineering and in situ fabrication of
              organic-inorganic composites. This project will examine the physicochemical
              aspects of a recently discovered crystallization process, termed the
              Polymer-Induced Liquid-Precursor (PILP) process. In the PILP process, anionic
              polypeptides that mimic the acidic proteins found in biominerals are used to
              sequester ions in crystallizing solutions of calcium-based salts to induce this
              unusual liquid-liquid phase separation process.  Rather than precipitating
              nuclei of the inorganic salt, microscopic liquid-like droplets of a mineral
              precursor are formed.  Because liquids take the shape of their container, the
              liquid-phase mineral precursor can conceivably be molded into various shapes,
              providing materials engineers with a new tool for regulating crystal
              morphology. A new outreach program for Materials Chemistry will be established
              at the University of Florida. This summer research program will recruit
              undergraduate students from some of the women's colleges in the northeast and
              historically black universities in Florida. The projects will provide an
              opportunity to those students who would like to explore the applications side
              of materials chemistry.    
%%%
Advances in the area of biomineralization
              will have important medical implications dealing with the formation of bones
              and teeth, as well as pathological biominerals such as kidney stones,
              biomaterial encrustation, and atherosclerotic plaque. It is anticipated that
              the benign processing conditions of the "biomimetic" PILP process will be
              particularly advantageous for applications that require the incorporation of
              organic, polymeric, or biological components into ceramic materials, and thus
              could be useful for the fabrication of  biosensors, biocatalysis,
              bioseparations, and hard-tissue engineering. Students trained in these areas
              compete well for a range of jobs in the medical industry. 

