Title       : A Unifying Approach for Discrete and Continuous Nonconvex Optimization with
               Applications to Operational and Design Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0094462

Award Number: 0094462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $461334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanif D. Sherali hanifs@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project is concerned with a unifying solution approach, namely the
              Reformulation-Linearization/Convexification Technique (RLT), that has been
              developed for generating tight relaxations for large classes of discrete
              combinatorial and continuous nonconvex programming problems. The various
              contributions addressed in this project involve the development of both general
              theoretical and algorithmic concepts, as well as specialized procedures for
              several important applications, along with the investigation of related
              implementation issues accompanied by extensive computational tests.  For linear
              mixed-integer 0-1 problems we explore the design of effective RLT relaxations,
              enhanced by conditional logic implications, and embedded within a dynamic
              Lagrangian relaxation constraint generation scheme.  In the context of
              continuous nonconvex problems, we propose the study of various strategies for
              generating tight manageable relaxations for devising computationally effective
              global optimization RLT approaches to solve a wide class of factorable
              nonlinear programs. In order to effectively cope with the size and structure of
              the relaxations that are typically generated by RLT, various Lagrangian
              dual/relaxation, aggregation, penalty function, trust region, and
              conjugate/deflected subgradient methods are suggested for investigation. These
              ideas are proposed to be further explored in the context of a variety of
              specific applications including radar pulsing and bit-mapping problems, machine
              scheduling problems, two-stage stochastic mixed-integer problems involving
              integer recourse decisions, ship design problems, and various operational and
              strategic planning air traffic management problems faced at airports as well as
              in the enroute airspace.  Discrete and continuous nonconvex programming
              problems arise in a host of practical operational, strategic planning, and
              system or engineering design applications.  Several recent advances have been
              made in the development of algorithms for solving such classes of problems. At
              the heart of these approaches is a sequence of linear (or convex) programming
              relaxations that drive the solution process, and the success of such algorithms
              is strongly dependent on the strength or tightness of these relaxations. This
              research project is concerned with a unifying solution approach, namely the
              Reformulation-Linearization/Convexification Technique (RLT), that has been
              developed for generating tight relaxations for not only constructing exact
              solution algorithms, but also to design powerful heuristic procedures for large
              classes of discrete combinatorial and continuous nonconvex programming
              problems.  The various contributions addressed in this project involve the
              development of both general theoretical and algorithmic concepts, as well as
              specialized procedures for several important applications.

The impact of
              this study will be the development of a comprehensive technology that unifies
              many important concepts and offers insights into problem structures and
              modeling strategies, as well as provides a construct for generating tight
              relaxations.
