Title       : Structure, Function, and Evolution of RNA Maturation Enzymes in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0094288

Award Number: 0094288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Gegenheimer pgegen@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0094288  Peter Gegenheimer
The transfer RNA (tRNA) species in a cell or
              organelle are synthesized as large precursor molecules.  Their subsequent
              maturation is accomplished by enzymes that recognize and break a single,
              specific bond in each precursor RNA, thus separating the functional tRNA from
              the nonessential fragments.  One of these enzymes, ribonuclease P (RNase P), is
              present in bacteria and archaea, and in the nuclei, mitochondria, and
              chloroplasts of all eukaryotic cells.  The RNase P enzymes from all known
              bacteria contain a large RNA molecule and a small protein; it is the RNA
              component which performs the essential reaction.  Although chloroplasts evolved
              from a cyanobacteria, which possess a bacterial RNase P, the spinach
              chloroplast enzyme appears to consist exclusively of protein.  Recent studies
              demonstrated that the chloroplast enzyme uses a different catalytic mechanism
              than the bacterial RNase P.  Transfer RNA maturation in chloroplasts is the
              first example of a single biochemical reaction that is catalyzed in different
              organisms by a protein or by an RNA enzyme.  The goal of this project is to
              complete the characterization of this extraordinary enzyme.  The major
              polypeptide associated with chloroplast RNase P activity is a novel
              nuclear-encoded RNA-binding protein that is related to bacterial signal
              transduction proteins as well as to the superfamily of dinucleotide-binding
              proteins.  Preliminary modeling studies indicated a possible mechanism for
              proteins of this class to bind tRNA.  This project will test this hypothesis by
              completing the biochemical purification of chloroplast RNase P.  By treatment
              of purified enzyme preparations with antibodies specific for each of the
              polypeptides in this preparation, the investigators will identify which
              polypeptides are necessary for RNase P activity.  cDNAs encoding these
              polypeptides, as well as cDNAs able to restore activity to a bacterial strain
              lacking RNase P, will be isolated and the respective proteins over-expressed
              and characterized in vitro.  The results of these investigations will provide
              insight into how a single biochemical reaction can be accomplished by an RNA
              enzyme or by a protein enzyme.    
