Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a0094823

Award Number: 0094823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda A. Holt mholt@twu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don E. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Woman's University
	      BOX 425619 T W U STATION
	      Denton, TX  762045619    940/898-3375

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to enhance support of low-income, academically
              talented computer science, engineering and mathematics (CSEM) students through
              scholarships and expanded student-support programs as part of the CSEM Scholars
              Program. The associated objectives are to increase the retention of students in
              the computer science, dual degree engineering and mathematics programs through
              graduation; to increase the number of students from underrepresented groups
              studying computer science, engineering and mathematics; to increase the
              participation of students in professional development opportunities; to
              strengthen partnerships between the university and local industry; and to
              strengthen partnerships between the university and local community colleges.
              

Forty scholarship recipients are selected based on their academic record,
              financial need, a recommendation from an instructor, counselor or employer, and
              a brief essay. The scholarships are awarded to students in the computer
              science, engineering and mathematics programs in ratios that approximate the
              department's student population. Selected students receive the National Science
              Foundation scholarship, and Texas Instruments, Inc is matching the amount. In
              addition each student is assigned faculty, industry, and peer mentors. Students
              in the CSEM Scholars Program participate in departmental student organizations,
              campus-wide student organizations, student research opportunities, cooperative
              education opportunities, campus-wide professional development workshops,
              campus-wide graduate school preparatory workshops, visits to local professional
              association meetings, and travel to professional conferences. 

In order to
              increase the number of CSEM students and the pool of applicants, recruitment
              efforts are being expanded through increased cooperation with area community
              college faculty and staff, faculty and staff of universities serving as
              partners to the 3+2/Dual Degree Engineering Program and the university
              admissions office. The program is evaluated by monitoring retention and
              graduation rates, growth in the number of undergraduate and graduate students
              within the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, and the
              participation rate of students in departmental and university professional
              development opportunities. In addition, participating students are tracked to
              follow job placement and advanced degree achievement.
