Title       : CAREER: Nonlinear Optical Studies of Spin and Magnetization Dynamics in
               Ferromagnetic Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0094225

Award Number: 0094225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Reilly reilly@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to enhance research
              and education in the areas of modern optics and condensed matter physics at the
              College of William and Mary. The objective in research is to apply the newest
              techniques in ultrafast pump-probe laser spectroscopy, including
              frequency-dependent and time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr effect and
              magnetization-induced second harmonic generation, to answer questions regarding
              spin polarization and spin and magnetization dynamics in ferromagnetic thin
              film multilayers. Such multilayers are showing great promise in technological
              applications, but are limited by incomplete knowledge of electron spin
              lifetimes and the sources of spin scattering and spin-flipping. Systems to be
              explored include magnetic multilayers displaying giant magnetoresistance,
              half-metallic materials and metal/semiconducting systems. This work will
              continue to develop non-destructive, fast and straightforward nonlinear optical
              techniques to measure parameters crucial for spin-based devices. The
              educational goal of this project is the development of a series of laboratory
              modules which will be used to introduce modern optics and the physics of
              materials to undergraduates at the College as well as be used in outreach
              programs to the local community.
%%%
This Faculty Early Career Development
              (CAREER) project seeks to enhance research and education in the areas of modern
              optics and the physics of materials at the College of William and Mary. In
              research, ultrafast pulsed laser techniques (with laser pulses less than
              one-trillionth of a second in duration), will be used to measure how the
              magnetic properties of thin-film ferromagnetic multilayers evolve in time. In
              these techniques, a "pump" beam is used to excite the material under study
              while a second pulsed beam "probes" or takes a snapshot of the state of the
              system later in time. Such techniques have been successfully used, for example,
              to study chemical reactions as they occur, and have only recently been applied
              to magnetic materials. The study of the ultimate speed of magnetic processes
              and what determines the magnetic and electrical properties of magnetic thin
              films is extremely important for the design of electronic and magnetic devices
              such as hard drive read heads, nonvolatile computer memory and the next
              generation computer devices based on electron spin (dubbed "Spintronics" or
              Magnetoelectronics"). The educational goal of this project is the development
              of a series of hands-on laboratory modules which will be used to introduce
              modern optics and the physics of materials to undergraduates at the College as
              well as be used in outreach programs to the local community.
***


