Title       : Art & War: Dynamics of International Norm Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0094550

Award Number: 0094550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Sandholtz wsandhol@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines change in international norms and rule systems.  In
              particular, this study investigates the evolution of international rules
              against art plundering in wartime, focusing on the period from the Napoleonic
              Wars to the present. Although until 1800 victors in war seized the art
              treasures of the vanquished, international rules prohibited the destruction or
              removal of artworks during war by the latter half of the twentieth century.  An
              endogenous theory of norm change, built on the interactions among rules,
              actions, and discourses, generates testable propositions about the evolution of
              international rules. One implication of this theory is that victorious powers
              will act in accordance with new norms as these become internalized by
              incorporation into domestic law and policies. This stands in contrast to the
              realist tradition that suggests that great powers make rules to suit their
              interests, and therefore that international rules have no independent causal
              force. Evidence is provided by critical episodes in the evolution of norms
              against plunder. The research will show how actors interpreted normative
              tensions and ambiguities, how they sought to resolve them, and how their
              interactions altered the rules. Using secondary as well as primary and archival
              sources, the project will reconstruct the discourses, both between and within
              governments, that drove the evolution of rules. This research will also inform
              the understanding of other international norms governing the conduct of war
              (e.g., treatment of prisoners and civilians).
