Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program (CSEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0094590

Award Number: 0094590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Y. Narayan narayan@oswego.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rhonda Mandel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret W. Groman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Mohammadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rolando Arroyo-Sucre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Oswego
	      
	      Oswego, NY  13126    315/341-2500

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of this program is to facilitate graduation in computer science
              and mathematics for low- income persons, in particular, students from
              underrepresented groups and persons with disabilities. Recruitment targets
              students from two distinct populations, transfer students from community
              colleges who plan to attend the institution as juniors and currently enrolled
              students entering their junior or senior year at the college. A collaborate
              actively is planned with the community colleges in the state to recruit
              eligible computer science students to participate in the program. The program
              provides a challenging opportunity with high expectations where designated
              faculty members will work as faculty mentors monitoring academic progress and
              supervising research projects or internships. It also provides an enriched
              course environment in which students have an opportunity to deal with problems
              they encounter with the material and with the hands-on projects. Each student
              is assigned a peer mentor in his/ her own field. The program features an
              internship experience in which the student integrates material from the
              classroom with learning from the real world. In addition, this prepares
              students for transitioning to the workplace environment, and provides realistic
              expectations on work for the student. 

