Title       : Evaluation of Biogeochemical Watershed Models: How Do We Know When A Model is
               Wrong?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0094312

Award Number: 0094312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Meixner tmeixner@mail.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1325,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0094312
Meixner

Biogeochemical watershed models have become disconnected
              from rigorous hypothesis testing due to a lack of available evaluation tools,
              thereby limiting the usefulness of these models.  I propose to improve the
              utilitty of biogeochemical watershed models by developing improved techniques
              of hypothesis testing using recently developed multi-criteria calibration
              techniques.  Three questions will be addressed:  (1) What are the benefits of
              distributed models of catchment biogeochemistry?  (2) How do we incorporate
              multiple fluxes and state variables into our judgment of how well a model is
              performing?  (3) How do we use different types of data in evaluating what is
              wrong with a model?  Preliminary results with multi-media methods have shown
              promise in solving the hypothesis-testing challenge of biogeochemical watershed
              models.  I will foster the development of these methods through both education
              and fundamental research into these techniques.  I will develop an innovative
              group project on watershed mass balance models for the general hydrology course
              I teach.  The graduate education portion of the project will involve lecture
              and collective learning in small groups using a simple bucket model of
              watershed processes.  The group project will take the students from the
              rudiments of model construction to the tools available for model calibration
              and model evaluation of lumped as well as distributed hydrologic models.  This
              course will form the foundation for the biogeochemical watershed modeling group
              I hope to create.  The research I propose will focus on the development of
              multi-criteria model calibration and evaluation tools for multi-process
              biogeochemical watershed models.  The proposed work includes testing the AHM
              model of the Emerald Lake watershed using "true" (testing for parameter
              uniqueness and identification) and real data sets using the available
              multi-criteria evaluation tools.  Model calibration will be conducted for
              several scenarios comparing the level of spatial aggregation, time series
              duration, and the kinds of data available (outflow time series in addition to
              spatial data of soil conditions).  These studies will investigate the utility
              of distributed biogeochemical watershed models and what sort of data is needed
              to properly parameterize and evaluate these models.  I will also conduct
              similar modeling studies with agricultural non-point source models with the
              assistance of a post-doctoral associate trained in agricultural engineering. 
              Finally, I will establish a biogeochemical watershed processes field site at
              the San Diego Experimental Forest. 

