Title       : Nanostructure Synthesis using Reactive Block Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0094144

Award Number: 0094144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Hillmyer hillmyer@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The career development plan described in this proposal focuses on diblock
              copolymers, a class of hybrid macromolecules that represent an extremely
              interesting set of self-assembling materials with a wide variety of
              applications.  Diblock copolymers are simple macromolecules consisting of two
              segments of chemically distinct monomers connected by one covalent bond.  This
              one bond prevents macrophase separation of the two polymeric segments and leads
              to the formation of a variety of nanoscopic assemblies depending on the nature
              of the monomers, the molecular weight of the chain, and minority component
              volume fraction.  While their uses as thermoplastic elastomers, pressure
              sensitive adhesives, and compatibilizing agents are wide spread, it has only
              been recently that the nanoscopic compositional heterogenties have been
              exploited for the preparation of other nanostructured materials.  A strategy
              for the preparation of nanoporous materials using ordered block copolymers
              templates will be investigated.  The ultimate of this research goal is the
              preparation of polymeric monoliths that contain aligned nanopores with a narrow
              pore size distribution and an extremely high pore density.  Two general
              strategies for the preparation of porous materials starting from ordered block
              copolymers are presented.  One utilized block copolymers with a degradable
              block and the other utilized block of an array of interesting nanomaterials. 
              The work described in this proposal depends on the combination of polymer
              synthesis, supramolecular self-assembly and characterization, and solid-state
              chemistry of ordered block copolymers.
%%%
The science and technology of
              structures on the nanometer length scale is central to many research
              initiatives.  The research described in this proposal addresses an area that
              will have significant impact on the development of nanostructured templates and
              scaffolds for the design and synthesis of new nanomaterials.  The target
              materials will have remarkable potential as nanostructure scaffolds, separation
              media, and optical devices.  Furthermore, this plan also includes a section on
              integration research and educational activities.  There are two primary aspects
              the proposed educational plan.  The first is focused on graduate education in
              the field of polymer science, and the second is centered around undergraduate
              education at the Freshman level and adult continuing education.

