Title       : Computational Chemical Engineering on a Dedicated Beowulf Cluster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a0094407

Award Number: 0094407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48330              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Sholl sholl@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steinar Hauan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lorenz T. Biegler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: David S. Sholl, Lorenz T. Biegler and Steinar Hauan
              
Institution: Carnegie Mellon University
Proposal Number: 0094407

This is
              an equipment grant to provide funds to purchase a 32 node Beowulf cluster to
              support research in advanced computing to be used by three research groups at
              Carnegie Mellon University.  Beowulf clusters represent an advantageous
              architecture for advanced computing: they are inexpensive to construct,
              flexible to configure, and provide a powerful computing environment for a broad
              variety of scientific computing tasks.  The three research groups that will
              share the cluster will be conducting research on molecular dynamics and
              computational chemistry, modeling and visualization to support process
              synthesis and large-scale discrete and continuous process optimization.  The
              cluster will thus serve computations that require high peak performance on time
              scales of minutes and hours, along with sustained computational performance on
              time scales of days.  These complementary profiles mean that by sharing the
              cluster, its capabilities will be used more fully than they would be by any
              group individually.  The cluster can also easily be operated in a way that
              distributes resources between different usage modes without significant
              computational overhead.  The cluster will initially increase the PIs'
              computational capabilities by about a factor of three and will be expandable
              over succeeding years and will increase their computing power by over an order
              of magnitude within the next five years, without rendering existing nodes
              obsolete.

Specifically, the research of the three groups consists of the
              development of new algorithms for:
 Calculation in computational chemistry,
              particularly in molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations to determine
              macroscopic material properties from details of atomic-scale
              structure;
Accurate process modeling for process design and synthesis that
              includes phase equilibrium, representation and evaluation of process
              alternatives and visualization of design insights; and
Optimization of
              large-scale steady state and dynamic processes that involve both discrete and
              continuous decisions along with advanced decomposition strategies.

