Title       : The Formation and Evolution of the Metameric Body Plan in Basal Annelids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0094925

Award Number: 0094925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Q. Martindale mqmartin@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine C. Seaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0094925
Martindale

There is considerable debate about the origin of
              segmental body plans in metazoan evolution.  Arguments have been made that the
              protostome-deuterostome ancestor was already segmented, while others argue that
              segmentation evolved independantly in the three major clades of segmented
              organisms: the annelids, arthropods, and chordates.  While there is alot known
              about the development of some arthropods and chordates, virtually nothing is
              known about the development of annelids.  The little cellular and molecular
              information available comes almost exclusively from a few species of the highly
              derived group of freshwater clitellate annelids, the leeches.  The marine
              polychaetes are the most diverse and speciose group of basal annelids and are
              clearly a critical group to study when considering the evolution of segmental
              development in the annelids, yet not a single intracellular fate map has been
              published on any polychaete embryo. 

This proposal describes a comprehensive
              and integrative cellular and molecular dissection of the origins and
              development of the segmental body plan in polychaetes.  Rather than focusing on
              a single polychaete species, the investigators will examine three species of
              polychaetes with different life history characteristics to gain an appreciation
              for the diversity of mechanisms within this group of animals. Modern cell
              lineage analysis will be utilized in conjunction with molecular studies of two
              distinct patterning pathways, the formation of a segmental body plan, and the
              diversification of that body plan into distinct regions. 

Specific Aim #1:
              Utilize cell lineage techniques to follow the embryonic and larval origins of
              segmental tissues in three species of polychaetes with distinct life histories.
              

Specific Aim #2: Examine the spatio-temporal deployment of the segmentation
              genes engrailed, armadillo, even-skipped, runt, and hairy in three species of
              polychaete embryos and larvae. 

Specific Aim #3: Complete the expression
              studies with our previously isolated Hox genes in the heteronomous species
              Chaetopterus and contrast the deployment of Hox genes with two species of
              homonomous polychaetes (Capitella and Hydroides). 

The proposed work will
              provide critical information about how the segmented body plan is generated in
              a basal group of annelids.  This information is crucial before any kind of
              comparison about the homology of segmentation can be made with other metazoan
              phyla.

