Title       : CAREER: Discovering the Mechanisms of Liquid Phase Epitaxy and Bringing
               Intermolecular Forces to the Physics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0094385

Award Number: 0094385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Manne smanne@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Recent breakthroughs in mesoscopic materials have reinvigorated the science of
              solid-liquid interfaces and shifted its emphasis from bulk thermodynamic
              descriptions to intermolecular forces.  The goals of this project are to
              establish a central facility for the measurement and mapping of intermolecular
              and surface forces by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and, through student
              research, to discover the role of solid surfaces in directing interfacial order
              formation in an adjoining liquid phase (liquid phase epitaxy). First, the
              nucleation and overgrowth of a solid phase over a different substrate will be
              investigated by in-situ imaging in metastable solutions.  Studies will focus on
              differences in growth morphology (wetting vs. island nucleation vs. needle
              growth) as a function of compatibility between substrate and overlayer. Second,
              force measurements and soft contact imaging will explore the interfacial
              self-assembly of surfactant solutions and the templating of lyotropic phases by
              interfacial micelles.  Observed interfacial morphologies will be correlated
              with theoretical calculations based on optimizing the net interaction energy of
              the micelle lattice and substrate.  The role of temperature in structural phase
              transitions will be explored using an existing temperature-control cell that
              operates over the aqueous range of temperatures.  The students participating in
              this research will be trained in a contemporary area of condensed matter
              physics and will thereby be prepared to enter the scientific/technical
              workforce.
%%%
The partial ordering of a liquid film in contact with a solid
              surface is central to interfacial processes ranging from crystal growth to
              mesoscopic materials synthesis to boundary layer lubrication.  The goals of
              this project are to uncover the mechanisms of interfacial order formation by
              the measurement and mapping of intermolecular forces by atomic force microscopy
              (AFM).  This technique uses a sub-microscopic tip or stylus to measure
              intermolecular forces and to image surfaces at atomic scales by mapping force
              variations across the surface.  Student experimentalists will use force
              measurements and imaging in liquid environments to investigate the role of
              solid surfaces in nucleating solid and liquid crystalline phases from
              solutions.  Crystal growth of one mineral on a second, closely matched solid
              will be imaged in real time and at molecular resolution in supersaturated
              solutions.  Studies will focus on differences in growth morphology versus the
              degree of mismatch between the atomic structure of substrate and overlayer. 
              The nucleation of liquid crystalline phases of surfactants or detergents by
              solid surfaces will also be investigated.  The observed structures of
              interfacial layers will be correlated with theoretical calculations, based on
              optimizing the net interaction energy of the surface and surfactant aggregate
              layer.  The effects of temperature on these phases will be investigated using a
              special sample cell currently under operation.  These results are expected to
              shed new light on interfacial processes such as detergency and the synthesis of
              advanced materials by self-assembly.  This research will be conducted with
              students who will be prepared for scientific/technical employment in academia,
              industry, and government.




