Title       : CAREER: Size Resolved Measurement of Cloud Condensation Nuclei Concentration and
               Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0094342

Award Number: 0094342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,1045,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the design and fabrication of a novel instrument for
              studying the atmospheric aerosols that serve as condensation nuclei for the
              formation of cloud droplets.  The instrument consists of a differential
              mobility analyzer (DMA), which separates the aerosol particles into a narrow
              range of sizes, followed by a cloud condensation nucleus separator (CCNS),
              which separates the more hygroscopic particles from the less hygroscopic ones. 
              It is the hygroscopic particles that can serve as condensation nuclei.  The
              CCNS consists of two concentric cylinders, between which an electric field is
              applied.  The annular region between the cylinders is basically a thermal
              gradient diffusion chamber.  The inner and outer walls are maintained at
              different temperatures and at water saturation by means of wet filter paper, so
              that the space between them is supersaturated.  The particles are charged when
              they leave the DMA, and the field applied to the CCNS causes them to migrate
              slowly towards the inner wall as they move with the air through the chamber. 
              The electrical mobility of the particles is reduced as they grow by
              condensation.  Hence the particles that grow large have less chance of
              migrating to the inner wall than those that remain small.  From the initial
              population of near-equal sized particles that enter the CCNS, the less
              hygroscopic ones are thus deposited on the inner wall, and those that serve as
              CCN at the applied supersaturation pass through.  The two-stage instrument
              therefore makes it possible to study the nucleating properties of aerosol
              particles in different size ranges. As a further step in the analysis, the
              chemical composition of the CCN that exit the instrument may be determined
              using a single-particle mass spectrometer.  Results of the research are
              relevant to the basic physics of cloud formation and to the question of aerosol
              effects on the solar reflectivity of clouds.

The educational component of
              this CAREER award consists of a summer course for undergraduate students on
              techniques, applications, and practical aspects of meteorological and
              atmospheric chemical measurements.  The culmination of the course is a
              week-long field campaign in Marina, CA, centered on airborne observations with
              the research facilities of the Center for Interdisciplinary Remotely Piloted
              Aircraft Studies (CIRPAS).

