Title       : Controls on Carbon Isotopic Fractionation in Emiliania Huxleyi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0094637

Award Number: 0094637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Simone Metz                             
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian N. Popp popp@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Laws  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Bidigare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Although laboratory and field studies suggest that isotopic analyses of
              alkenones show great potential as a CO2 proxy because cell geometry may be
              estimated, the relationship between specific growth rate and carbon isotopic
              fractionation in natural samples has not been well defined.  For this reason,
              the principal investigators will develop and evaluate a novel method based on
              combining 13C labeling and isotope-ratio-monitoring gas chromatography-mass
              spectrometry to determine in situ growth rates of Emiliania huxleyi and
              Gephyrocapsa oceanica in the ocean.  The objectives of this research are to
              define the range of growth conditions where the 13C-alkenone-labeling technique
              gives reliable estimates of growth rate and to identify under what conditions
              bias may be anticipated.  In additions, the principal investigators will
              evaluate the effects of nutrient and light limitation on carbon isotopic
              fractionation and explore how culture techniques affect 13C labeling and the
              relationship between carbon isotopic fractionation, growth rate and aqueous CO2
              concentrations using dilute batch versus continuous culturing experiments. 
              Lastly, in a select suite of experiments, the rate of incorporation of 13C into
              alkenones will be compared with other lipids for E. huxleyi and G. oceanica to
              provide insight into the physiological function(s) and biosynthetic pathway(s)
              of alkenones.  A field component will be carried out to compare directly the
              fractionation relationship in natural alkenone-producing algae with those
              developed in laboratory experiments.  Results from this study will help
              calibrate and validate the use of carbon isotopes in alkenones as a CO2 proxy,
              essential knowledge if the paleoceanographic community is to use this proxy to
              better understand mechanisms of climate change. 

