Title       : CAREER: Integrated Monitoring and Smart Damping for Dynamic Hazard Mitigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a0094030

Award Number: 0094030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik A. Johnson JohnsonE@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Career Development Plan is a project of career-launching activities focused
              on the synergistic integration of structural health monitoring (SHM) and smart
              damping technologies to provide more reliable structures that respond better to
              natural hazards and are less-costly to maintain.  Effective prioritization of
              post-disaster actions, as well as long-term safety monitoring, requires that
              the health of civil structures be well characterized.  Yet, global SHM methods
              are largely ineffective in detecting local damage, whereas local methods
              require a cost-prohibitive number of sensors to monitor large civil structures.
               The thrust of this project is an innovative approach using variable stiffness
              and damping devices (VSDDs) to cause incremental changes in structural
              characteristics, multiplying the available information without adding
              additional sensors-a result not readily accomplished in a conventional
              structure.  VSDDs can also effect significant vibration mitigation; thus,
              through this integration, VSDDs can serve multiple purposes, as well as
              strengthen their performance through more accurate updated models of structural
              characteristics.  An outreach program to enthuse and interest future engineers
              will be developed using hands-on demonstrations and structural design
              competitions centered around small-scale seismic simulator exhibitions in K-12
              classrooms. Further, animations and interactive virtual experiments will be
              designed using state-of-the-art programming languages like JAVA and MATLAB to
              demonstrate key concepts in structural dynamics, monitoring and control in a
              manner not possible with static media such as paper or chalkboard.  This
              project will significantly impact the PI-challenging him to grow and mature as
              a professor, to learn and to mentor.  Further, the project will facilitate the
              development of the next generation of intelligent civil engineering structures.
              


