Title       : CAREER: Effect of Land-Surface Heterogeneity on Regional-Scale Fluxes Using a
               New Generation Large-Eddy Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0094200

Award Number: 0094200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Porte-Agel fporte@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0094200
Porte-Agel
Measurement and prediction (from hydrologic, weather and
              climate model) of regional-scale fluxes of heat and water vapor are subject to
              substantital errors associated with our limited ability to understand and
              account for the effect of land-surface variability.  For example, numerical
              weather models use boundary conditions based on similarity theory, which
              assumes homogeneity of the land surface and ignores subgrid-scale variability. 
              This study addresses these limitations by advancing our understanding of the
              complex two-way coupling between land-surface heterogeneity and atmospheric
              turbulence through a novel combination of wind tunnel experiments,
              remote-sensing field measurements, and three-dimensional transient numerical
              simulations (large-eddy simulations).  The wind tunnel experiments study the
              physics governing the relationship between instantaneous surface
              characteristics (shear stress) and air flow properties (wind velocity) in order
              to develop physically more realistic boundary conditions.  A new generation LES
              will be developed to incorporate the improved boundary conditions, as well as
              new subgrid-scale turbulence.  Performance for boundary layers over
              heterogeneous surfaces will be evaluated using wind tunnel experiments and
              field measurements from remote sensing.  The model is used to study how
              land-surface variability propagates upwards and affects the atmospheric
              boundary layer.  These results are expected to substantially improve our
              ability to parameterize land-atmosphere exchange processes and, consequently,
              the accuracy of hydrologic, weather and climate models.

The education
              innovations are to:

(1)  Develop a new education tool that exploits the
              potential of LES to provide 3-D transient information of the turbulent flow
              above the land surface.

(2)  Develop and solidify curriculum to incorporate
              the motivation and fundamental ideas behind our research as they achieve
              pedagogical maturity. 

(3)  Mentor and engage Ph.D, M.S., and undergraduate
              students in interdisciplinary research based on the coupling and feedback
              between the state-of-the-art experimental, numerical, and theoretical
              approaches.

(4)  Outreach through workshops for high school teachers and
              students, with special emphasis on students from groups traditionally
              underrepresented in science and engineering.

