Title       : Values into Infrastructure: an Ethnographic Archaeology of Distributed
               Computational Scientific Work
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0094632

Award Number: 0094632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey C. Bowker bowker@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project undertakes an ethnographic examination of the development of
              digital scientific infrastructure, following two scientific teams -
              environmental hydrology, and chemical engineering, as they build and implement
              computational models intended to provide layered access to specialists and
              broader audiences. These infrastructural models will allow users to access
              advanced tools for data mining, analysis, visualization, tutorials, and problem
              solving, using remote supercomputers, arguably constituting the scientific
              problem-solving environment of the 21st century. The goal of this research
              project is to develop an empirically and theoretically informed understanding
              of how ethical, epistemological and social and political values emerge in the
              interactions of various actors and agencies and get written into technical
              systems.  The research proceeds by "infrastructural inversion," that is, by
              opening to observation and analysis computational and other elements that
              underlie knowledge development, but are usually hidden from view.  It  involves
              observing scientific practices at the respective laboratories of the
              environmental hydrology and chemical engineering teams, as well as those of 
              the enabling technology teams working with them to create the infrastructure. 
              The observations allow the researchers to outline an analysis of the
              disciplinary networks through which the contributors to the digital science
              infrastructure are moving, the technical and symbolic commitments that have
              become crucial to their work, and the justifications they provide for
              developing infrastructure in the particular ways that they do. Site visits will
              include formal and informal interviews with laboratory members about their
              specific practices and their contributions to the digital scientific
              infrastructures.  The researchers will record, transcribe, code and analyze all
              the interviews, interlacing the analyses with analysis of the technical
              decisions being written into the infrastructure.  Results will be reported at
              relevant scientific modeling conferences, at professional society meetings, in
              journals, and in a book. 
