Title       : The Computer Science and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a0094764

Award Number: 0094764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Steig jsteig@huntingdon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Robertson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Anthony Carlisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Huntingdon College
	      1500 East Fairview
	      Montgomery, AL  361062114    205/265-0511

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides scholarships for low-income, academically talented
              students in computer science and mathematics. It is also fashioned to directly
              effect and subsequently increase retention and graduation rates in computer
              science and mathematics. Furthermore, the Scholarship Program improves and
              enhances the networking of students with potential future employers as well as
              strengthens relationships between Huntingdon College and the related employment
              sector and graduate schools. Additionally, a versatile scholarship model is
              created that will serve as an example to other liberal arts colleges who desire
              to enhance their computer science and mathematics departments. Finally, this
              program promotes mathematics and computer science as dynamic areas of study to
              college-bound students and gives Scholars (i.e. Scholarship recipients)
              teaching and instruction experience. All scholarship recipients are assigned to
              faculty mentors who meet with their Scholars on a weekly (in some cases daily)
              basis to evaluate, plan, and assess student projects and matters within the
              program and departments. Scholars participate in specialized training to
              prepare them to serve as peer mentors to one or two underclassmen (i.e.,
              freshman or sophomores majoring in computer science or mathematics). They
              present lectures or demonstrations in local elementary, junior high, and high
              school classrooms. In addition, Scholars engage in contemporary issues debates
              and forums. Scholars also participate in co-curricular opportunities including
              research with department faculty members as well as observe and work with
              professionals in the discipline-related professions. This unique scholarship
              program improves education for students in computer science and mathematics,
              increases retention of students to degree achievement, improves professional
              development, and strengthens partnerships in the employment sectors.
