Title       : CAREER: Study of the Suburban Citizenry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a0094180

Award Number: 0094180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300140             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Oliver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past fifty years, the suburban portion of the population has nearly
              doubled and today one in two Americans calls a suburb home. Sub urbanization
              has changed fundamentally the types of political communities where most
              Americans live: rather than being crowded in diverse central cities or isolated
              in rural towns, they now live in specialized municipalities that are often
              highly singular in their economic and racial composition and land-use. Despite
              the enormity of this change, we have little understanding of how these suburban
              social contexts are influencing citizens' perceptions of community or their
              attitudes towards government. Many critics bemoan the alienation and hostility
              to government that suburbs putatively foster, but little research has either
              adequately defined suburbs or tested their effects. Consequently, there is
              little systematic theory to explain whether or why suburbanites may be
              different, not just from residents of large cities but also from other people
              who live across the vast diversity of suburban locales.

This CAREER project
              fills this information gap with the first-ever comprehensive Study of the
              Suburban Citizenry (SSC). It has three interrelated components. First, by
              collecting survey data from more than 2,400 respondents from 40 locales across
              six states and doing intensive field studies of suburban election campaigns,
              this project advances and tests a "conflict theory" of local democracy. This
              theory promises to link disparate areas of research on local political
              attitudes and provide a systematic explanation for how social contexts
              influence citizens' views on local government and community. This research
              focuses on how social diversity and conflict in suburbs (or the lack thereof)
              structures people's political beliefs, the nature of campaigns, and voting
              behavior. Utilizing computer assisted survey technologies, the study contains
              both questions specifically tailored to each locality and standard items asked
              of all respondents. Using data from the 2000 Census, other sources, and field
              research, information is appended to the survey about each locality's social
              composition, political institutions, media sources, and other important
              contextual factors.

Second, this project  provides a valuable resource for
              scholars both within American political science and social studies at large.
              Using these data, scholars can examine many questions such as whether suburban
              citizens act as "consumers" of public services, how voters make decisions in
              low information, non-partisan elections, and how social environments influence
              political attitudes. The availability of good, geo-coded data that measure
              community attachments and attitudes helps further multi-level
              analysis.

Finally, as a CAREER investigation this project contains a strong
              educational component. It develops a community based learning curriculum for
              undergraduate teaching at Princeton. As part of their coursework,
              undergraduates will conduct intensive studies of the municipalities chosen in
              the survey instrument, particularly in the week before their elections. Their
              research will be utilized in the creation of contextual variables and their
              reports will be collected and published in an edited volume on suburban
              political campaigns. This project allows for advances in graduate student
              research, linking the study of local politics with that of survey research, two
              areas, 

