Title       : CAREER: Combinatorial Investigation of Functional Metal-Oxide Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0094265

Award Number: 0094265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ichiro Takeuchi takeuchi@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses a comprehensive research and education study of
              functional thin-film metal-oxides based on combinatorial methods. The
              combinatorial approach will be used to survey large compositional variations in
              individual experiments. New materials phases will be explored through
              fabrication of thin-film combinatorial libraries and composition-spread
              samples. The method for fabricating samples is a newly designed combinatorial
              pulsed laser deposition system. Scanning probe microscopies will be used to
              perform rapid characterization of the samples. In particular, a scanning
              evanescent microwave microscope, a ferromagnetic reso-nance microscope and a
              scanning SQUID microscope will serve as the main screening tools. Sample
              quality will be addressed by using various microanalysis tools, which allow
              spatially re-solved composition and phase mapping. The immediate focus will be
              on microwave materials for wireless communications applications and various
              magnetic materials including ferrites and half-metallic systems. In addition to
              searching for new compositions with enhanced physical proper-ties,
              composition-spread experiments will be conducted to systematically study
              composition-property relationships in materials that had previously only been
              made in bulk samples. Experi-mental tasks required in the proposed program span
              fundamental materials synthesis to develop-ing novel characterization
              techniques, and this multidisciplinary research environment will serve as a
              model educational background to train a new generation of students.
In
              collaboration with other faculty a lab-based Combinatorial Materials Research
              and Education Course using mostly preexisting equipment targeting senior-level
              undergraduates will be devel-oped. Many of the course activities will mirror
              the actual research techniques developed in the research activities, thus
              directly linking research with education. The ability of combinatorial
              ex-periments to rapidly cover a range materials with large compositional
              variation in a single ex-periment will be used to provide hands-on experience
              that conveys the breadth of materials sci-ence to students. The emphasis on
              "search and discovery" in combinatorial research makes this method particularly
              exciting and effective as an educational tool.
%%% The project addresses
              fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance. The scope of the project will expose students to
              challenges in materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An
              important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
              integration of research and education. 
***  

