Title       : CAREER: Large Cardinals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0094174

Award Number: 0094174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Itay Neeman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI is investigating several aspects of large cardinal theory in the
region
              of Woodin cardinals, including (1) Long Games; (2) Iterability; and
(3)
              connections with Descriptive Set Theory. 1 - Results obtained by the
PI
              through previous NSF support demonstrate the tight connection between
Woodin
              cardinals and games of variable countable length. The existence of
iterable
              models for specific large cardinals can be used to yield the
determinacy of
              games of specific lengths, with increasing length
corresponding to increasing
              large cardinal strength. These games in turn
can be used to decide statements
              over minimal inner models for large
cardinals. The PI is attempting to extend
              this correspondence, the first
main test case being open games of length omega
              one. 2 - The study of
Woodin cardinals leads naturally to a transfinite game
              known as the
iteration game. Winning strategies ("iteration strategies") for
              the good
player in this game are essential to the comparison process that lies
              at
the heart of inner model theory. Proving that iteration strategies
              exist
is the single most important problem in the field. The PI has been
              working
on this problem, contributing to the existing pool of partial
              results.
Several problems, related to the general problem of iterability
              but
specialized and more concrete, are investigated as part of this
              project.
This investigation should provide increased understanding of the
              main
problem, and hopefully lead to additional partial results. 3 - The PI
              is
working to solidify the connections between large cardinals and
              definable
sets of real numbers. Extensive work, much of it done during the
              '70s and
'80s, provides a detailed analysis of definable sets of reals
              assuming
determinacy. Later work obtained determinacy from large cardinals.
              The PI
is working to emulate the existing analysis of definable sets of
              reals,
working directly from large cardinals. The point here is to try to
              convert
methods used in the study of definable sets of reals, into methods
              which
can be used in inner model theory and the study of large
              cardinals.



Set Theory is a branch of Mathematics which attempts to
              understand the
universe of Mathematics, that is the collection of all objects
              studied by
Mathematicians, or more precisely the collection of all _sets_.
              (Numbers,
groups, functions, etc., can all be represented as sets.)  Set
              Theorists
view this universe as a structure in its own right, a structure
              which can
itself be analyzed using mathematical reasoning. For example, a
              Set
Theorist may ask "is there an embedding of the universe into a
              similar,
yet not identical, structure?" Set Theorists work with such
              embeddings
("elementary embeddings") in much the same way that one would work
              with
functions on numbers, asking "how similar is the target structure to
              the
original structure?" and "what's the smallest size of a set actually
              moved
by the embedding?" Such questions about embeddings of the universe form
              a
subfield of Set Theory known as the study of large cardinals.
              The
terminology here hints at the answer to the last question
              mentioned.
Indeed, the sets actually moved by elementary embeddings are
              substantially
larger than any object studied in other branches of
              Mathematics
(substantially larger than the set of real numbers for example).
              Yet it
turns out that the existence of elementary embeddings has concrete
              effects
on lower level objects, including concrete effects on real numbers.
              This
project is part of the on-going effort to better understand
              large
cardinals, and better understand their effects on the line of
              real
numbers. The PI, like other researchers in the field, is motivated by
              the
connection between the abstract and the concrete.

