Title       : Simultaneous Measurement of Condensation and Thermal Accommodation Coefficients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0094909

Award Number: 0094909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norihiko Fukuta nfukuta@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As a cloud droplet grows by condensation, water molecules flow from the vapor
              surrounding the droplet to its surface and the heat released by condensation
              flows away from the droplet.  Classical theory treats the environment of the
              drop as a continuum, so that the heat and mass transfer are described by the
              diffusion equation.  This is a valid approximation for drops that are much
              larger than the molecular mean free path, which is about 0.06 mm for normal sea
              level conditions.  However, newly formed cloud droplets have sizes typically
              between 0.1 and 1 mm, for which the classical, continuum theory must be
              modified to include gas kinetic effects.  The modification introduces two new
              parameters that characterize the transfer of heat and mass, the accommodation
              coefficient and the condensation coefficient, denoted respectively by a and b. 
              The accommodation coefficient may be thought of as the fraction of the
              molecules bouncing off the surface of a drop that have acquired the temperature
              of the drop.  The condensation coefficient may be described as the fraction of
              the molecules hitting the surface of the drop that stick to it.  In general, a
              and b are not equal and must be determined experimentally, because there is no
              known way to derive their values theoretically.  Though there have been
              previous attempts to determine the coefficients, the results are quite
              variable.  There are several reasons for this.  First, it is no easy matter to
              measure the rate of growth of a micron-sized droplet in controlled conditions. 
              Second, a and b are linked in such a way that a given droplet growth rate can
              be explained by many combinations of a and b.  Third, there is evidence that
              the values of the coefficients may be influenced by small amounts of impurities
              in the water.  This project aims to determine a and b separately by taking
              advantage of their different dependence on atmospheric pressure.  The rates of
              growth of small droplets are observed under different conditions of temperature
              and pressure by illuminating them with a laser and employing the known peaks in
              the Mie scattering curve for water droplets to determine drop size. 
              Experiments with drops formed on aerosols of different chemical composition
              will indicate the possible influence of contaminants on a and b.  There is
              already some evidence that impurities lower the values of these coefficients. 
              The effect of lower values is to reduce the growth rates of small droplets.  A
              consequence of smaller droplet size is a greater reflectivity of the cloud for
              solar radiation.  Therefore pollution aerosols may have the effect not only of
              increasing the number of small cloud droplets but also retarding their early
              growth by condensation.  The correct treatment of the effects of clouds on
              solar radiation may therefore require accurate knowledge of the accommodation
              and condensation coefficients. 
