Title       : CAREER: Financial and Real Effects of Policy Reform in Emerging Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0094379

Award Number: 0094379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Henry pbhenry@Stanford.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Evaluation of the financial and real effects of policy reforms is important,
              because there is a paucity of facts about the effects of policy reform on
              financial markets and the impact of financial market fluctuations on the real
              side of emerging economies. For example, the opening of emerging stock markets
              to foreign investors in the late 1980s and early 1990s coincided with a boom in
              emerging market equity prices. The conventional wisdom is that these stock
              market liberalizations caused the booms. However, with a myriad of other
              economic events happening concurrently, it is not obvious that the stock market
              liberalizations were responsible for the boom. It is also fashionable to blame
              the recent emerging markets crises in Asia and Latin America on liberalized
              stock markets, but this view ignores the fact that stock market liberalization
              took place almost ten years before the onset of the crises. By evaluating and
              documenting the facts about the effects of policy reform on the financial and
              real side of developing economies, this research program makes substantive
              contributions to economic knowledge. In addition to increasing the general
              state of knowledge, this research also has the potential to make a significant
              contribution to general economic welfare.

This project evaluates the real
              and financial effects of economic policy reform in emerging markets. The goal
              is to systematically document a coherent and reliable set of facts about the
              effects of policy reform on financial markets and the impact of financial
              market fluctuations on the real side of emerging economies.  The investigator's
              past research on stock market liberalization and on inflation stabilization has
              made progress in this direction using aggregate data. CAREER funding will
              permit the investigator to build on, and extend, his existing research by
              constructing an extensive data set on emerging market firms. Systematic use of
              firm-level data is central to obtaining more robust conclusions about the
              financial and real effects of policy reform in emerging markets. The
              educational activities disseminate the findings of this research to business
              practitioners and public policy makers. The educational activities also train
              future scholars to work in this area of research, with a particular emphasis on
              increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities through an
              undergraduate research initiative.

Finance theory and macroeconomic theory
              are used to generate sharp predictions about the financial and real effects of
              economic policy reform. These predictions are tested against the data using
              event study techniques. A major component of the research program to date is
              the construction of a time series of major economic events that coincided with
              the economic policy reforms. This list of events is used to isolate the impact
              of the economic policy reforms from the potentially confounding effects of
              other economic events.

