Title       : Optical Property/Structure/Process Relationship for Gold Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0094773

Award Number: 0094773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Suni isuni@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Title: Optical Property/Structure/Process Relationship for Gold
              Nanoparticles
Proposal Number:	CTS-0094773
Principal Investigator: Ian
              Suni
Institution: Clarkson University


The objective of this proposal is
              to investigate the electrodeposition of gold particles onto hydrogen terminated
              silicon surfaces using atomic force microscopy, second harmonic generation
              (SHG), and UV-visible extinction spectroscopy. Gold nanoparticles will be
              deposited onto silicon substrates by both electrodeposition and by galvanic
              displacement from hydrogen fluoride solutions.  The electrodeposition of metal
              nanoparticles of a relatively uniform size can be accomplished by using a large
              transient overpotential so that instantaneous nucleation occurs. Nanoparticle
              size can be controlled by regulating the duration of the nucleation transient.
              An alternative method of nanoparticle growth is to apply a highly cathodic
              voltage transient as a nucleation strike, followed by particle growth at a low
              overpotential so that further nucleation does not occur.  The optical studies
              involve development of in situ tools for studying nucleation and particle
              growth during the initial stages of thin film deposition. Gold nanoparticles
              have unique optical and catalytic properties that might lead to novel
              applications. The recent emergence of gold nanoparticles as effective oxidation
              catalysts is an area where this work may have relevance.  In addition, this
              work may lead to novel methods to rapidly characterize the average size and
              structure of metal nanoparticles over micron-sized length scales.




