Title       : CAREER: Career Development Plan: Interdisciplinary Research and Education in
               Marine Habitats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0094169

Award Number: 0094169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Finelli cfinelli@lumcon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LA Univs Marine Consortium
	      8124 Hwy 56
	      Chauvin, LA  70344    504/851-2800

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will integrate the investigator's research program with student
              active education to advance our understanding of the interdependency of
              biological, chemical, and physical processes in marine habitats. This goal will
              be achieved through interdisciplinary field and laboratory studies, and through
              the development of participatory educational programs at the university and K-
              12 levels.

The motivation for the proposed research is to understand the
              role of burrowing infauna on nutrient processes in sedimentary habitats. Many
              animals create burrows in the soft mud and sand that cover the vast majority of
              the sea floor. The water that is expelled as the animal feeds or ventilates its
              burrow is often enriched in ammonium, silicate, phosphate, and other important
              nutrients. While some important geochemical and ecological effects of
              bioturbation and bioirrigation have been demonstrated, quantitative studies of
              the production and fate of nutrient plumes have never been conducted. Over the
              next five-years, Dr. Finelli and his students will study the effects of
              nutrient release by two species of thalassinid shrimp from Louisiana coastal
              habitats, the estuarine ghost-shrimp Lepidophthalmus louisianensis and the
              beach ghost-shrimp Callichirus islagrande. Using thermistor flow meters and
              portable pumps, they will measure the daily and seasonal patterns of burrow
              ventilation, nutrient concentration of burrow water, and burrow morphology.
              Detailed measurements of plumes in the laboratory and field will then be used
              to examine how rapidly nutrient plumes are dispersed by turbulent water flow.
              These measurements are critical to predicting the effects of nutrient plumes on
              primary production. Finally, algal pigment concentrations and measurements of
              photosynthetic efficiency from the areas surrounding the burrows will test if
              the elevated nutrients in burrow plumes influence benthic production. This
              research will lead to fundamental advances in our understanding of nutrient
              cycling, benthic-pelagic coupling, and the ecology of sedimentary
              habitats.

In addition to being researchers, science faculty members are
              educators who pass on established knowledge and provide students with the
              cognitive skills to identify and solve problems. The importance of this latter
              role is underscored by recent calls for increased teaching from funding
              agencies, state and federal governments, and the tax-paying public that are
              spurred by the pervasive role of science and technology in our daily lives. Two
              themes have been emphasized in the recent discussions of science education
              reform. First, all people need a minimal level of scientific understanding to
              participate in a technological society. Second, leaming is best accomplished by
              observation and manipulation of study subjects, not by memorization and
              recitation. Both of these themes are addressed in the education plan. At the
              university level, Dr. Finelli will support and supervise undergraduate and
              graduate research, and teach courses that emphasize hypothesis formation and
              data collection. However, it is at the K- 12 level that a real opportunity
              exists to better serve the 4000 students who visit LUMCON annually. The
              investigator is part of a collaborative team that is developing a field
              experience for grades 7-12 that is guided by state and national science
              education standards. This effort consists of annual teacher workshops that are
              designed to help local teachers use LUMCON as a resotirce for science
              education. In addition, these workshops will serve as a mechanism for formative
              evaluation of the field program. The field experience requires students to
              collect water chemistry samples in the field, analyze data in the lab, and
              interpret their results. Data from all classes will be available online to
              encourage yearlong participation. The objective of this exercise is to teach
              students about physical and chemical processes in the salt marsh, while
              exposing them to the scientific process.


