Title       : Swamps and Faunal Diversification: Interdemic Variation in the Respiratory
               Ecology of East African Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0094393

Award Number: 0094393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauren J. Chapman ljchapman@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              For fishes, the availability of dissolved oxygen in the water can limit habitat
              quality and dispersal pathways.  Oxygen-scarce (hypoxic) waters play a similar
              role to the absence of water for some fish species, creating a barrier to
              movement or limiting selection of alternative habitats.  Oxygen scarcity has
              led to the evolution of varied morphological and physiological adaptations in
              fishes (e.g., development of air-breathing organs, large gills).  These
              adaptations have associated costs and benefits that should affect the ability
              of fishes to colonize, inhabit, or disperse through deoxygenated waters. 
              Despite great interest in the evolution of physiological and morphological
              adaptations to deoxygenation, the role of oxygen-scarce waters as barriers or
              biological filters and their impact on fish diversification is not well
              understood.  This research program considers the evolutionary role of
              oxygen-scarce wetlands in fish faunal diversification by addressing the
              question of whether or not hypoxia acts as a strong selective force
              contributing to variation among populations of East African fishes.

Oxygen
              scarcity is widespread in tropical fresh waters, particularly in dense
              wetlands, floodplain pools, and flooded forests.  In East Africa, extensive
              hypoxic wetlands dominated by papyrus harbor air-breathing fishes like the
              African lungfish.  Some non-air-breathing (water-breathing) fishes also occur,
              and these tend to be species with extremely efficient oxygen uptake mechanisms
              (e.g., very large gill surface area) or species inhabiting the edge of the
              swamp where interaction with open waters elevates the oxygen content of the
              water.  Despite low numbers of fish species within dense wetlands, these
              habitats may be very important in the maintenance of fish diversity.  For
              air-breathing fishes, wetlands are not likely to limit dispersal.  However, for
              water-breathing fishes that cannot tolerate low oxygen conditions in the water,
              large swampy divides may isolate populations and lead to diversification and
              speciation.  Even for some water-breathing fishes that can survive in dense
              swamps, habitat use and dispersal may still be limited by dissolved oxygen
              availability and oxygen uptake efficiency in the species.  This may result in
              differences between swamp and open-water populations (i.e., neighboring
              populations of the same species may diverge in morphology or genetic makeup
              when one population lives in dense swamp and other populations live in
              well-oxygenated streams and rivers).  Earlier studies by L. Chapman and
              colleagues demonstrated that swamp populations of three water-breathing African
              fishes have larger gills than populations of the same species in nearby
              well-oxygenated waters.  Further studies on one of the species revealed
              differences in respiratory behavior and physiological characters between fish
              from swamp and fish from nearby well-oxygenated streams and rivers.  However,
              the evolutionary mechanisms controlling these patterns of interdemic
              (between-population) variation are unknown.  

This research program uses a
              combination of field studies in Uganda and laboratory studies at the University
              of Florida to examine the degree to which oxygen scarcity contributes to
              interdemic variation in the respiratory biology of water-breathing East African
              fishes, and whether their respiratory biology is limiting habitat use and
              performance.  The program focuses on one species from each of three major
              lineages of water-breathing fishes that inhabit both hypoxic swamps and
              well-oxygenated lakes and/or rivers:  Barbus neumayeri  (a minnow),
              Pseudocrenilabrus multicolor victoriae (a cichlid) and Gnathonemus victoriae
              (an electric mormyrid fish).  This research expands on earlier studies of these
              species by evaluating the relative contribution of genetic and environmental
              influences on respiratory characters as well as physiological and behavioral
              performance under oxygen stress.  A major question is how much of the variation
              in respiratory traits (e.g., gill size, hemoglobin concentration) between swamp
              and open-water populations is the result of genetic differences, and how much
              of the variation is due to phenotypic plasticity (change in characters in
              response to the environment that does not involve genetic change)?   The
              project also considers whether the variation is adaptive, whether change in
              gill morphology impacts non-functionally related characters (i.e., do large
              gills constrain adjacent muscles such as those involved in feeding?), and the
              potential for interactions between phenotypes (large- and small-gilled fish) in
              the field.  The evaluation of these questions will provide insight into how
              environmental patchiness (the swamp-open water mosaic) fosters evolutionary
              diversification of African fishes, and enhance our understanding of adaptive
              phenotypic plasticity versus local adaptation.


