Title       : Kinetic and Structural Properties of Semicrystalline Polyolefins derived from
               NMR, Thermal Analysis and High Resolution Microscopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a0094485

Award Number: 0094485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rufina G. Alamo alamo@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1594,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A research program is described that uses previous experience in the area of
              semicrystalline polymers and the use of NMR spectroscopy to advance the
              characterization and structural properties of polyolefins.  The research is
              also projects to improve our understanding of the development of crystalline
              structure from the non-oriented isotropic melt or during annealing a previously
              crystallized system.  The PI plans to build upon the base of pervious NSF
              funded programs that allowed training in the use of solid-state NMR, to extend
              a novel NMR method to obtain the crystallite thickness distributions and mean
              average thicknesses of narrow fractions of linear polyethylenes previously
              characterized with other techniques.  The method will also be tested in
              polypropylenes using AFM, SAXS and TEM data to build the required calibrations.
               A combination of NMR, DSC and AFM will be used to establish the role of a
              specific lamellar morphology and/or chain conformation in the amorphous
              regions, in the unique isothermal melting observed in polypropylenes.  The
              kinetics of this process will be also studied.  The proposal also includes a
              research program to assess the nature of the structural changes that take place
              with time upon annealing previously crystallized polyolefins.  Changes will be
              evaluated in relation to the initial crystalline morphology.  Emphasis is given
              the NMR investigation of relaxation properties of the chains in the
              intercrystalline regions and WAXS analysis of the halo of well characterized
              metallocene type polyethylenes and polypropylenes.
%%%
The FAMU-FSU College
              of Engineering is a jointly managed program of the Florida State University, a
              Research I institution with an enrollment of 35,000, and Florida A&M
              University, a Historically Black University with and enrollment of 12,000. 
              Faculty hold joint appointments at both institutions, and students from both
              universities enroll in the same engineering classes.  The present enrollment at
              the College of Engineering consists of approximately 50% minority students and
              over 25% women, making it unique in several respects.  The proposed work
              includes active participation of graduate students and training in current
              techniques of characterization of polymers.  These activities parallel the
              commitment of the PI to education of students in the area of Polymer Science
              and Engineering.  The PI plans to take advantage of recently NSF funded
              instrumentation (NMR spectrometer and AFM) to FAMU and FSU at the College of
              Engineering to expand on characterization and the details of the crystalline
              state of novel polyolefins.

