Title       : Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0094710

Award Number: 0094710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Ryan meryan@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Staley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides comprehensive support to complement a scholarship program
              for low income undergraduates completing their baccalaureate degrees in
              engineering, computer science, and mathematics. A constellation of support
              services are provided through existing programs at the University including:
              recruitment and outreach, tutoring, mentoring, advisement, career planning and
              exploration opportunities, research and internship placements, summer
              enrichment and work- experience programs, study abroad and cooperative
              education opportunities, work preparedness, and job placement. The program
              interfaces with a large number of campus organizations and programs. The
              program integrates with successful existing programs at the University and
              comprises the following components: Implementing recruitment, outreach,
              selection, and monitoring strategies with particular attention directed at
              underrepresented minorities, women, and students with disabilities. Developing
              a network of CSEMS scholars and of support services including tutoring,
              mentoring, small group academic focus sessions, and advisement to ensure
              student retention and success. Providing career planning, practical experience,
              and career exploration opportunities through research and internship
              placements, study abroad, and cooperative education opportunities. Developing a
              monitoring and evaluation process to ensure program success and degree
              completion of scholarship recipients.
