Title       : Game Theory and Social Interactions: A Virtual Collaboratory for Teaching and
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0094800

Award Number: 0094800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2497868            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Holt cah2k@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Game theory is one of the prime contenders for becoming the central theory in
              economics and related social sciences. Broadly speaking, a game is an
              interactive situation in which everyone's incentives depend on their own and
              others' actions. Games have been used to model a wide variety of environments,
              such as collective action problems, market pricing, auctions, committee voting,
              family decisions, organizational behavior, and contract law negotiations. The
              Nash equilibrium, which has been the central solution concept in game theory
              since its introduction about fifty years ago, is one of the most commonly used
              constructs in economics. Game theory is increasingly being applied in political
              science and management science.  Its relevance in many non-market interactions,
              however, is limited by the extreme rationality assumptions that underlie
              standard solution concepts. This project will bring together a group of social
              scientists that incorporate behavioral and cultural factors into the analysis
              of strategic interactions. Cross-cultural studies of non-economic motivations
              are naturally supplemented with controlled experiments, some of which will be
              implemented using a portable wireless laboratory or web-based software to
              connect participants at different locations. Although game theory has been
              successfully applied in some settings (for example, the design of the FCC
              spectrum auctions), the inclusion of behavioral elements and limited
              rationality is essential to ensure a major impact on the study of a wide array
              of social interactions.

One goal of this project is to coordinate web-based
              teaching, research, and programming activities through a virtual collaboratory
              involving the investigators and other researchers who decide to post and share
              their work. The central website will contain a set of useful computer programs
              and a data base of interdisciplinary experimental results, which will be
              structured to stimulate further theoretical work that is guided by carefully
              documented empirical regularities. The web-based programs that control these
              strategic interactions will be made available for general use and adapted for
              classroom instruction, for large classes and groups of students at different
              universities. A series of annual workshops on classroom experiments, held at
              different locations, will facilitate the dissemination of the teaching and
              research insights across disciplinary boundaries.

