Title       : Computer Simulations of Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0094422

Award Number: 0094422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Landau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0094422
Landau
Computer simulations are a powerful tool for obtaining
              fundamental information about wide ranging problems in statistical physics and
              to complement traditional theoretical and experimental methods.  This grant
              supports a broad program on computer simulations of statistical systems.  As
              part of this effort, large scale simulation methods will be developed and
              refined for the study of phase transitions in systems which are difficult to
              treat analytically.  Techniques to be used include diverse Monte Carlo and Spin
              Dynamics simulations which have been exceedingly well refined.  Models to be
              examined will be relevant to magnetic materials (including systems which
              exhibit colossal magnetoresistance), binary semiconductor alloys, growing
              films, and disordered media.  Several of the systems include particles which
              may move continuously in space and which are subject to elastic interactions,
              whereas others will be confined to rigid lattices (including classical spins
              with continuous degrees of freedom) with discrete near-neighbor interactions. 
              In many of the systems finite geometries and/or the presence of walls are
              responsible for behavior which is different than that which is found in the
              bulk.  Both static and dynamic critical phenomena for systems in equilibrium
              will be carefully examined, and simple non-equilibrium models related to film
              growth and superionic diffusion will be studied using Monte Carlo and Kinetic
              Monte Carlo methods.  Where possible, results will be compared with analytical
              theory and/or experiment.
%%%
Computer simulations are a powerful tool for
              obtaining fundamental information about wide ranging problems in statistical
              physics and to complement traditional theoretical and experimental methods. 
              This grant supports a broad program on computer simulations.  Computational
              techniques will be developed and refined, and these techniques will be applied
              to a variety of physics systems. ***  

