Title       : CAREER: Statistical Physics of Disordered Systems: A Program for the Development
               and Application of Exact Combinatorial Algorithms to Extended Systems in
               Disordered Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0094176

Award Number: 0094176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chen Zeng chenz@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0094176
Zeng
This CAREER award supports theoretical research on the
              thermodynamics of disorder-dominated systems. The PI seeks to develop a
              framework in which combinatorial algorithms are used to study disordered
              systems, and from the resulting analyses of disordered systems, new
              combinatorial algorithms of greater utility can be designed. There are three
              components to the proposed work: (1) combinatorial algorithms will be used to
              study dislocation loops, and the roughness and statistical topography of glassy
              interfaces that are important to materials science, with the aim of
              investigating universal features at random criticality. (2) Large scale
              simulations on mesoscopic vortex systems using a new finite-temperature
              transfer matrix sampling technique will be performed to investigate: anomalous
              scalings of thermodynamic variables, universal sample-to-sample variances for
              non-self-averaging quantities, and the scaling forms of probability
              distribution functions. (3) A disordered fully-packed-loop model defined on a
              square lattice will be studied with a focus on difficulty of computing ground
              states as a function of loop fugacity. The aim is to locate a phase transition
              between P (polynomial and easy) and NP (nondeterministic polynomial and hard). 
              The educational component of this award involves the development and
              implementation of multidisciplinary science courses.  The primary focus will be
              a graduate course "Combinatorial Optimizations in Natural Science" with a novel
              implementation that includes a diverse range of topics from bioinformantics to
              condensed matter physics.
%%%
This CAREER award supports theoretical research
              and education on statistical physics and combinatorial algorithms.  The focus
              of the research is on the equilibrium properties of systems dominated by
              disorder with the aim of contributing to a unified theory of the thermodynamics
              of disordered systems.  Materials motivated examples include vortices in type
              II superconductors that are pinned by random disorder, polymer absorbtion on
              disordered substrates, and conformation of compact proteins with random residue
              sequences.
***

