Title       : Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a0094866

Award Number: 0094866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Day dday@mc.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Kay Abbey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montgomery Col Rockville
	      51 Mannakee Street
	      Rockville, MD  208501101    301/279-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides scholarships and reduces economic barriers to full-time
              enrollment for up to 40 full-time, Pell eligible students majoring in
              engineering, computer science or mathematics at Montgomery College each year.
              These students, known as Montgomery College NSF CSEM Scholars, are provided
              with a challenging and supportive program that prepares them for majors in
              engineering, computer science or mathematics at a four-year college. Selected
              students participate in a paid internship program the summer before
              transferring to a four-year institution. In addition to grade point average,
              selection criteria includes a student essay and letters of recommendation from
              individuals such as teachers, counselors or job supervisors who can address the
              applicant's potential to succeed in engineering, computer science or
              mathematics.

The centerpiece of support services for Montgomery College NSF
              CSEM Scholars is an expanded, comprehensive mentoring program that provides
              students with interdisciplinary faculty mentor teams composed of faculty from
              computer science, mathematics, engineering, and the basic sciences. This
              mentoring process continues at the four-year institution with a continuing
              mentor from Montgomery College during the student's first year after transfer.
              At Montgomery College, student's mentoring team may include a faculty member
              from a four-year institution once a student has decided upon a transfer
              institution. Scholars are required to enroll in a one credit course that
              includes seminars by scientists and engineers as well as resume writing,
              interviewing, preparing for transfer and graduate school and applying for
              internships.

Scholars have many opportunities outside of the classroom to
              interact with their peers, faculty and business leaders. As these opportunities
              are evaluated, the college develops models of pathways that lead to bachelor's
              degree completion in engineering, computer science or mathematics for students
              who start their college education at a community college. 


