Title       : CAREER: Effects of Pressure and Magnetic Field in Strongly-Correlated-Electron
               Systems with Non-Collinear Magnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  2002   
File        : a0094241

Award Number: 0094241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543104             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinrich Nakotte hnakotte@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at New Mexico State
              University will focus on strongly-correlated-electron systems that exhibit
              non-collinear arrangements of the magnetic moments.  Non-collinear order can be
              perturbed by the application of sufficiently high pressures or high magnetic
              fields, where different dependencies would allow separating direct and indirect
              exchange interactions as well as contributions due to coherence, Zeeman and
              crystal-field terms.  A better understanding of the magnetism in
              strongly-correlated-electron systems will provide indispensable information on
              the complicated hierarchy of interactions between magnetic moments, the limits
              of validity of standard models, and the pre-conditions for long-range magnetic
              order.  The project will use the neutron-scattering and high-magnetic-field
              user facilities at Los Alamos National Laboratory, and a substantial portion of
              the studies will be performed under multi-extreme sample-environment conditions
              (low temperatures, high pressures, high magnetic fields) that cannot be
              achieved elsewhere in the world.  Graduate students will gain in-depth
              expertise in the field of magnetism and they will acquire skills in
              cutting-edge neutron-scattering and high-magnetic-field techniques, which are
              currently in great demand for forefront research.  In addition, this project
              fosters efforts toward a strong Materials Science Program (a fast-growing field
              with many rewarding career opportunities) in the predominantly Hispanic
              communities in Southern New Mexico and Western Texas.
%%%
Magnetic materials
              are of extraordinary importance for many technological applications. The
              development and design of new magnetic devices requires a detailed
              understanding of the magnetic properties of the material under investigation.
              Materials with strongly interacting electrons exhibit a variety of fascinating
              properties, many of which are not completely understood. In these so-called
              strongly-correlated-electron systems, various interactions can cause the
              magnetic moments to arrange in an unusual non-collinear fashion. This Faculty
              Early Career Development (CAREER) project at New Mexico State University will
              focus on the properties of such non-collinear magnets at world-record external
              conditions (high pressures and high magnetic fields). The results are expected
              to provide indispensable input for modeling the magnetism in
              strongly-correlated-electron systems. Graduate students will be trained in
              performing world-class research, and this will help to prepare the next
              generation of leading scientists in Academia, National Laboratories and
              Industry. In addition, this project fosters efforts toward a strong Materials
              Science Program (a fast-growing field with many rewarding career opportunities)
              in the predominantly Hispanic communities in Southern New Mexico and Western
              Texas.
***


