Title       : Molecular Organization of Mammalian Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0094577

Award Number: 0094577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Burnett BURNETT@WISTAR.UPENN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Burnett, Roger M.
MCB-0094577


We will explore the principles by which
              viruses are constructed from their constituent proteins, and advance ways of
              imaging very large biological structures at high resolution.  The molecular
              structures of two very large virions will be obtained by combining two
              independent imaging methods.  Cryo-electron microscopy (EM) will yield
              three-dimensional reconstructions of adenovirus and bacteriophage PRD1, and
              their mutants.  Difference imaging will use the known X-ray structures of the
              two major coat proteins with the EM reconstructions to define the molecular
              envelopes and locations of proteins at the vertex and others acting as capsid
              "cement."

We want to understand the molecular interactions determining the
              architecture and stability of adenovirus and bacteriophage PRD1, and to develop
              our hypothesis that they have evolved from a common ancestor.  How can two
              dsDNA viruses have large pseudo T=25 virions with quite different sizes,
              although they are formed from similar major coat proteins?  Both proteins have
              double "viral barrel" subunits to give trimers with pseudo-hexagonal shapes
              that can closely pack.  How are these and other similarities, such as in DNA
              organization and replication, maintained while the viruses have evolved?  They
              infect very different hosts, and PRD1 has an unusual internal membrane.  The
              role and evolution of cementing proteins will be studied by imaging viral
              mutants.  These proteins are important in large macromolecular assemblies as
              they resolve the conflicting requirements for weak interactions to ensure
              accurate assembly of major components, and the strong bonding necessary for
              stability.

