Title       : Intercellular Signalling in Vibrio harveyi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0094447

Award Number: 0094447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie L. Bassler bbassler@molbiol.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1114,1136,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term goal of this research is to explore the molecular mechanisms that
              bacteria use for inter-cellular communication.  This project focuses on a study
              of quorum sensing in the model bioluminescent marine bacterium Vibrio harveyi. 
              It has been demonstrated that V. harveyi has two quorum sensing circuits
              (Signaling System 1 and Signaling System 2) that converge to regulate light
              production (Lux). Each system is made up of a two-component sensor-auto-inducer
              pair: LuxN/AI-1 for System 1 and LuxPQ/AI-2 for System 2.  Both sensors
              transduce information to a shared phosphorelay protein, LuxU, which in turn
              conveys the signal to the response regulator protein LuxO.  Phospho-LuxO is
              indirectly responsible for repression of luciferase production at low cell
              density, because it activates the expression of a negative regulator of Lux.  A
              transcriptional activator protein, LuxR, is also required for expression of the
              luciferase structural operon (luxCDABEGH).  Results suggest that V. harveyi
              uses Signaling System 1 and AI-1 for intra-species communication and Signaling
              System 2 and AI-2 for inter-species communication.  Many bacteria including a
              number of clinically important pathogens produce AI-2.  The goal of this
              project is to identify and characterize components of the V. harveyi
              multi-channel quorum sensing signalling pathway, to determine the functions and
              interactions of the different signalling proteins, and to determine the
              mechanism of signal integration by the two systems. The analysis of this
              regulatory network will lead to a molecular understanding of how bacteria
              integrate, process and transduce sensory information to control gene expression
              in response to inter-cellular communication. Analysis of this circuit should be
              valuable for understanding how bacteria perceive and react to their
              environment, how they communicate with one another and with other species of
              bacteria, and how they architect elaborate community structures. Since the
              regulatory process is complex and involves intra-cellular, inter-cellular,
              intra-species and inter-species signal transmission, interesting new mechanisms
              could be revealed. 
