Title       : Attentional Limits to Visual Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0094992

Award Number: 0094992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rene Marois rene.marois@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin M. Chun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Visual scenes contain far more information than can be perceived consciously at
              any given instant.  The information that does reach visual awareness is
              selected by attention.  However, since attention has very limited processing
              capacities, it constrains severely the amount of visual information accessible
              for visual perception.  Surprisingly little is known about the circumstances
              under which attention limits perception and about the neural substrates that
              underlie these restricted attentional capacities.  By using a combination of
              behavioral and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments, this
              research will examine the behavioral conditions under which attentional
              capacities are strained, and it will map out the brain regions that are
              responsible for these capacity limits.  The research will use the attentional
              blink (AB) paradigm as a model for understanding the neural correlates of
              attentional limits to visual perception.  The AB refers to a severe but
              transient (about half a second) impairment in detecting the second of two
              target objects presented amidst a rapid sequence of objects.  The blink occurs
              when attentional mechanisms are consumed by the processing of the first target,
              leaving little attention available to perceive the second target, which hence
              may go undetected.  Thus, the AB can be used as a measure of attentional
              capacity limits.  One series of experiments will determine the conditions that
              trigger the attentional blink.  While it is well known that the presence of
              multiple objects in a visual scene can compete with a target for attentional
              resources, this research will determine whether other conditions that render a
              target less discernable may also drain attentional resources.  Another series
              of experiments will examine whether increasing the difficulty in perceiving an
              object, such as by decreasing its visibility, is sufficient to increase
              attentional demands and generate an AB.  The research will also determine the
              generality of the capacity-limited process revealed by the AB.  Do various
              forms of attention, namely task-driven (top-down) and stimulus-driven
              (bottom-up) attention, show similar capacity limits?  Do other sensory
              modalities, namely the auditory system, also show capacity limits like the
              visual AB, and do they tap on the same attentional resources as the visual
              system?  And finally, are the attentional resources necessary to perform
              perceptual tasks such as letter identification the same as those required when
              performing motor tasks, such as response selection?  The experimental approach
              will be first to determine behaviorally whether different forms of attentional
              processes show capacity constraints, and then to carry out a series of fMRI
              experiments to determine the neural substrates which mediate these
              capacity-limited processes.  A massive amount of visual information can be
              processed in parallel in the initial stages of visual information processing. 
              However, soon the information enters some capacity-limited stage(s) that
              severely limit the amount of visual information that can reach conscious
              perception.  These experiments will reveal the behavioral conditions that
              produce bottlenecks, and fMRI data will determine where the bottlenecks occur
              along the visual information-processing pathway in the human brain.  This
              research should therefore reveal important insights into the neuro-architecture
              of human visual information processing, and it will also advance our
              understanding of the link between attention and visual perception.
