Title       : CAREER: Understanding Plasticity In Polymer Glasses at The Molecular Level by
               Computer Simulation and Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0094290

Award Number: 0094290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel Utz mutz@ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The plasticity of glassy polymers, in spite of its considerable industrial
              importance, continues to represent a major frontier of materials science and
              condensed matter physics. Although phenomenological models of the mechanical
              properties of polymer glasses at large strains do exist, the underlying
              mechanisms are unkown. The proposed work aims at identifying the elementary
              processes of plasticity at the nanometer length scale, thus uncovering the
              relationship between molecular structure and plastic properties.  In order to
              meet this goal, a comprehensive approach is adopted, including molecular
              simulation as well as experimental work. Modeling efforts will shed light on
              the role of the topological constraints caused by the entangled polymer chains
              in determining the spatial extension of the elementary relaxation processes
              that are activated by plastic deformation. A second target of computer
              simulation will be the interplay between physical aging and plastic deformation
              in molecular glasses.  Experimental work, in complement to the simulations,
              will also focus on the role of molecular entanglements. Compatible polymer
              blend systems offer the opportunity to vary the density of entanglements by
              simply varying composition. This will be exploited for a systematic solid-state
              NMR study of how the amount and character of molecular alignment that results
              from plastic deformation depends on the entanglement density. In addition, the
              connection between entanglements and the shear activation volume, a key
              parameter of the plastic response that is linked to the spatial extension of
              its elementary processes, will be explored. Together, the results from these
              studies have the potential to take understanding of plasticity in amorphous
              polymer solids onto a new level. Knowledge of the relation between molecular
              structure and plastic properties will foster the optimization and development
              of novel polymer materials and applications, opening many opportunities for
              further research.  By virtue of its interdisciplinary nature between physics,
              chemistry and materials science, the proposed research program will open a
              multitude of opportunities for students from several different departments,
              graduate as well as undergraduate, to become involved. In turn, this will
              generate a highly stimulating learning environment for fields as diverse as NMR
              spectroscopy, computer modeling at electronic, molecular and continuum length
              scales, polymer science, and solid mechanics. 
%%%
Although glassy polymers
              are ubiquitous in today's technology, many important aspects of their
              mechanical behavior are not yet well understood. The present project seeks to
              establish the molecular origins of the ductility of such materials. Advanced
              magnetic resonance spectroscopy as well as computer simulations will be used
              for this purpose. The insight gained from this work will be helpful to guide
              the development of novel materials for structural as well as medical and
              optoelectronic applications.

