Title       : CAREER: Expanding the Scope of Nucleic and Protein Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0094128

Award Number: 0094128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629906             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Liu drliu@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0094128 David Liu
The ability of chemists and biologists to manipulate
              molecules of increasing complexity has exerted a profound influence on our
              understanding of the processes driving life.  Nature employs a powerful version
              of generating variants of molecules and correlating their new structures and
              functions in the form of molecular evolution.  The dominance of proteins and
              nucleic acids among solutions to complex chemical problems, despite the limited
              chemical functionality of these molecules, is a dramatic testament to the power
              of iterated cycles of diversification, selection, and amplification. 
              Researchers have recently harnessed this power to artificially evolve proteins
              and nucleic acids with new properties.  This CAREER project seeks to expand the
              scope of molecular evolution by addressing two current limitations.  First,
              because each cycle of molecular evolution relies on the diversification of
              molecular structure, the development of general methods to more intelligently
              sample the vast sequence space of a biopolymer would represent a major advance
              in the ability to evolve all types of biopolymers.  Second, the development of
              methods to apply molecular evolution to more types of biologically important
              macromolecules such as protein-RNA complexes may lead to advances both in the
              basic understanding of these molecules and in the ability to generate new
              molecules with tailor made properties.

Molecular evolution is representative
              of chemical biology, a term used to describe the manipulation of structures and
              functions of molecules to study biological phenomena.  Although chemical
              biology is having an enormous impact on many areas of science, the rapidly
              changing and multidisciplinary nature of chemical biology together with the
              effort required to depart from standard textbooks in biological chemistry have
              resulted in its under-representation in curricula at both the undergraduate and
              graduate levels.  Early and in-depth exposure to chemical biology is now a
              prerequisite for any complete modern education in chemistry or biology.  As
              part of the education component of this CAREER project, a course for graduate
              students and advanced undergraduates has been constructed from more than 800
              recent papers covering many of the most important and cutting-edge topics in
              chemical biology, including genomics, proteomics, combinatorial chemistry,
              chemical genetics, protein design and engineering, and molecular evolution.

