Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program (CSEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0094750

Award Number: 0094750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sterrett dsterret@utm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Corey Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Helgeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Martin
	      University Avenue
	      Martin, TN  38238    901/587-7000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is fostering individual attention and mentoring leading to
              graduation and successful employment in the fields of engineering, mathematics
              and computer science through a National Science Foundation Scholars Program.
              The primary objectives of the program are to (1) broaden enrollment diversity
              within these disciplines to include more low- income persons, African
              Americans, and women (2) increase retention to degree rates in the targeted
              disciplines (3) strengthen collaborative partnerships with other higher
              educational institutions and industrial sectors employing graduates in these
              fields and, (4) improve professional development and career choice
              opportunities for the targeted low- income students in related fields. Expected
              outcomes include increased enrollment of low- income, academically talented
              students in engineering, mathematics and computer science fields, enhanced
              persistence and performance, successful degree completion and direct
              application of learned skills in employment. The scholarship program prepares
              participants for either graduation within two years of entry into the program
              or attainment of significant achievement within respective areas of discipline.
              Academic experiences are being enhanced through required participation in
              seminars and workshops and interaction with faculty mentors and professional
              peers in related industries. Program activities include individual and group
              meetings with the Program Director, site visits to regional industries,
              workshops, seminars, research projects with a faculty mentor and/ or external
              sponsor, and peer group study sessions. Program success is measured on academic
              achievement, retention to graduation rates, number and percentage of students
              passing license examinations, and number gainfully employed upon graduation.
              Dissemination of program activities are both internal and external via
              conferences, workshops and outreach initiatives.
