Title       : Role of Presynaptic Mechanisms in the Control of Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0094444

Award Number: 0094444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon T. Alford sta@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract
The mechanisms underlying rhythmic behaviors such as walking,
              talking, and breathing will be studied. These are vital activities controlled
              by processing systems within the central nervous system. For locomotion
              (walking) the circuits are within the spinal cord. These circuits, called
              central pattern generators, create the oscillating signals that extend and flex
              the legs in patterns needed for walking. The process of generating rhythmical
              output is found in most multicellular animals, from terrestrial vertebrates to
              the simplest nematode worm. Behaviors are created by the sum of activity of
              connections between nerve cells (neurons), the properties of the neurons and
              the properties of their connections with other neurons (synapses). Mechanisms
              that affect the strength and timing of activity at synapses modulate the
              processes by which the brain distributes information and learns. The means by
              which the nervous system controls information flow across synapses will be
              studied to understand how that control is used to generate locomotion. The
              lamprey fish will be used because the circuitry responsible for creating
              locomotor patterns is accessible. Sophisticated imaging and electronic
              recording techniques will be applied to synapses within an intact and
              behaviorally relevant spinal cord.

The work has implications affecting a
              wide range of fields. Understanding the means by which information flow is
              controlled at the synapse is the foundation of understanding many behaviors. At
              the level of locomotion improving comprehension of the underlying biological
              systems will improve understanding of problems as wide ranging as robot design
              to alleviating problems associated with spinal cord injury.

