Title       : Macroscopic Properties of Heterogeneous Media and Development of the Applied
               Mathematics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0094089

Award Number: 0094089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329573             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yury Grabovsky yury@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0094089
Mathematical Sciences: CAREER: Macroscopic
              properties of heterogeneous media and development of the applied mathematics
              curriculum

Abstract

0094089  Grabovsky

The unifying idea of this
              project's research is the general Hilbert space approach to homogenization due
              to Milton. There are three major issues based on this approach that will be
              investigated.  One concerns the exploration of the convexity properties of
              G-closures with the goal of developing new numerical approximations to the
              elusive set. This approach may lead to the new analytic results in several
              basic cases, where the G-closure is still not known.  The second issue is to
              make use of the new formula for effective tensors in terms of the
              W-transformation of Milton for studying effective behavior of the random media.
              That formula provides a new series expansion for the fields and effective
              tensors of the random composites. The new expansion is shown to converge
              rapidly even for a relatively high contrast media. Finally, we will develop a
              new and exciting idea of space-time composites proposed recently by Lurie.  The
              space time composites refer to composites whose electromagnetic properties
              change rapidly in time.  These temporal oscillations may be a result of high
              frequency vibrations of the composite specimen or of an active nature of the
              material itself. 

This project's research is centered on the investigation
              of properties of complex and smart materials.  Examples of such materials
              include composites (used in spacecraft, airplanes, cars, skies, golf clubs,
              etc.), random media like rock, clay or bone, novel active materials that are
              used in sensors and actuators.  This grant provides funding for a variety of
              research and educational activities that includes a small elasticity
              demonstration lab. The main purpose of the lab will be to heighten students'
              interest in mathematics through the inclusion of experiments and
              demonstrations.  The lab will also facilitate involvement of undergraduates in
              mathematical research and interdisciplinary interaction throughout the College
              of Science and Technology at Temple University. The grant will also support a
              multi-prong applied research program unified by the common mathematical tools
              used in this research.  One of the goals of this project is the prediction of
              properties of composite materials. Success in this direction may make it
              possible to reduce or eliminate expensive and time-consuming measurements of
              elastic properties of composite materials by providing good theoretical
              predictions.  Another application is to the study of high-contrast disordered
              media, of interest in hydrology for prediction of the permeability of large
              volumes of sedimentary rock based on local measurements.  The permeability is a
              crucial property of soil that determines how ground water, oil or pollutants
              propagate underground.  Yet another application is to the novel field of
              space-time composites: composite materials whose components are in rapid
              relative motion or whose components have the ability to change their properties
              rapidly in time without mechanical motion.  The success of this part of the
              project will be essential for designing and understanding the new generation of
              smart materials that are able to respond quickly to a changing environment. 

