Title       : Computer Science Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a0094922

Award Number: 0094922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Ortega bobbyo@epcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha Self  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : El Paso County Cmty Col
	      P O BOX 20500
	      El Paso, TX  799980500    915/594-2000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is providing scholarship grants to talented low- income students
              who are enrolled full- time in a program leading to an associate degree in
              mathematics, pre- engineering, computer science, or computer technology. The
              overall goal for this program is the successful attainment of a degree and
              subsequent employment in the degree field, or transfer to a four- year
              institution to obtain a baccalaureate degree in the chosen field. The college
              is developing a pool of program applicants through a recruitment process
              directed primarily at high schools. Particularly encouraged to apply are
              individuals from groups underrepresented in these disciplines (minorities,
              women, and the disabled). This recruitment process solicits the assistance of
              teachers at the high schools, and involves informational seminars for
              interested students. Applications are being reviewed and rated by a College
              Selection Committee composed of faculty from the program disciplines involved,
              using criteria developed specifically for this program by the College. The
              college is providing retention and support services for participating students.
              These services include required attendance at two group meetings each semester.
              The initial meeting is an orientation meeting to review continuing eligibility
              requirements, clarify scholarship disbursement processes, and to orient
              participants to services available (counseling, tutoring, mentoring, and
              faculty- student conferences). The second meeting occurs at mid- semester to
              identify academic problems and secure participant feed- back on general or
              program specific problems. These meetings also serve to encourage mutual
              support among this student group. Implementation of this program provides
              career opportunities for program participants and also increases the numbers of
              underrepresented individuals in the targeted professions. Further, as the
              community moves from a minimum- wage manufacturing based economy to a higher
              wage technology based economy, this program contributes to the technologically
              skilled employee pool that is needed.
