Title       : Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship Opportunity Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0094454

Award Number: 0094454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank P. Rinehart frinehart@monroecc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Quintin B. Bullock  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael E. Ayewoh  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Monroe Community College
	      1000 E Henrietta Road
	      Rochester, NY  146235780    716/424-5200

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS)
              Opportunity Program is designed to provide an innovative pathway for
              academically talented, low- income students to enter an educational track in
              computer science, engineering, or technology; graduate with an associate
              degree, transfer to four-year colleges, or directly enter the workforce. This
              is being accomplished through the implementation of a structured mechanism that
              moves students through critical junctures in the educational process. With an
              inclusive team of educators, industrialists, scientists, and concerned public
              officials, the project is using the following goals to guide an educational
              path for continuing excellence: 
1) To include diverse student groups who are
              academically- talented and low- income into the National Science Foundation's
              Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program. 
2) To
              build a coalition of scientists, educators, and concerned industrialists, with
              the purpose of enhancing the degree of active participation and success of
              CSEMS students. 
3) To institute an inclusive student support services system
              that enhances each learner's rate of active persistence, continuing scholarly
              performances, appropriate placement in four- year colleges and/ or employment,
              and overall satisfaction with college experiences. 
4) To enhance the degree
              of student- college "fit", and therefore academic survival and success, of the
              first- time and full- time enrollees in CSEMS Opportunity Program. 
5) To
              establish a continuous system of documenting the impact of the CSEMS program in
              assisting students to successfully achieve desired outcomes.
