Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0094725

Award Number: 0094725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy P. Stout jstout@jaguar1.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund Tsang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael V. Doran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Madhuri S. Mulekar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    251/460-6101

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of South Alabama is implementing a Computer Science, Engineering
              and Mathematics Research (CSEM) Scholars Program. Goals of this program include
              improving the quality of educational programs and increasing the number of
              students in these disciplines that complete academic degrees or pursue further
              education or successfully gain employment with U. S. industry in demanding
              technical positions. The cornerstone of this program is the selection of up to
              40 full time students to receive financial support. 
Recipients participate in
              a didactic career seminar series conducted by career training specialists and
              professionals from industry. Further, students spend a minimum of 6 hours/ week
              gaining practical experience in their major while conducting research
              supervised by a faculty mentor. Participating faculty have an organized
              research plan for aspiring scholars to review for potential research projects.
              Selected faculty are not only accomplished researchers but also have
              demonstrated the ability to effectively mentor undergraduate students towards
              accomplishment of career goals or the pursuit of higher education. Students
              participate in a monthly research seminar series and a Student Research Forum
              each semester. Annually, the research projects judged to be most promising are
              selected for presentation at an appropriate regional or national conference.
              CSEM Research Scholars also participate in a specialized series of career
              development forums. A CSEM Research Scholars Coordinating Committee administers
              selection of students, monitoring, reporting and assessment. Selection of
              faculty mentors, projects and conduct of forums is administered jointly with
              the existing University Council on Undergraduate Research (UCUR). CSEM Research
              Scholars are being particularly monitored for success rates relative to other
              campus - wide retention programs and for accomplishment of the CSEM program
              goals.
