Title       : Ultrastructural Analysis of RNA Synthesis and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0094561

Award Number: 0094561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334687             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann L. Beyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0094561 Ann Beyer
        The long term goal of the project is to contribute to
              an understanding of the complex process of ribosome biogenesis.  Ribosomes are
              of obvious interest and importance as the protein synthesis machinery of the
              cell.  In an actively growing yeast cell (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), ribosomes
              are made at a rate of ~2000 per minute in a process that has turned out to be
              surprisingly complex.  Indeed, more than 60 trans-acting components are known
              to function in yeast ribosome biogenesis, and it has not proven possible to
              assemble ribosomes from purified components.  This research will provide a new
              perspective on early events in ribosome synthesis, which are important to the
              successful assembly of the mature ribosome.  The project combines two powerful
              approaches that have not previously been exploited simultaneously. 
              Specifically, these are yeast genetics and the Miller chromatin spreading
              technique for electron microscope (EM) visualization of active genes.  The
              basic idea is to visualize ribosomal RNA genes in yeast cells that have
              mutations in the trans-acting factors that function in early steps in ribosomal
              RNA processing.  The three largest rRNAs are synthesized by RNA polymerase I as
              a single large 35S precursor RNA and are extensively modified (mainly by
              pseudouridylation and ribose methylation) and separated by nucleolytic
              cleavages.  During the 5-6 minutes required to synthesize this rRNA, the
              nascent transcripts are accessible for EM visualization in the characteristic
              tandemly repeated 'Christmas-tree' gene configuration.  These rRNA transcripts
              are packaged into large ribonucleoprotein complexes that occur at nonrandom
              positions.  By asking if and how this RNP structure changes as various
              components are deleted or mutated, combined with knowledge as to effects of the
              mutation on rRNA processing, information will be obtained regarding the
              structural framework of processing, molecular interactions in processing, and
              the timing and order of these events.  In addition, three rRNA processing
              events can be visualized co-transcriptionally, at low frequency but
              reproducibly.  The three events visualized are thought to represent removal of
              the extreme 5' end of the transcript (the 5' ETS), separation of the bulk of
              the transcript from the extreme 3' end (the 3' ETS), and cleavage about midway
              through the transcript, which presumably corresponds to cleavage in ITS1
              separating the 18S rRNA precursor from the rest of the precursor.  These
              predictions will be tested using mutations in known required components, and if
              correct, effects on these specific processing steps will be tested in a
              structural setting.  Components to be tested include both RNA and protein
              components of the two major classes of snoRNPs involved in rRNA modification
              (Box H/ACA and Box C+D), with an emphasis on the snoRNPs required for the early
              RNA cleavage steps, as well as non-snoRNP proteins involved in these steps. 
              Completion of these experiments will provide important new information on early
              steps in ribosome biogenesis.

