Title       : GOALI: Coupling Reaction Chemistry with Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0094568

Award Number: 0094568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian F. Tyson tyson@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerhard Schlemmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Julian Tyson of the University of Massachusetts, Amherst and Dr.
              Gerhard Schlemmer of Perkin-Elmer Corporation are funded by the Analytical and
              Surface Chemistry program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities for
              collaborative research on  trace analysis involving instrumentation.  This
              Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) grant addresses
              trace element uptake by marine plankton, the fate of arsenic in soils, the
              anti-cancer properties of selenium-enriched yeast, the uptake of trace elements
              by marine organisms, the fingerprinting of lead, copper, and gold, and the
              human metabolism of arsenic, selenium, and mercury.  Efforts in the area of
              sample pre-treatment include microwave and ultrasound-assisted extractions,
              supercritical extraction, solid phase extraction and liquid/liquid extraction.
              Specific investigations of flow injection (an area of expertise in the Tyson
              laboratory) include the evaluation of cationic surfactants on hydride
              generation and reaction with arsenic and selenite, and development of manifolds
              for synthesizing volatile organometallic compounds.  The PIs propose to develop
              an interface for HPLC-ICP-MS and liquid-liquid extraction pretreatment.  The
              collaboration will provide industrial experience for students who will spend at
              least one summer each at Perkin-Elmer in Norwalk, Connecticut or Uberlingen,
              Germany.

Trace element detection is enormously important in the biological,
              medical and environmental sciences.  The difficulty of detecting small amounts
              of key metals in matrices such as biological fluids and soil still limits our
              ability to understand transport and function in these media.
