Title       : CRHSP-28 and Exocrine Secretion in the Digestive System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0094154

Award Number: 0094154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy E. Groblewski groby@plantpath.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              CRHSP-28 is a novel Ca 2+ -sensitive regulatory protein, abundant in epithelial
              cells that are
specialized in exocrine protein secretion. This includes Paneth
              cells that secrete antimicrobial
peptides, chief and pancreatic cells that
              secrete digestive enzymes, lacrimal cells for corneal
function and goblet
              cells that secrete mucin for tissue barrier protection. Introduction
              of
recombinant CRHSP-28 into permeabilized acinar cells completely reverses
              the decreased Ca 2+ -dependent
secretory capacity caused by the leakage of
              cytosolic proteins from the cell interior,
indicating a direct role for
              CRHSP-28 in the secretory pathway. Consistent with a coiled coil
interaction
              motif near its amino terminus, CRHSP-28 exists as a dimer in cytosolic
              extracts, and
is associated with a large molecular complex in
              membrane/cytoskeleton fractions. Further,
CRHSP-28 is concentrated around
              secretory granules in the apical regions of exocrine cells, and
specifically
              associates with a 70 kDa binding protein (pp70) that co-purifies with
              secretory
granule membranes. Significantly, soluble forms of this binding
              protein associate with taxol-stabilized
microtubules when analyzed in the
              absence of Ca 2+ ; however, when exposed to
elevated Ca 2+ , pp70 undergoes a
              complete translocation to an actin-rich detergent insoluble
fraction. Based on
              biochemical and immunohistochemical data, CRHSP-28 and its associated
proteins
              are proposed to regulate the delivery and movement of secretory granules
              through the
subapical actin cytoskeleton in a Ca 2+ /calmodulin dependent
              manner. The triggering mechanism
for this effect is theorized to entail the
              acute serine phosphorylation of CRHSP-28 by the
multifunctional CaM kinase II.
              Thus, the primary objective of this project is to elucidate the
precise
              biochemical and molecular mechanisms by which this novel
              CRHSP-28-mediated
pathway regulates Ca 2+ -stimulated exocrine secretion. The
              Specific Aims of this project are:
1). To test the idea that the
              Ca2+/calmodulin regulated phosphorylation of CRHSP-28 is a
key signaling
              mechanism by which the protein modulates secretion. Experiments will
              first
address the identity of the Ca 2+ -sensitive serine phosphorylation
              sites on CRHSP-28.
Phosphorylation sites will be mapped in vitro and in intact
              cells, and verified by transfection of
phosphorylation mutants into cultured
              T84 cells. The effects of normal and mutated forms of
CRHSP-28 will then be
              evaluated for their ability to alter secretagogue-stimulated mucin
              release
from these cells. Similarly, CRHSP-28 mutants will be expressed and
              purified in bacteria and
tested in permeabilized acinar cells to assess their
              effects on digestive enzyme secretion.
2). To evaluate the concept that
              CRHSP-28 functions in the secretory pathway of exocrine
cells through dynamic
              interactions with other key regulatory proteins. These studies will
              be
centered on identifying the molecular identity of the 70 kDa CRHSP-28
              binding protein that 
copurifies with secretory granule membranes, binds to
              taxol-stabilized microtubules,
and translocates to detergent-insoluble
              cytoskeletal fractions in the presence of elevated Ca 2+ .
CRHSP-28 affinity
              chromatography and cDNA library screening will be used as
              purification
techniques. Following cloning, tagged proteins will be expressed
              in cells to characterize the
molecular interactions of CRHSP-28 with itself
              (as a dimer) and the 70 kDa binding protein
using coimmunoprecipitations and
              dual immunofluorescence labeling. This approach will allow
for identification
              of the specific sites that mediate these interactions, as well as the effects
              of
second messengers and phosphorylation in regulating binding. Complementary
              studies will be
conducted using tagged recombinant proteins for in vitro
              binding assays. Identification and
characterization of CRHSP-28 protein
              interactions within the cell is key to understanding its
regulatory
              function.

