Title       : Defining and Manipulating the Fate of Glutathione and Glutathione S-Conjugates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a0094062

Award Number: 0094062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331794             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda N. Martin mnmartin@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

This project focuses on the hydrolysis of glutathione (gamma-Glu-Cys-Gly)
              and glutathione-S-conjugates in plants, a poorly understood pathway that likely
              plays a central role in at least two important physiological processes. The
              first is detoxification of xenobiotics (e.g., herbicides), initiated when they
              are conjugated with glutathione. Glutathione-S-conjugates are processed after
              their formation. However, the processing pathway and enzymes are not known with
              certainty, nor is it known what role processing plays in xenobiotic
              detoxification. Similarly, although glutathione has been hypothesized to be a
              major transport/storage form of cysteine in plants, how cysteine is released
              from glutathione is not well understood.  Cleavage of the unique gamma-glutamyl
              bond of glutathione by a gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase may be the first step in
              degradation of glutathione and modification of glutathione-S-conjugates.
              Arabidopsis thaliana contains four putative gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
              genes, GGT1, GGT2, GGT3 and GGT4.  GGT1 and GGT2 share high coding-sequence
              homology and exon-intron structure.  GGT3 differs markedly from GGT1 and GGT2
              in that it lacks the exons encoding the amino terminal ~half of the proteins.
              GGT4 shares less than 60% coding sequence homology with the other three GGT
              genes.  The functional roles of the structurally different GGT genes and the
              function of the GGT proteins are the foci of this research. The catalytic
              properties of recombinant GGT proteins will be studied to determine how the
              missing amino terminal domain of GGT3 and the divergent coding sequence of GGT4
              affect enzymatic function. Transgenic Arabidopsis expressing GGT constructs
              carrying a tagged sequence will be used to determine whether the amino terminal
              domain of GGT3 affects its subcellular compartmentation. The hexa-His sequence
              will also serve as a tag for purification of individual GGT proteins from the
              plant as a means to explore the subunit composition of gamma-glutamyl
              transpeptidase. The physiological role of GGT proteins will be explored using
              two complementary strategies. First, spatial and temporal expression will be
              studied to determine in which tissues and subcellular compartments the enzymes
              are expressed. Then, as time and funding permit, the consequence of altering
              the expression of individual GGT's in transgenic Arabidopsis will be
              studied.

This research should increase our understanding of how plants
              process foreign compounds such as herbicides and how they maintain the proper
              internal balance of nutrients.



