Title       : Membrane Complexes Required for Gliding Motility.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0094635

Award Number: 0094635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Hartzell Hartzell@UIdaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0094635
Hartzell

Studies of the soil-dwelling bacterium Myxococcus xanthus
              have broadened our understanding of prokaryotic biology.  M. xanthus uses
              gliding motility to forage for nutrients in relatively dry environments and to
              form a fruiting body containing quiescent spores in the absence of nutrients. 
              We have discovered independent sets of genes encoding homologs of the E. coli
              transmembrane TolBQRA protein complex that are essential for gliding motility
              during growth.  Surprisingly, the Tol proteins are not needed for gliding per
              se during development, because disruption of any of the tol genes does not
              affect aggregation or fruiting body formation.  However, the spores produced by
              tol mutants fail to mature, showing that the Tol proteins are required at a
              late stage of spore differentiation.  We will test the hypothesis that the Tol
              proteins are involved in the transport of biopolymers needed for gliding
              motility during growth and spore maturation during development.  

Important
              clues to the function of the Tol complex have come from the study of one tol
              operon, the gidA- aglU (tolB1) operon.  AglU, a homolog of TolB, is predicted
              to be an outer membrane lipoprotein.  Like TolB, AglU contains WD-repeat motifs
              that form B-propellar structures that mediate protein-protein interactions with
              the TolQRA proteins located in the inner membrane.  The gidA gene encodes a
              homolog of the E. coli glucose-inhibited division protein, a protein of unknown
              function present in many prokaryotes.  Purified M. xanthus GidA absorbs at
              450nm and has features showing that it is a flavoprotein. The gidA mutant does
              not aggregate and cells do not differentiate into spores.  Moreover, the gidA
              mutant releases a substance that inhibits the development of wild-type cells. 
              The inhibitor is likely exported via the Tol complex, because a second mutation
              in aglU prevents the release of this toxic substance.  Analysis of the
              inhibitor, purified from the gidA mutant, may provide clues to the nature of
              the material secreted through the Tol complex. 

