Title       : Ecology of Herpesvirus Infection and Cancer in Sea Lions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0094919

Award Number: 0094919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1344308            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Lowenstine ljlowenstine@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Stott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1128,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              California sea lions (CSL) have an unusually high incidence of cancers, the most
              frequent of which are aggressive urogenital tumors in both males and females. 
              The foraging biology of CSL, which differs between age and gender classes,
              brings them into contact with pollutants that accumulated in their tissues. 
              Some of these are known to cause cancer.  However, more than one factor is
              needed to cause cancer and  a CSL herpesvirus has been identified that may also
              contribute.  Intrinsic factors (age, gender, genetic makeup), environmentally
              acquired factors (tissue contaminants, other infectious agents), as well as
              population natural history factors (feeding behavior and foraging ranges)  are
              expected to influence the susceptibility of CSL to herpesvirus infection and
              cancer.  Animals captured and released on California breeding grounds and in
              Puget sound and stranded animals in rehabilitation centers will be tested for
              antibodies, viruses, bacteria, genetic markers, blubber contaminant levels and
              comparisons made between age classes, genders and CSL with and without tumors. 
              Satellite telemetry will be used to track  juvenile females and to resample
              individual CSL.  A model will be developed to  assess factors important in  the
              ecology of herpesvirus infections and cancer.

California sea lions live and
              feed in the Pacific coastal  ecosystem  in which people work and recreate, 
              eating  many of the same seafood. They are important sentinels for ecosystem
              health.  The high incidence of cancers in sea lions is alarming.  Understanding
              factors causing these cancers will help assess risks to human health  as well
              as to other coastal wildlife including threatened Steller's sea lions,
              Guadalupe fur seals  and southern sea otters.

