Title       : Modeling Information Systems In Prokaryotic Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a0094827

Award Number: 0094827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julius H. Jackson jhjacksn@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Herring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The expressed purpose of this project is to understand the relationship of base
              periodicity to the overall structure of information in prokaryotic genomes. The
              longer-term goal of the research is to use an understanding of the total
              information in chromosomes to construct and test mathematical models that
              simulate the dynamics of information evolution and exchange in prokaryotes. The
              objectives are to characterize the origins, organization and fate of genomic
              information in prokaryotes by developing and applying methods for system
              identification to track genes and the integrity of their information over time.
              A longer term goal is to model the content, structure, and behavior of
              information in prokaryotic chromosomes by characterizing signals from the
              frequency and organization of sequence and genes over multiple scales of
              measure. The scales of measure will vary from a few nucleotides to an entire
              chromosome. Protein-coding nucleotide sequences characteristically tend to
              repeat bases at three-step intervals, thereby producing short-range
              periodicity. Prior work from our lab established that Fourier analysis of
              signals from nucleotide periodicity revealed a tendency for genes from the same
              prokaryotic chromosome to exhibit similar patterns of short-range nucleotide
              periodicity. At the same time, long-range base periodicity and models of gene
              clustering patterns suggest that prokaryotic chromosomes have a fractal
              structure of base-repeat and gene clustering information. A fractal information
              structure for a chromosome is one in which the pattern of information for a
              large segment is similar to the pattern for a smaller unit used to build the
              larger structure. This research seeks to determine whether and to what extent a
              common information infrastructure exists in a genome and methods to measure it.
              New and established pattern recognition methods are being developed to study
              the structure of periodic information by analyzing the records of base
              periodicity in a set of prokaryotic genomes to compare with the signals from
              four other parameters of total information that influence periodicity. Other
              parameters will include measures of: ii) relative nucleotide frequency; iii)
              relative nucleotide arrangement; iv) relative codon frequency; and v) relative
              codon arrangement. Overall research objectives are designed to study: 1) signal
              variation in chromosomal gene and ORF (Open Reading Frame) populations; and 2)
              fractal structures of information in chromosomes. This study will probe the
              history and structure(s) of information in bacterial genomes. Potentially, the
              expected results could be used to build a theoretical framework to explain the
              early history of bacterial chromosome formation.


