Title       : Postdoctoral Research: Structural Engineering and the Architecture of
               Nineteenth-Century American Steelworks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0094481

Award Number: 0094481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83265              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Boothby tebarc@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Postdoctoral Fellowship allows the co-PI to apply the combined
              methodological tools of structural engineering, industrial archeology, and
              architectural history to examine the engineering of nineteenth-century American
              steel works buildings. Working with an advisory committee of civil engineers
              and architectural historians at The Pennsylvania State University, the co-PI is
              engaging in the intensive study of structural analysis using buildings from
              historically important steel works as exercises. Training includes a focus on
              the graphical methods widely used during the 19th and early 20th centuries
              --the steel industry's most innovative period of building design. The c0-PI is
              augmenting his experience in documenting historic bridges with a workshop in
              documenting historic structures. Using these new skills as a foundation, the
              co-PI is analyzing selected structures through both field observations and
              archival materials. This methodology is intended to familiarize the co-PI with
              the range of choices and constraints confronting designers. Comparison with the
              actual decisions made by the designers - as found in the building themselves -
              demonstrates the frequency with which engineers and designers made decisions
              that based, not on clear-cut and mathematical calculations, but on a complex
              interplay among cultural values, economic considerations, intuitive hunches,
              and technological knowledge and experience. The study broadens the
              historiography of industrial architecture and the study of industrial and other
              non-high style buildings with a scientifically informed approach. The results
              of the study help the historic preservation community as it seeks to assess,
              preserve, and interpret the few remaining early structures of a heavy industry
              central to the rise of the United States as an industrial power. In addition,
              the project seeks to impact engineering and architectural education. The
              co-PI's plans to interact with undergraduate engineering students at the host
              institution and to use the fellowship to focus his career on teaching
              engineering and architecture students about both the technical and social
              aspects of their own milieus. Finally, the co-PI intends to present findings at
              the host institution, conferences, and ultimately incorporate them into a
              monograph on the architecture and engineering of the American steel
              industry.


