Title       : CAREER: Time-Resolved Studies of Correlated Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0094156

Award Number: 0094156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Kikkawa kikkawa@physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at the University of
              Pennsylvania will study magnetic instabilities related to the carrier density
              in strongly interacting (correlated) electronic systems using state-of-the art
              ultrafast optical experiments.  Short (<100 fs) laser pulses will modulate the
              carrier concentration in colossally magnetoresistive oxides and weakly
              ferromagnetic divalent hexaborides, thereby perturbing their complex many-body
              states.  A variety of time-resolved optical techniques will be utilized to
              obtain a multi-dimensional view of the ensuing magnetic, charge and lattice
              dynamics.  If successful, the insight obtained may help guide the discovery of
              related materials of use in technological applications involving
              magnetoresistance and the optical control of ferromagnetic order. The
              educational component of this project will prototype and deploy captivating and
              entertaining internet-based experiments that introduce high school students to
              the process of scientific discovery. Students arriving at a web site will be
              given the opportunity to remotely grab the controls of an apparatus and to
              experiment with them. Considerable attention will be paid to experimental
              design considerations, including educational value, scalability, integration
              with course content, and target age groups.  
%%%
New and poorly understood
              magnets have been discovered recently, and this Faculty Early Career
              Development (CAREER) project at the University of Pennsylvania aims to clarify
              their behavior using short laser pulses.  The unusual properties of these
              magnets create the possibility that, with proper materials design, light could
              be used to control their magnetic strength and the positions of their north and
              south magnetic poles.  Another potential use is in magnetic recording, where
              related materials could serve as sensors in computer hard disk drives.  This
              project aims to provide a foundation of knowledge for such efforts by capturing
              a variety of material responses to brief laser excitation. The educational
              component of this project will prototype and deploy captivating and
              entertaining internet-based experiments that introduce high school students to
              the process of scientific discovery. Students arriving at a web site will be
              given the opportunity to remotely grab the controls of an apparatus and to
              experiment with them. Considerable attention will be paid to experimental
              design considerations, including educational value, scalability, integration
              with course content, and target age groups.  
***

