Title       : Workshop: Distributed Collective Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0094989

Award Number: 0094989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie G. Gasser gasser@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a twenty-four month standard award to support an extended,
              computer-mediated workshop on technical, cognitive, and social processes and
              infrastructures for distributed collective practices (DCP). DCP is
              conceptualized along the dimensions of social organization, cognitive
              processes, and technical infrastructures. A fourth crosscutting area of
              considerable emerging importance is the development of very large distributed,
              shareable information bases, community memory projects, and data warehouses,
              that create computer-mediated collective memory practices.  This workshop
              brings together computer scientists, cognitive scientists, library and
              information scientists, artificial intelligence researchers, and social
              scientists, with the aim of strengthening and focusing the emergent
              multidisciplinary, international research community in this area.  The workshop
              will be structured as a two-year web-based discussion, punctuated with two
              face-to-face meetings.  The first year will establish a seed community,
              elaborate an international research program, and involve international
              scientific communities and the general public.  The second year will assess
              progress, synthesize the results of discussions and joint work, develop and
              refocus the program's objectives, and produce documentation. This project
              involves four participating groups from France and the US, including the CNRS
              Laboratoire d'Informatique pour la Mecanique et les Sciences de l'Ingenieur
              (LIMSI); the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications (ENST); the
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the University of California at
              San Diego (UCSD). Collaborative funding is being provided by the UNESCO
              Management Of Social Transformations Program and the Societe Francaise des
              Sciences de l'Information et de la Communication.  
