Title       : Career: Photonic Crystal Waveguides and Device Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0094020

Award Number: 0094020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374998             (Estimated)
Investigator: John O'Brien jdobrien@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to design, build, and evaluate photonic crystal
              nanophotonic
waveguide components and optical systems. The broad goals of this
              program are to
develop a practical nanophotonic technology, and to incorporate
              knowledge of the
advancements in photonics technology into the classroom.
              There has been a great deal of
research into photonic bandgap structures in
              the last few years. All of this work,
however, has been done either as basic
              research on the optical properties of different
dielectric lattices or on
              single photonic components. My research at USC contains
several programs in
              which the goals are to develop individual nanophotonic devices or to
engineer
              a particular feature of one of these devices. This proposal is intended to
              build
on work ongoing in those programs and to integrate the results into an
              integrated optical
communication technology. Waveguides, of course, are
              important in their own right, but
they are also one of the key elements
              necessary to combine devices to form functional
optical circuits. In doing
              this, care must be taken to minimize coupling and insertion
losses as well.
              There are several key questions to be investigated in this program. What
is
              the origin of photonic crystal waveguide loss? How do we design efficient
              guiding in
thin patterned films? What are the trade-offs between
              one-dimensional and two-dimensional
periodic guiding structures? How do we go
              from single devices to an integrated optics technology using photonic crystals?
              What modeling algorithms can handle these structures efficiently, and are there
              system level modeling algorithms possible?

