Title       : CAREER: Nanostructured Intermetallic Alloys - Annealing Behavior,
               Microstructural Control and Influence of Scale in Reversibly Ordering Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0094213

Award Number: 0094213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorg M. Wiezorek wiezorek+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0094213
Wiezorek

This CAREER award is aimed at a quantitative,
              mechanism-based description of the processing-microstructure-property
              relationships and annealing behavior in reversibly ordering metallic systems.
              Model alloys based on the ferromagnetic L10- and L12-ordered intermetallic
              phases in the Fe-Pd system undergoing severe plastic deformation (SPD)
              processing will be the focus of the research. The main experimentation
              techniques are differential scanning calorimetry (DSC),
              vibrating-scanning-magnetometers, mechanical testing, and in-situ and
              post-mortem microstructural observations by transmission electron microscopy
              and x-ray diffraction.  Strategies for property optimization and
              microstructural control will be devised based on the mechanistic models of the
              processes responsible for the observed microstructural changes. Unique
              exploitation of reaction processing of heavily deformed reversibly ordering
              alloys will be used to control microstructures at the nanoscale. The
              educational component centers on the development of Web-based educational tools
              and their implementation into upper-level MS&E undergraduate and graduate
              courses.  These new tools will incorporate results and experimental
              capabilities developed from the research and they will be made available to the
              public cost-free. The national and international collaborations that will be
              fostered through this award offer unique opportunities for interaction with
              outstanding researchers in the field of intermetallics and physical metallurgy
              of advanced materials. 
%%%
This research facilitates a systematic study of
              scale-related effects in truly bulk nanostructured functional intermetallic
              alloys with commercial potential. There is considerable interest in these
              functional intermetallics for advanced permanent magnet technologies, e.g. thin
              film media, data storage and futuristic micro-devices. Refinement of the
              microstructure to the nanoscale offers enormous potential for property
              improvements. Future success of these and many other intermetallics requires a
              detailed knowledge of the synergistic interplay between competing solid-state
              reactions during processing.
***

