Title       : Adductor Muscle Function and Fiber Type in Macaca and Papio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0094522

Award Number: 0094522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86141              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine E. Wall Christine_Wall@baa.mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Hylander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick H. Schachat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Understanding the ways in which primates use their jaws during chewing is of
              great importance to physical anthropology because chewing has a major influence
              on the form of the skull.  Knowledge of the influences on skull form helps
              anthropologists interpret the evolutionary history and behavior of extinct
              primates and understand the relationship between anatomy and function in living
              primates.  The goal of this study is to determine whether, for the chewing
              muscles, variation in fiber type is linked to muscle activity during chewing. 
              This research will (1) document the proportion and cross-sectional area of the
              Type I (slow) and Type II (fast) fibers in the chewing muscles of adult male
              and female macaques and baboons using histochemistry and electrophoresis, (2)
              determine whether sexual dimorphism in fiber type is present, and (3) determine
              how the proportions of fiber types are correlated with electromyographic
              activity during chewing in these animals.  The hypothesis that the proportion
              of fast fibers is directly related to the rapid production of large bite forces
              during chewing will be tested.  This research is important because little is
              known about the relation between muscle fiber type and activity during chewing,
              and it will provide new information about structure-function links in the
              skull.  Furthermore, the data will resolve the controversy over whether there
              is sexual dimorphism in the fiber type of the chewing muscles.  If sexual
              dimorphism is present, the data will provide a baseline for understanding the
              functional implications of sexual dimorphism.
