Title       : The Mechanics of Tree Gouging in Common Marmosets (Callithrix jacchus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0094666

Award Number: 0094666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22421              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Vinyard cvinyard@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine E. Wall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Schmitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Hylander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Many primates habitually feed on tree gums and saps.  Some of these tree
              exudate feeders actively elicit exudate flow by biting trees with their
              anterior teeth.  Many researchers hypothesize that this tree gouging behavior
              involves relatively large jaw forces and jaw gapes.  Further, some scientists
              argue that gougers have skulls adapted to these jaw forces and gapes.  In
              reality, we know almost nothing about the jaw forces and gapes during gouging. 
              
	The researchers will quantify the jaw forces and gapes that common marmosets
              (Callithrix jacchus) use during gouging using an apparatus they designed to
              record these data.  They will analyze the magnitude and timing of jaw forces
              and gapes during gouging of different tree types in a male and female marmoset.
               This will allow them to assess the relative magnitude of the gouging data by
              comparing gouging jaw forces to the forces marmosets create during transducer
              biting and gapes during gouging to gapes during chewing.  
	Their results will
              provide the first empirical data on primate jaw forces and gapes during
              gouging.  The pilot data collected on these two animals will be used to
              demonstrate the feasibility of the approach and justify collecting data on a
              larger marmoset sample.  The results will be applied to test hypotheses of
              skull adaptations to gouging in marmosets.

