Title       : Has Licensing Changed Academic Research? Issues of Productivity, Faculty
               Incentives, and Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a0094573

Award Number: 0094573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie C. Thursby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry G. Thursby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the role of faculty in the increasing trend for U.S.
              universities to engage in patent licensing. The focus is on the characteristics
              of individual inventors and the role of licensing in the conduct and
              dissemination of their research. Since 1980, the Bayh-Dole Act has allowed U.S.
              universities to own and license results from federally funded research, and
              license-related activity has increased dramatically. Universities cite
              increased licensing activity as evidence of their increasing contribution to
              the economy while skeptics question the impact. Critics claim that potential
              financial returns from licensing have diverted faculty from more basic to
              applied research. This research is based on a panel database of the research
              and licensing activity of six to seven thousand faculty members in major U.S.
              research universities, including Cal Tech, Carnegie Mellon, Cornell, Harvard,
              MIT, Pennsylvania, Penn State, Purdue, Stanford, Wisconsin, and Texas A&M.
              These universities have been selected because of their status as major research
              universities and their commitment to provide data. Most data cover at least the
              period 1988-1999. With these data, one can examine the evolution of faculty
              behavior over time and the extent to which it is related to individual
              characteristics or to environmental factors. Differences in patterns across
              universities and disciplines can be examined. Three major issues are addressed:
              i. Does the increase in university licensing over the last decade reflect a
              shift away from fundamental research and/or an increased willingness of faculty
              to participate in licensing as well as publish the results of their research? 
              ii. How is the propensity of faculty to disclose inventions (i.e., file a
              report with the university when they believe a research result has
              commercial/license potential) re-lated to individual characteristics (e.g.,
              publication record, research sponsorship) and other characteristics (e.g.,
              academic discipline, university and/or department effects)?  iii. What is the
              life-cycle behavior of inventors with respect to research, publication, and
              license-related activity? The basis of the research is a life-cycle model in
              which faculty can choose to engage in basic or applied research and where
              licensing activity as well as publication is possible. This theoretical model
              suggests three empirical models of research productivity. One deals with
              publication activity, while the other two deal with licensing activity and
              basic relative to applied research over the life cycle. For each model
              empirical results are based on annual data for individual scientists and
              engineers. The method of analysis is Tobit and logit regression analysis.
              Preliminary results based on 602 Purdue faculty over the period 1983-96 tend to
              support the theoretical model. Further, there appear to be changes over time in
              licensing activity, but little or no changes over time in publication activity
              or the basic/applied nature of faculty research.  Results will be reported in
              publications and relevant professional meetings.
