Title       : CAREER: Growth Mechanism, Synthesis and Application of Semiconductor
               Nanocrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a0094248

Award Number: 0094248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaogang Peng xpeng@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to study the synthesis and processing of colloidal
              inorganic nanocrystals. Inorganic nanocrystals are fragments of corresponding
              bulk crystals with at least one dimension in the range of one to tens of
              nanometers. A fully controllable synthetic scheme will be designed for all
              types of colloidal nanocrystals by focusing on a systematic and quantitative
              study of the growth process of semiconductor nanocrystals.  The ultimate goal
              is to develop safe, reliable, fully controllable (size, morphology and
              distribution), and quantitatively programmable synthetic chemistry for high
              quality colloidal nanocrystals. A fundamental study of growth mechanisms
              together with the development of a green chemistry approach to synthesizing
              high quality semiconductor nanocrystals will be emphasized. Even though this
              country will need a large number of nano-scientists and nano-engineers in the
              near future, the current curricula in most universities have not yet reflected
              this urgent demand. The aim of the teaching plan is to address this need. This
              philosophy will be incorporated into regular courses to be taught as well as
              the development of new courses such as materials chemistry with a strong
              emphasis on nanomaterials and nanofabrication.  
%%%
Colloidal inorganic
              nanocrystals are of great interest for both fundamental research and industrial
              applications because of their phenomenal size dependent properties, excellent
              processibility, and high specific surface area. This well integrated research
              and education project addresses current needs for a large number of
              nano-scientists and nano-engineers to be trained in areas of high priority to
              industry.
*** 

