Title       : Collaborative Research: Integrated Primate Biomaterials and Information Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0094928

Award Number: 0094928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1886062            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne C. Beck jbeck@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne Altmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coriell Inst Med Research
	      
	      Camden, NJ  08103    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The conduct of advanced research involving biological materials from nonhuman
              primates requires open access to high quality, well documented samples.  Until
              now, access has been opportunistic and quality control highly variable. This
              Infrastructure Award will establish an Integrated Primate Biomaterials and
              Information Resource that will be developed through a collaboration among
              Coriell Institute for Medical Research (Coriell), the International Species
              Information System (ISIS), Princeton University (PU), the San Diego
              Supercomputer Center (SDSC), and the Zoological Society of San Diego (ZSSD). 
              The Resource will provide primate biomaterials such as DNA and cell lines for
              research that takes advantage of emerging genetic technologies and the human
              genome sequence to probe questions of human origins, primate phylogeny and
              biogeography, conservation, and human behavior and cognition.  With policy and
              priorities guided by a broadly based Scientific Advisory Committee, the
              Resource collaboration includes institutions that bring expertise in
              biomaterials banking, bioinformatics, information access, and in primate
              conservation, behavior, and ecology.  Resource priorities include high levels
              of quality control and wide accessibility to researchers who would not
              otherwise have access to necessary materials for research, conservation, and
              capacity-building. The collection will seek to provide a balance among
              diversity and depth of sampling combined with maximal associated information or
              other available with samples.
