Title       : Acquisition of a Gas Chromatography/Time of Flight-Mass Spectrometry (GC/TOF-MS)
               System for Ultra-High Resolution Molecular Stratigraphy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0094475

Award Number: 0094475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Konrad A. Hughen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Reddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0094475
Eglinton

In recent years, molecular organic proxies have become an
              integral component of paleoclimate research.  As for other proxies, there is an
              ever-growing need to develop continuous, high temporal resolution records from
              sediment and ice cores to document short- and long-term climate variations. 
              Typically, however, organic geochemical measurements lag behind other proxy
              measurements in part due to the laborious analyses involved, and because of
              relatively large sample size requirements.  This grant provides partial support
              for the acquisition of a gas chromatograph/time-of-flight mass spectrometer
              (GC/TOF-MS) system that overcomes many of these present limitations.

The key
              feature of the new instrumentation is the acquisition of full-scan mass
              spectral data at unprecedented rates, paving the way for very rapid sample
              analysis at high sensitivity.  In addition to its direct application as a tool
              to develop detailed, high resolution molecular stratigraphic records, we will
              also configure the GC/TOF-MS instrument for two new modes of analysis.  The
              first involves sorptive extraction of organic compounds from aqueous matrices
              and subsequent sample introduction via a thermal desorption unit.  We plan to
              use this approach for the measurement of trace semi-volatile organic species in
              ice-core samples.  The second involves configuration of the GC for
              comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatographic separations.  The latter
              enables detailed characterization of highly complex geochemical matrices. 
              Overall, we believe the new instrumentation offers unique capabilities that
              will open up new frontiers for the development and application of molecular
              organic proxies in paleoclimate studies.

***


