Title       : CAREER: Synthesis and Structure-Property Elucidation of III-V Based Magnetic
               Semiconductor Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0094273

Award Number: 0094273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie L. Brock sbrock@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to investigate the synthesis and physical property
              characterization of nanoparticles with coupled magnetic and electronic
              properties. Two types of systems will be studied, both based on III-V
              semiconductors: (1) Diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMS's) and (2)
              Heterostructured core-shell nanoparticles with a magnetic:semiconducting
              interface. Such materials are expected to combine the information storage
              ability of magnetic devices, with the processing ability of semiconductor
              devices. The miniaturization of circuits is expected to provide an economic
              impetus for such dual use devices. III-V based nanoparticle DMS's will be
              prepared through modified co-precipitation reactions of manganese and iron
              salts with indium or gallium in the presence of a pnictogen source such as
              phosphorous or arsenic. These materials will be characterized using standard
              techniques for structural and particle size determination of nanoparticles and
              the physical properties will be evaluated by magnetic susceptibility,
              absorption/luminescence spectroscopy, and coupled magnetic/optical techniques. 
              The structural and physical properties of DMS nanoparticles will be compared to
              heterostructured nanoparticles consisting of a magnetic transition metal
              pnictide core and a semiconducting main group pnictide shell. Techniques have
              been developed for producing transition metal pnictide nanoparticles (cores)
              and to be used as substrates for the nucleation/precipitation of  indium or
              gallium pnictide phases (shells). 
%%%
The diluted and heterostructured
              magnetic semiconductor materials prepared in the course of this research are
              expected to impact industries focused on information storage/transmission and
              development of magnetoresistive sensors. Accordingly, an important educational
              goal is to illustrate the relevance of  materials research to technological
              advances by fostering interactions between students and local industry.
              Additionally, modules emphasizing materials chemistry and nanotechnology will
              be incorporated into traditional inorganic courses at the graduate and
              undergraduate levels. 

