Title       : Regulation of Potassium and Calcium Channels in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0094477

Award Number: 0094477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Satpal Singh singhs@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall D. Shortridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Regulation of Potassium and Calcium Channels in Drosophila

Regulation of
              potassium and calcium channels plays an important role in several cellular
              functions. The investigators have identified mutations, in two genes, that
              disrupt the regulation of K+ and Ca2+ channels in Drosophila. The proposed
              research will identify these two genes and clone them. The project uses
              P-element mutagenesis and X-irradiation to generate additional mutant alleles
              of each of the two regulatory genes. Some of these new alleles will be "tagged"
              by the presence of the P-element or a "chromosomal breakpoint". These "tagged"
              alleles will be used to facilitate the isolation and characterization of the
              two genes. Sequence analysis of the wild-type and mutant alleles will identify
              the mutations present within each of the mutant alleles.
Past research
              experience has clearly demonstrated a strong evolutionary conservation of
              mechanisms involved in the regulation of ion channels. Identification of the
              two genes under study, and subsequent analysis of how the encoded gene products
              regulate the K+ and the Ca2+ channels, will provide valuable insights into the
              molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of Drosophila ion channels.
              These regulatory mechanisms would be expected to be applicable to other
              systems. Since ion channels share regulatory pathways with other cellular
              functions, these studies will also provide useful information on general
              cellular regulatory pathways.

