Title       : Origins of Object Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0094814

Award Number: 0094814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $552853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott P. Johnson sj75@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	When we look around the world, we see objects that are separate from one
              another, each of which is defined by a unique size, shape, surface pattern, and
              distance.  Our ability to perceive coherent objects overcomes incomplete input
              to the visual system, which is actually fragmented across space and time.  That
              is, most objects we see are partly occluded by other, nearer objects, and may
              go in and out of sight as they move or as we move.  Commonsense notions of
              "object permanence," the knowledge that objects persist when away from direct
              perceptual contact, are central to this experience.  Origins of object concepts
              in children have long been a source of interest among philosophers and
              researchers.  Most notably, the pioneering studies of the eminent child
              psychologist Piaget provided evidence that object concepts develop only after
              months of experience handling and reaching for objects. 

	More recently,
              some researchers have challenged Piaget's account on the grounds that it relies
              too much on reaching as an index of object concepts. Reaching may be difficult
              for infants, and may underestimate "true" object knowledge.  Infants' object
              concepts, instead, have been proposed to be rooted in innate knowledge
              structures, such as "object continuity," the understanding that an object, seen
              to have become occluded, maintains its existence and location or trajectory
              when out of sight.  Such concepts are claimed to be revealed when looking time
              methods are employed, and an event is presented to an infant that violates some
              expectation of object permanence (this attracts longer looking than would be
              expected normally).  Such accounts, however, have themselves come under fire
              for failing to furnish viable explanations of developmental mechanism:  Even if
              some ability is innate, it must have developed somehow.  In addition, these
              "violation of expectation" methods have been criticized as leading to ambiguity
              in interpretation.  In general, then, there is much disagreement about the
              origins of fundamental kinds of object knowledge in infants. 

	The present
              proposal investigates this question by testing the role of specific visual cues
              in young infants' perceptions of object motions, as well as recording eye
              movements and reaching patterns in response to occlusion displays.  The results
              are expected to yield important information on infants' perceptual and
              cognitive development, by providing converging evidence from multiple methods
              including assessments of object continuity, intermodal (visual-auditory) object
              perception, object "identity" (the ability to distinguish objects on the basis
              of appearance, location, and movement), and depth perception.  It is
              anticipated that these findings will provide evidence and accounts that
              elucidate fundamental mechanisms of development, and it is hoped that such work
              will help guide theorizing on vital questions of the emergence of object
              concepts in infancy. 


