Title       : PECASE: Molecular Design and Nanomechanical Testing of High-Toughness Biomimetic
               Polymeric Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a0094194

Award Number: 0094194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Ortiz cortiz@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The research component of this CAREER proposal involves the design and
              nanomechanical testing of biomimetic, "modular" polymeric systems with highly
              controlled mechanical properties at the molecular level.  A general design
              strategy for improving the molecular toughness of synthetic macromolecules is
              proposed which involves the nonspecific, noncovalent complexation of a
              synthetic "host" polymer with smaller, nanometer-size, shape-persistant
              "guests."  The research will begin by studying a model system which involves
              the well-studied complexation of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), -[CH2-CH2-O]n- and
              the small globular protein, human serum albumin (HSA).  Chemical attachment of
              one PEO chain end to a surface and sufficiently low chain grafting densities
              will be achieved using a mixed monolayer technique involving the
              co-chemisorption of mono(thiol)-functionalized PEO and a self-assembling
              alkanethiol monolayer (SAM) on gold.  The PEO substrates will then be incubated
              in an HSA solution to form surface-immobilized macromolecular complexes. 
              High-resolution force spectroscopy will be employed to tether the individual
              macromolecular complexes to a probe tip via nonspecific, physisorption
              interactions and the extensional nanomechanical properties (e.g. force, F,
              versus separation distance, D) will be measured in aqueous solution.  A variety
              of parameters will be studied in order to control the molecular elasticity and
              toughness, such as the host polymer molecular weight, the length of host chain
              segment between two neighboring guests, pH, and ionic strength.  In the
              long-term, this research project will be expanded to include other general
              classes of "guests" including dendrimers, SAM-functionalized nanoparticles, and
              complementary oligomer-clothed nanoparticles.
%%%
The educational activities
              described in this CAREER proposal are strongly integrated with the research
              objectives and will expose materials science students to the molecular origins
              of material properties and behavior.  A secondary goal is to show students from
              a variety of disciplines some of the latest, most exciting scientific
              discoveries in the field of nanotechnology and to encourage them to take up
              undergraduate research projects, apply to graduate school, and / or pursue a
              career in research and academia.  This will be achieved through the continuing
              development of a new semester-long undergraduate course entitled "Nanomechanics
              of Materials and Biomaterials," the creation of a special 4-week undergraduate
              course during our "independent activities period" entitled " Nanotechnology
              Science and Engineering," the creation of a week-long, graduate-level
              laboratory summer course entitled " High-Resolution Force Spectroscopy," and
              outreach to high school teachers.

