Title       : Moderators and Processes of Theory-Based Bias Correction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0094510

Award Number: 0094510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane T. Wegener wegener@psych.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People often wonder whether their perceptions are accurate or appropriate. For
              example, jurors are asked to disregard inadmissible evidence, and people in
              hiring positions are responsible for ensuring that their evaluation of
              candidates is free from racial or gender bias. This project seeks to understand
              how and when people attempt to avoid or remove bias in their judgments and
              perceptions. The Flexible Correction Model (FCM) addresses such issues and
              forms the theoretical basis for the experiments. In contrast to past theories
              addressing bias correction, the FCM conceptualizes bias correction as guided by
              individuals' naive theories (beliefs) about which biases are at work in a given
              setting. Some biases might be made salient for a particular judgment (e.g.,
              when a judge instructs jurors not to use a particular piece of inadmissible
              evidence), whereas other potential biases might be salient for an individual
              across many settings (e.g., if a person has seen many past instances of
              racism). Whether active attempts at bias correction do or do not occur is also
              determined by the levels of motivation and ability people have to avoid the
              bias. For instance, juries might use inadmissible but condemning evidence
              because they are motivated to convict the right person. In other situations,
              people may not be able to avoid bias because they are distracted with other
              activities or because they do not have time to consider the biases at
              work.

Fourteen experiments examine the variables that can influence which
              biases are most likely to be noticed and corrected by social perceivers,
              investigate the consequences of efforts to remove or avoid bias, and compare
              the belief-based corrections outlined by the FCM with alternative theories of
              avoiding bias. By utilizing a variety of research domains, including
              persuasion, stereotyping, and impression formation, the experiments will
              demonstrate how the FCM can help to organize our understanding of corrections
              in such varied settings as hiring decisions, courtroom judgment, advertising,
              and education.

