Title       : Collaborative Research: A Multidisciplinary Study of Selective Tidal-Stream
               Transport: Bio-physical Coupling and Behavioral Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2001  
File        : a0094938

Award Number: 0094938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99063              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Luettich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Many invertebrates and fishes use selective tidal-stream transport (STST) for
              horizontal movement. STST is based on a vertical migration pattern, in which
              animals leave the bottom and enter the water column during one phase of the
              tide and remain on or near the bottom during the other phase. One remarkable
              but unstudied aspect of STST within a species is the reversal in the direction
              of migration at different life history stages. Migration of the blue crab
              Callinectes sapidus, involving a reversal in STST direction following spawning,
              is the focus of this multidisciplinary research. During spawning migration,
              ovigerous females use ebb-tide transport to move seaward from estuaries. After
              releasing larvae, they reverse direction and undergo flood -tide transport to
              re-enter the estuary. The specific goals of this research are to: use
              biotelemetry to observe and characterize the pattern of movement and physical
              conditions during the spawning migration; simulate observed physical conditions
              and migratory pathways and extrapolate these results in time and space using a
              coupled bio-physical model; determine whether the behavior underlying STST is
              mediated by an endogenous rhythm in activity or by behavioral responses to
              exogenous cues; and determine the cues mediating the onset of ebb-tide
              transport by females with mature eggs and flood-tide transport of post--spawn
              females. 

The study integrates the fields of biological and physical
              oceanography and will expand our understanding of the cues, behaviors, and
              physical mechanisms underlying STST, a common life history trait among many
              marine and estuarine species that is essential for continuation of populations.
              Specifically, combining results from field observations and laboratory
              experiments with a circulation model will allow researchers to predict
              hydrologic and meteorologic conditions that promote or impede female blue crab
              migration to and from spawning sites and estimate the relative contribution of
              larvae released from different areas of an estuary to the supply of developing
              larvae in coastal waters. 

