Title       : Societal Dimensions of Food and Agricultural Standards: A Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0094618

Award Number: 0094618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Busch lawrence.busch@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig K. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Reardon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. James Bingen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides support for the development of a graduate training program
              focused on the ethical and value issues raised by food and agricultural
              standards (FAS) including quality, food safety, labor and environmental
              standards. FAS determine who benefits and who participates in the global
              exchange of agrifood commodities. They embody many important social and ethical
              issues, including: What should be the relationship between states and markets?
              What can science tell us about risk and safety? How can democracy be
              (re)constructed? What is the proper role of global trade in socioeconomic
              development? What should be the scope of WTO jurisdiction? Can environmental
              values be reconciled with economic values? No existing US-based graduate
              program offers students the opportunities to explore the issues and develop the
              skills needed to deal with these complex normative and empirical issues.  This
              grant will help to build an internationally recognized graduate program that
              enhances state-of-the-art discipline-based training with specialized learning
              opportunities, allowing students the opportunity to incorporate
              interdisciplinary perspectives and skills and preparing them to grapple with
              normative issues in an increasingly global and differentiated food and
              agricultural system. Additionally, it will help students to integrate normative
              issues into the theoretical frameworks and practices of their respective
              disciplines.

FAS issues cut across sociology, law, economics, ethics and
              policy analysis, and play themselves out in five dimensions: (1) standards
              formation, modification, implementation and enforcement, (2) access to markets
              for input factors and output products, (3) public and private roles with
              respect to standards, (4) risk, (5) consequences of standards for different
              groups in an industry and for society as a whole.These five dimensions form the
              basis of this research theme and ongoing research program. Participants in this
              grant will engage in research and training on one or more of these topics. In
              order to address these questions, faculty and students will draw upon
              approaches and disciplinary skills in rural sociology, institutional economics,
              international and food law, ethics and philosophy, and institutional and policy
              analysis in political science. The training program will permit three graduate
              fellows and a postdoctoral fellow to engage in research and formal course work
              focused around the topics above, in each of three years. Over the course of the
              training program, fellows will interact and develop collaborative relationships
              with the variety of stakeholders in systems of FAS. They will also participate
              in a rigorous program of coursework and research on themes currently under
              investigation by the principal investigators. The postdoctoral associate will
              bring new skills to the research team as well as help in team teaching the
              proseminar in FAS and in managing the overall research program. As a result of
              their training, fellows will be well situated to integrate these normative
              issues in their training and research careers. They will also have the
              knowledge and skills to develop collaborations with stakeholder groups at the
              local, national and international level. They will be able to work with a full
              range of stakeholders so as to help create socially desirable and equitable FAS
              from which all parties can benefit.

