Title       : Modelling Repeated Categorical Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0094565

Award Number: 0094565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Agresti aa@stat.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop statistical methods for modeling and analyzing
              categorical responses having clustering, most commonly due to repeated
              measurement.  The main focus is generalized linear mixed models and extensions
              for multinomial responses and for mixtures of categorical and continuous
              responses.  The issues to be studied include (1) modeling repeated ordinal and
              nominal responses using a distribution-free approach for the random effects,
              (2) addressing related misspecification and efficiency issues, (3) extending
              standard models for association and conditional association to allow
              heterogeneity of odds ratios by using random effects in binomial logit and
              Poisson loglinear models, (4) incorporating a wide variety of random effects
              models for categorical responses in an extended class of generalized loglinear
              mixed models, and (5) modeling repeated measurement of multivariate responses
              that are mixtures of discrete and continuous responses using random effects. 
              Related work includes modeling of repeated compositional data, developing
              summary measures for comparing non-nested models for handling repeated
              measurement data, developing improved small-sample confidence intervals for
              parameters summarizing repeated measurement data, and writing survey articles
              on topics related to modeling clustered, categorical data.

This project will
              study and develop a type of model that is increasingly popular for applications
              in which standard statistical methods are inadequate because observations are
              not independent.  The lack of independence occurs, for instance, when the same
              subjects are measured repeatedly over time or when observations occur in
              clusters such as families.  The models are also useful for the study of
              subjects' opinions expressed on a battery of related questions in a survey --
              for instance, opinion about whether government spending should increase, remain
              the same, or decrease, measured separately for defense, education, health, and
              the environment.  This project will formulate new models, develop inferential
              methods for them, and illustrate them with social-science related data sets. 
              Potential applications include comparing responses to similar questions on a
              survey, modeling survey questions in which respondents can select more than one
              outcome category, and summarizing how effects vary among groups that are
              sampled from some larger set of groups (e.g., schools, hospitals).

