Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Undergraduate Scholarships
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0094793

Award Number: 0094793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philipp J. Kraemer   (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Kolasa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce L. Walcott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl A. Eberhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lillie R. Crowley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Kentucky (UK) and Lexington Community College (LCC) are
              providing undergraduate scholarships for low- income, academically talented
              students in computer science, engineering, and mathematics (CSEM). Through the
              partnership between the UK College of Engineering, UK Mathematics Department,
              and the UK Lexington Community College Computer Information Systems and
              Engineering Technology programs, this project supports the pipeline of students
              from the associate's and bachelor's degree levels to the graduate degree level
              and into science and technology employment opportunities. Forty students will
              be selected into the program each year, and will be expected to complete a
              degree within two years of being awarded a scholarship. Objectives of the
              program include: reducing the time students need to spend on non- academic
              employment in order to meet their financial obligations; enhance academic
              success by making an integrated range of services and activities available to
              the scholars; and increasing the number of students who transfer from the
              associate's degree level to the bachelor's degree level. These objectives are
              being achieved by: providing scholarships to reduce the burden of academic
              expenses; coordinating student support services, providing research
              experiences, and developing focused enrichment activities to promote academic
              success and foster interest, expertise, and enthusiasm for the CSEM fields; and
              provide bridging activities for LCC students who wish to transfer to UK.
