Title       : Idiomatic Language: Multiword Expressions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0094638

Award Number: 0094638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan A. Sag Sag@CSLI.Stanford.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ivan Sag will conduct three years
              of linguistic research on multiword expressions (MWEs). MWEs are a problem that
              must be solved on the route to robust and natural natural language technology.
              Fixed expressions can be entered into a lexicon as words-with-spaces, but this
              is inadequate even for cases like 'part(s) of speech' and
              'kicks/kick/kicked/kicking the bucket' ("die"). Further, some semi-fixed
              expressions exhibit positional variation (e.g., 'look up the answer/look the
              answer up'), while others of equal semantic idiosyncrasy do not (e.g., 'falling
              off a log/*falling a log off'). Some patterns appear rule-governed, but contain
              unexpected exceptions (e.g., 'call/ring/phone/*telephone someone up').
              Decomposable phrasal idioms allow even greater syntactic flexibility: 'Kim
              pulled the strings that got Pat the job' and 'The strings that had been pulled
              in order for Pat to get the job were more extraordinary than those pulled to
              get Chris employed'. Linguistic research has not yet provided an adequate
              theory of the diverse phenomena that populate the space between truly fixed
              expressions and syntactically flexible phrasal idioms. This project will fill
              that gap, developing a mathematically precise and computationally tractable
              theory of various classes of MWEs. The research team will analyze and
              computationally manipulate corpus data, integrating discrete and frequentistic
              methodologies into a hybrid theory of the different kinds of MWEs. The methods
              include complex word structures, lexical selection, partially similar grammar
              rules organized into "construction hierarchies", idiomatic construction rules -
              a new technique for analyzing constructions where idiomatic expressions may be
              separated from one another by considerable distance. Compositionally
              structured, institutionalized phrases like 'traffic light' and 'phone booth'
              will be treated as purely statistical dependencies. The most recent extraction
              techniques will be used to develop stochastic constraints and integrate them
              into fundamentally discrete, constraint-based grammars.

Since there is at
              present no comprehensive account of MWEs, this research on MWEs will contribute
              to both basic grammatical theory and our understanding of lexical knowledge.
              Because the analyses are mathematically precise and implemented within
              open-source software, the results will be of immediate utility for the
              development of robust language processing technology in a variety of
              constraint-based frameworks currently being explored in the field. Natural
              language processing applications will benefit from the results, including those
              involving language understanding, language generation, machine translation, and
              speech-related systems of various kinds (including speech prostheses for
              individuals with certain disabilities). All such applications involve scaling
              grammars up; and scaling grammars up to deal with MWEs will necessitate finding
              the right balance among various analytic techniques. Of special importance will
              be finding the right balance between symbolic and statistical techniques, a
              difficult problem whose solution this project's results bear on.

