Title       : National Historical Geographic Information System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0094908

Award Number: 0094908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4709991            (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Adams adams004@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy L. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Block  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Ruggles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. McMaster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Small-area census data are the primary source for studying such critical issues
              in social science research as suburbanization, the decline and rebirth of
              central cities, residential segregation, immigrant settlement patterns, rural
              depopulation, agricultural consolidation and population shifts from the rust
              belt to the sunbelt.  These issues cry out for chronological analysis, but
              because historical small-area data are inaccessible, most studies are static. 
              Researchers who address change over time in spatial processes must either
              confine their analyses to local areas because broader studies are simply too
              expensive or they must adopt large units of analysis, such as states and
              metropolitan areas, which preclude the nuanced detail needed for full
              understanding.  This Social, Behavioral, and Economic Science Infrastructure
              award will support the work to make the census accessible to researchers within
              the framework of a comprehensive National Historical Geographic Information
              System (NHGIS).  A multidisciplinary research team will bring together
              approximately 670 gigabytes of data covering the period 1790 through 2000 that
              currently are scattered across dozens of archives and stored in incompatible
              formats on different media.  This project will consist of three major
              components.  (1) The data and documentation component will gather all extant
              machine-readable census summary data, fill holes in the surviving
              machine-readable data through data entry of paper census tabulations, harmonize
              the formats and documentation of all files, and produce standardized electronic
              documentation according to the recently developed Data Documentation Initiative
              (DDI) specification.  (2) The mapping component will create consistent
              historical electronic boundary files for tracts, minor civil divisions,
              Counties, and larger geographic units.  (3) The data-access component will
              create a powerful but user-friendly, Web-based browser and extraction system
              based on the new DDI metadata standard.  The system will provide public access
              free of charge to both documentation and data and will present results in the
              form of tables or maps.

The census constitutes a fundamental underpinning of
              social science and policy research.  It also represents an exceptional untapped
              resource for secondary and higher education in the social science, statistics,
              and history.  This project will allow all users -- from high school students to
              research scientists -- to adopt a comparative and historical perspective.  The
              NHGIS database will open a new range of powerful approaches to familiar
              problems, broadening the scope of local and regional analyses to explore
              variations across time and space simultaneously.  
The database will have even
              broader application when combined with other sources.  The census provides
              basic denominators for an array of studies across the social sciences,
              including such diverse fields as political science, criminal justice, and
              epidemiology.  The availability of small-area data and geographic boundary
              files will allow such analyses to incorporate a chronological as well as a
              spatial dimension.  Furthermore, social scientists have become increasingly
              aware that individuals' life changes, choices, and attitudes are shaped not
              only by their own characteristics but also by the characteristics of their
              neighbors and communities.  The NHGIS will encourage and greatly simplify the
              use of techniques such as multi-level analysis that draw upon such insights. 
              These aggregate-level census data will dovetail with and complement widely used
              micro-level datasets, such as the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, the
              American Community Survey, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, and other
              specialized surveys.  The NHGIS database will democratize access to the census.
               The database will be a resource that can be used widely for social science
              training, by the media, for policy research at the state and local levels, by
              the private sector, and in secondary education.

