Title       : CAREER: Charge Injection in Polymers and Small Organic Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0094047

Award Number: 0094047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452048             (Estimated)
Investigator: George G. Malliaras george@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project aims to advance fundamental understanding of organic
              interfaces, and to provide a unique environment to prepare students for careers
              in the rapidly growing area of or-ganic optoelectronics. In devices such as
              light emitting diodes, thin film transistors, photodiodes and photorefractives,
              a primary problem limiting the ability to improve performance and stability is
              lack of a fundamental understanding of the interface between organic materials
              and metal electrodes. Achieving a fundamental understanding of carrier
              transport across these interfaces, identifying and understanding the primary
              mechanisms of degradation at these interfaces, and then utilizing this
              understanding to improve the electrical properties are the
              scientific/engineering issues being addressed in this project. A series of
              experiments seeking to elucidate the mecha-nism of charge injection at
              metal/organic interfaces and leading to improvement of the perform-ance and
              stability of metal/organic contacts will be conducted. The approach is to first
              establish the dependence of injection on electric field, temperature and
              materials parameters such as layer thickness, dielectric constant, energy
              barrier and the presence of traps, at model metal/organic interfaces. These
              interfaces will be formed by depositing organic materials with
              well-characterized charge transport properties on properly chosen metals.
              Second, doping of the or-ganic will be induced by the introduction of
              appropriate thin conducting layers at the interface and its influence on
              injection investigated. A variety of experimental techniques will be used to
              probe the nature of these interfaces and contact properties. Finally, the
              stability of both pristine and doped interfaces will be studied with
              accelerated aging tests in order to deduce primary modes of degradation and
              determine their influence on injection.
The research project will be closely
              integrated with an education and outreach program incorpo-rating both
              conventional courses and extensive mentoring. New courses will be developed to
              provide undergraduate and graduate students with a solid background in organic
              optoelectronics. In addition to graduate research assistants, undergraduate
              students will be intimately involved in the research program - providing them
              with a unique opportunity to complement their theoretical training with
              hands-on research activities. A greater community focusing on organic
              optoelec-tronics will be assembled from diverse groups across the campus and
              other universities, which will give students the opportunity to experience a
              truly multidisciplinary environment. Also, an extended outreach program aimed
              at K-12, female/minority colleges, and industry, will be devel-oped to extend
              these benefits to the broad community. The proposed program will create a
              center of excellence in research and education at Cornell that will benefit the
              field of organic optoelec-tronics and society at large. The broad education and
              outreach plan will establish a unique envi-ronment expected to attract students
              to sciences and nurture the researchers that will shape the future of organic
              optoelectronics.
%%% The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
              topical area of materials science having high technological relevance. The
              scope of the project will expose students to challenges in materials synthesis,
              processing, and characterization. An important feature of the project is the
              strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
              
***  

