Title       : CAREER: Designing International Agreements: Theoretical Development, Data
               Collection, and Empirical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a0094376

Award Number: 0094376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Koremenos koremeno@polisci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	For the past twenty years, the theoretical literature on international
              cooperation has focused on overarching questions about whether cooperation is
              possible and how important it is.  Now, this literature must address more
              focused questions about how the institutions of cooperation work and how they
              change state behavior.  Moreover, after over fifty years of intense
              realist-antirealist debate in international relations (much of which turns on
              the question of the value and function of international agreements), no one has
              systematically collected data on important dimensions of international
              agreements.  Hence, it is also time to collect such data to use them to
              confront both old and new theories.
	The first aspect of my research program
              develops a theoretical framework that explains international agreement design
              in terms of a set of logically derived and empirically testable hypotheses. 
              The framework is based on a rational choice perspective in which actors
              purposefully design agreement and institutions to advance their joint
              interests.  The theoretical aspect continues the line of work already
              established by Koremenos and others.
	The second aspect consists of collecting
              data on the characteristics of a large sample of international agreements drawn
              from the United Nations Treaty Series.  I focus on four types of provisions: 
              flexibility provisions, such as planned renegotiations and escape clauses,
              monitoring and compliance provisions, agreement scope (the number of issues
              covered), and references to other international agreements.  These dimensions
              are motivated by important (and interesting) theoretical questions in the
              existing literature.
	The datasheet allows reseachers who study international
              cooperation to test their theories in much the same way as the Correlates of
              War and Militarized International Disputes datasets enable researchers who
              study international conflict to test their ideas.  The data are available to
              the research community once assembled.  As such, the project represents an
              important contribution to the research infrastructure of international
              relations.  The feasibility of the proposed project is demonstrated by a
              successful test sample already drawn by the principal investigator.  This
              sample reveals systematic variation in agreement provisions across issue
              areas.
	The third aspect consists of statistical analyses of the collected
              data.  Given that this is the first data collection effort of its kind, this
              basic descriptive work represents an important contribution to the literature. 
              Furthermore, and in contrast to the existing literature, which mainly
              illustrates theories of how states cooperate with case studies., these data
              allow researchers to test theories.
	The proposal also contains a substantial
              undergraduate and graduate teaching component.  I expect several graduate
              students to add to and use the datset in their dissertations.  I develop both
              undergraduate and graduate courses on research design, with a particular focus
              on how to collect data that can be used to test empirically predictions from
              formal theory.  These courses cover all aspects of the problem, with a special
              focus on the challenge of operationalizing theoretical variables.  I also
              modify my existing undergraduate seminar course to focus on the systematic
              empirical analyses that emerge from this project.
	My research agenda includes
              theoretical development, major data collection, and systematic empirical
              testing of the theory.  To date, funding from UCLA and from the University of
              California for the collection of the test data has been insufficient to allow
              me to pursue the project on the scale proposed here. 

