Title       : Dictionary of Jicarilla Apache
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a0094373

Award Number: 0094373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa Axelrod axelrod@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jordan Lachler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to produce a dictionary of the Jicarilla Apache
              language.  Jicarilla, an Eastern Apachean language, is spoken on the Jicarilla
              Apache reservation in northern New Mexico.  Approximately 21% of the population
              is fluent in the language.  Other Eastern Apache languages, Lipan and Plains
              Apache, are nearly extinct.  To date, no large-scale dictionary or grammar has
              been produced for any of the Eastern Apachean languages.

The dictionary will
              consist of a single database, but different programming features will allow it
              to be printed out in many different formats.  We intend to produce versions in
              two formats for this project period: 1) a linguist's version, in which 4,000 -
              5,000 words (verb bases, nouns, adverbs, and particles) will be organized by
              root into approximately 1,000 entries in its Jicarilla-English section, and 2)
              a native speaker/learner's version organized by semantic field.  Data will come
              both from direct elicitation and from recorded texts and conversation. The
              database will be available for creating dictionaries in other formats, e.g. a
              native-speaker version organized alphabetically by word-initial segment, a CD
              ROM version.

Participants on the project have been working as a team on
              language revitalization projects in the community, including a daycare
              immersion program. This project will complement the ongoing language work and
              will take advantage of an already-established team of Jicarilla Apache
              elder/educators and academic linguists who have been working together
              successfully for several years.  The project also will bring an expert in
              Jicarilla morphosyntax for consultation on the grammatical analyses presented
              in the dictionaries and in the grammatical introductions.

This project
              represents a rare opportunity to make language documentation efforts a major
              part of an already existing language revitalization program.  It will make
              invaluable data available for comparative and historical linguistic research on
              the Athabaskan language family as well as providing information for the study
              of polysynthetic languages in general.  It combines this benefit for academic
              scholars with a program designed to empower a Native American community in
              their desire to revitalize their endangered language.
