Title       : CAREER: Dynamics of Audition: Rhythm, Music, and Attending
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0094229

Award Number: 0094229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421648             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Large large@walt.ccs.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              What does the neural representation of a complex, temporally structured auditory
              event look like?  When we listen to a symphony or a speech, what neural
              processes allow us to maintain a stable attentional focus?  How do the
              requisite auditory representations form, how do they adapt to unexpected
              nuances, and how do they reorganize to accommodate structural change?  This
              research will test a theory of auditory perception and attention that focuses
              on complex, temporally structured events, such as speech and music.  The theory
              holds that the mental representation of an auditory event is a self-organized,
              dynamic structure whose neural correlate is a spatiotemporal pattern of neural
              activity.  The primary function of this hypothesized spatiotemporal structure
              is attentional: it enables anticipation of future events and thus the targeting
              of perception and the coordination of action with external events.  The
              stability and flexibility properties of attention in this theory both arise
              through nonlinearities in the underlying pattern-forming dynamics. 
              Furthermore, the hypothesized dynamic representations in the theory function in
              auditory communication.  It is known empirically that transient stimulus
              fluctuations, such as intonation and rate changes observed in both speech and
              musical performance, communicate intention, emotion, and structural
              information.  The theory holds that these communicative gestures are recognized
              as deviations from temporal expectations embodied in the attentional
              structure.

This theory explains how people maintain a stable attentional
              focus over temporally extended events while adapting flexibly to transient
              temporal fluctuations.  It provides mathematical models of dynamic structural
              representation, using the tools of nonlinear dynamical systems.  It makes
              predictions about neural correlates of auditory representation, attention, and
              communication.  Finally, it applies to complex, temporally structured event
              sequences, explaining how people respond to the auditory complexity of the real
              world. 

The experiments will use music, as well as simpler music-like
              sequences, to model temporally extended events.  Theoretical predictions will
              be tested using behavioral and neuroimaging techniques.  Behavioral experiments
              will assess predictions in four areas 1) formation and stability of structural
              representations, 2) real-time tracking of temporally structured sequences, 3)
              the role of rhythm in attention, and 4) the role of expectancy in auditory
              communication.  Neuroimaging techniques (EEG, MEG) will measure temporal and
              spatial aspects of neural function in auditory perception and attention, to
              further assess theoretical predictions.  Modifications to the theory will be
              based on comparison of experimental results with predictions of computer
              simulations, and extensions to the general theory will be developed.

This
              research will advance our basic understanding of auditory perception and
              attention by enhancing our knowledge of the role of structure in perceiving and
              attending to complex events. The results have potentially wide applicability
              from the development of more robust computer algorithms for speech recognition
              and music processing, to deeper clinical understanding of recovery from neural
              trauma, such as aphasic stroke. 
