Title       : CAREER: Scalar Representations in Natural Language Semantics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0094263

Award Number: 0094263
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Kennedy kennedy@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The ability to establish orderings among objects and make comparisons between
              them according to the amount or degree to which they possess some gradable
              property is a basic component of human cognition. Natural languages reflect
              this fact: all languages have syntactic categories that express gradable
              concepts, and all languages have constructions that are used to make
              comparisons. 'Gradable' adjectives like 'tall', 'bright', 'beautiful', and so
              forth are canonical examples of such expressions, and have formed the central
              empirical domain for studies of grading in natural language.

An important
              conclusion of this work is that natural language semantics must make reference
              to abstract representations of measurement, or 'scales'. A question that has
              not been seriously addressed, however, is whether scalar representations
              underlie the semantic properties of categories other than adjectives. This
              study will address this question through a systematic and comprehensive
              investigation of the role of scalar representations across categories. The
              primary focus will be on relations between adjectives and verbs, both because
              their core semantic properties are well understood, and because preliminary
              research points towards a regular relation between scale structure in
              adjectives and event structure in verbs. The study will also explore scalar
              representations in the prepositional and nominal domains.

The empirical
              domain of the project will provide the foundation for an integrated
              three-quarter sequence in lexical semantics, formal semantics, and pragmatics,
              as well as a freshman seminar focusing on linguistic, cognitive, and
              philosophical questions about meaning. The project will also support graduate
              and undergraduate researcher assistants, providing an opportunity for
              supervised independent research on a topic that allows a range of variation in
              individual research focus. Finally, the project will introduce students and
              colleagues directly to contemporary research by bringing in outside scholars
              for guest lectures, and through a workshop on scalar representations in natural
              language.
