Title       : Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0094964

Award Number: 0094964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3101681            (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana C. Mutz mutz.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS) is designed to
              accomplish six goals:
1.	to provide numerous social scientists with new
              opportunities for original data collection:
2.	to promote innovative
              experiments;
3.	to increase the precision with which fundamental social,
              political and economic dynamics are
	measured and understood:
4.	to increase
              the speed and efficiency with which advances in social scientific theory and
              analyses can be
	applied to critical social problems:
5.	to maximize
              financial efficiency by combining otherwise separate studies, thereby radically
              reducing
	the average and marginal costs of each study:
6.	to create an
              Internet portal for people who want to learn about social science
              experimentation -- a place
	where teachers and students at many levels can
              easily benefit from these collective accomplishments.

TESS will accomplish
              these goals using two large-scale, cooperative data collection instruments.
              Both the internet-based and telephone-based instruments will allow researchers
              to run novel experiments on a national random sample of American households for
              the purpose of examining substantive or methodological hypotheses. Scholars
              across the social sciences will compete for time on one or both instruments. A
              comprehensive review process will screen proposals for the importance of their
              contribution to science. The co-PIs. assisted by leading researchers from
              Economics, Political Science, Psychology, Sociology. Communication, Cognitive
              Science and related disciplines, will oversee the review process, drawing on
              reviews solicited from within each proposer's discipline. Because the data
              collection instruments will be in the field on a continuous basis, accepted
              experiments can be conducted quickly.

Technologically, TESS combines the
              proven power of computer-assisted telephone interviewing with the new
              possibilities of computer-assisted Internet interviewing. Each approach allows
              researchers to capture the internal validity of traditional experiments while
              realizing the benefits of contact with large. diverse subject populations.
              Researchers can also use TESS to conduct experiments across interviewing modes.
              Such studies will reveal the extent to which phone and laboratory-based
              experimental findings are robust to interview contexts that can be created on
              home computers across the country. Time-sharing Experiments for the Social
              Sciences provides new opportunities, both methodological and substantive, to a
              wide range of researchers.

During the grant period TESS will open new
              research opportunities for over 150 individual researchers or research teams.
              By capitalizing on numerous economies of scale and having multiple experiments
              share time on each data collection instrument, TESS will allow numerous
              researchers to collect data tailored to their own hypotheses at an
              extraordinarily low cost per study. As a consequence, TESS will provide many
              social scientists with increased incentives to design innovative experiments.
              Moreover, by providing data collection instruments that are in the field on an
              ongoing basis, TESS will accelerate the pace at which research can be done and
              allow researchers to design studies that respond to current
              events.

Education and training are integral parts of TESS. The  website for
              this project, ExperimentCentral.org, is the core of  an educational strategy.
              In addition to coordinating the submission and review process for TESS
              proposals. ExperimentCentral.org will allow students and teachers at many
              levels to learn about the  many benefits of past and present social science
              experimentation. The site, in addition to providing quick and easy access to
              TESS data and analyses, will make it easier for many internet users to find
              experimental websites from the social sciences. The educational strategy also
              includes substantial graduate student training throughout the five-year
              project.

In sum, Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences offers new
              opportunities for both substantive and methodological advances. The key to TESS
              is multiple studies from different disciplines sharing common observational
              platforms, all exploiting the inferential power and measurement efficiencies of
              experimental designs. This time-sharing on data collection platforms is also
              the key to economic efficiencies of TESS. By distributing the costs of
              sampling, interviewing, and instrument collection over a large number of
              studies, the marginal cost of each study can be reduced by orders of magnitude,
              indeed, often to a tenth or less of what each would cost if done on its
              own.


