Title       : PECASE: Rethinking the Value of Choice: Considering Cultural, Individual, and
               Situational Mediators of Intrinsic Motivation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0094309

Award Number: 0094309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $680150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheena S. Iyengar ss957@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1187,9260,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Conventional wisdom and decades of research in American psychology have
              suggested a link between the provision of choice and intrinsic motivation,
              which in turn has been correlated with numerous psychological benefits,
              including better performance and higher levels of satisfaction. Conversely, the
              absence of choice has been shown to detrimentally affect intrinsic motivation
              and performance. So ingrained is the assumption that people will find choice
              intrinsically motivating, that psychologists have rarely paused to examine the
              more general applicability of these findings. Rarely have circumstances been
              considered in which the provision of choice(s) may not be intrinsically
              motivating. Considered even less, is the possibility that having others make
              the choice may, in certain contexts, inspire greater intrinsic motivation and
              increased commitment to the chosen activity. Moreover, it has been implicitly
              presumed that the phenomena demonstrated in laboratory experiments with
              primarily European American participants will generalize
              cross-culturally.

This research explores the mediating mechanisms underlying
              the relationship between choice and intrinsic motivation by examining for the
              first time circumstances in which people may actually exhibit greater intrinsic
              motivation when their choices are limited rather than expanded, or might even
              prefer to have others make their choices for them. By employing multiple
              methodological approaches including cross-cultural field, laboratory, and
              ethnographic studies using multiple dependent measures, the resulting mosaic of
              studies examines cultural, individual and situational differences in
              choice-making perceptions and goals. In particular, this research compares the
              motivational consequences of choice among individuals in the extent to which
              they perceive choice-making to involve the fulfillment of personal preference
              matching (i.e. identifying the choice most suited to personal interests) or to
              involve duty fulfillment (i.e. identifying the choice which is in accordance
              with others expectations).

The relevance of this research can be observed
              across a wide array of choice-making settings. In organizational settings, this
              research examines the way correlates of employee motivation and performance
              vary across culture and vary across their choice-making perceptions and goals.
              Financial 401k decisions may be influenced by choosers' perceptions of their
              choice-making goal in that people striving to identify the personally most
              optimal 401k retirement plan option may actually prefer to opt out of the
              choice-making process, even when doing so is sub-optimal. Similarly,
              interviewees perceiving employment options as involving the identification of
              the personally most optimal preference may in the choosing process examine more
              options, and yet experience greater dissatisfaction resulting in reduced tenure
              in their jobs of choice, as compared to interviewees searching for the
              employment choice which enables them to fulfill their obligations to others.
              Furthermore, ethnographic studies conducted cross-culturally examine consumers'
              preferred choice-making methods and subsequent satisfaction with their choices
              as a consequence of their initial choice-making perceptions and goals. In
              short, because these studies include corporate, consumer, financial, and job
              interview contexts in addition to laboratory settings, they both enrich a
              theoretical understanding of choosers responses to various choice-making
              contexts and provide better information about important aspects of choice in
              complex real-world settings.


