Title       : E-MELD: Electronic Metastructure for Endangered Languages Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0094934

Award Number: 0094934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2142913            (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Aristar aristar@linguistlist.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Bird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha S. Ratliff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen Aristar-Dry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Terence Langendoen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Language data is central to the research of a large social sciences community -
              not only linguists, but also anthropologists, archaeologists, historians, and
              sociologists interested in the culture of indigenous peoples. Members of this
              research community are currently faced with two urgent situations: the number
              of languages in the world is rapidly diminishing while the number of
              initiatives to create digital archives of language data is rapidly multiplying.
              The latter might seem to be an unalloyed good in the face of the former, but
              there are two ways things may go wrong without adequate collaboration among
              archivists, linguists, and language engineers. First, a common standard for the
              digitization of linguistic data may never be agreed upon. And the resulting
              variation in archiving practices and language representation would seriously
              inhibit data access, searching, and cross-linguistic comparison. Second,
              standards may be implemented without guidance from the people who best know the
              range of structural possibilities in human language-descriptive linguists who
              have done fieldwork on poorly described languages.

If digital archives of
              language data and documentation are to offer the widest possible access and to
              provide information in a maximally useful form, consensus must be reached about
              certain aspects of archive infrastructure. As the largest linguistic
              organization in the world and the central electronic publication of the
              discipline, The LINGUIST List <http://www.linguistlist.org> is organizing a
              collaborative project with a dual objective: (1) to preserve endangered
              languages data and documentation and (2) to aid in the development of
              infrastructure for linguistic archives. One outcome of the project will be a
              LINGUIST List digital archive housing data from 10 endangered languages. But
              the focus on infrastructure will produce other, equally important results. In
              the first place, The LINGUIST archive will function, not only as a repository,
              but also as a 'showroom of best practice.' The archive will offer endangered
              languages data marked up and catalogued according to community consensus about
              best practice; furthermore, the archive will disseminate reference material
              delineating best practice and software tools supporting it. Another outcome
              will be the establishment on the LINGUIST List site of a central metadata
              server for the discipline; this server will organize information on all the
              language-related resources residing at distributed sites, not just endangered
              languages information alone. Other infrastructure-related outcomes include (1)
              the involvement of the linguistics community in establishing best practice, (2)
              the widespread dissemination of the resulting recommendations, and (3) the
              hands-on training of a substantial core of linguists and language archivists in
              the implementation of the guidelines. Although the data collection efforts will
              focus initially on endangered languages, the metadata server, the
              recommendations for best practice, and the distribution of supporting software
              will have a significant impact on all empirical research in linguistics. The
              project will thus add value to many other language-related projects currently
              planned or underway.
