Title       : Ultrastructural Analyses on Chemosensory Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0094709

Award Number: 0094709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. M. Menco bmenco@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Our overall goal is to understand the structural characteristics of cells of
              chemosensory organs, smell and taste, in relation to chemosensory functioning,
              and to inform about the impressive architecture of the subcellular structures
              where smell and taste recognition takes place. For olfactory (smell) systems
              this includes vomeronasal olfactory signaling, i.e., the signaling of a special
              olfactory organ particularly involved in conspecific and prey recognition. For
              a long time it was assumed that apical structures of the chemosensory receptor
              cells that line the nasal cavity, cilia and microvilli in olfactory and
              vomeronasal system, respectively, are the subcellular organelles specialized
              for capture and recognition of chemosensory stimuli. Thus it was assumed that
              these structures contain the main subcellular sites of chemosensory
              signal-transduction. However, firm proof for this was lacking. Cilia and
              microvilli are tentacle-shaped processes that sprout from receptor cell
              surfaces, but that have different internal cytoskeletal (=scaffolding)
              structures. Their elongated shape likely serves to increase the
              surface-to-volume ratio to enhance chances that odor molecules reach the
              receptor cells. We want to construct a graphical image of proteins important in
              the chemosensory signaling-cascades from the special membrane proteins thought
              to receive incoming odor molecules  --  a family of proteins that resemble,
              e.g., the visual pigment rhodopsin  --  to current generating ion channels, as
              well as of molecules involved in signal modulation and signal termination. For
              this we use a technique called immunocytochemistry that makes use of antibody
              markers which can, with appropriate tags, help to identify molecules of
              interest. In combination with ultrastructural methods using electron
              microscopy, immunocytochemistry is used to localize such molecular components
              in their exact subcellular position. With this approach we showed that the
              distal parts of the olfactory cilia contained most, if not all, components in
              the signal-onset cascades, from odor receptor to current-generating ion
              channel. We began similar studies on vomeronasal olfaction. The new project
              serves to continue research on the location of signal-onset molecules involved
              in vomeronasal olfaction, while in both main and vomeronasal olfactory systems
              molecules that are involved in other parts of the signaling cascades,
              modulation and termination, will be localized.
Apart from the relevance to
              continued structural research in chemosensory signaling, my efforts are also
              important to advance and improve on ultrastructural methods for research in
              biology in general. While maintaining my research in a non-tenure track
              position I kept a small, but well equipped, electron microscope imaging
              facility alive at Northwestern University at minimal expense. Many such
              facilities have been closed, which is not good for biological research at
              large. During my stay at Northwestern several students participated in my
              projects. One such collaboration resulted in several publications. Perhaps,
              more important, I helped many colleagues and their students in their projects
              in case these projects required my special expertise in fine structural
              research. Whenever possible, I will continue such efforts during my stay at
              Northwestern. I also lectured widely at various schools, institutions and
              conferences, in the US as well as abroad, and organized seminars and special
              lectures, and hope to be able to continue such activities.


