Title       : Regulation of Retinal Functions by Light and a Circadian Clock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0094428

Award Number: 0094428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara-Anne Battelle battelle@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The physiology and behavior of animals that live in diurnal environments--
              environments where there is a daily rhythmic change in light and darkness-- are
              controlled in large part by signals that arise from an internal, 24 hour
              (circadian) clock.  The impact of circadian clocks on humans is particularly
              evident in shift workers and as "jet lag" in long-distance travelers when the
              internal clock becomes out of phase with the external light-dark cycle.  The
              mechanisms by which the clock regulates physiology are largely unknown.
	This
              proposal seeks to understand, at a molecular level, how environmental signals
              and the circadian click, separately and in combination, impact vision.  How the
              retina, the tissue in the eye that contains the cells which detect light
              (photoreceptor cells), begins to process incoming visual information, and
              transmits this information to the brain for further processing will be studied.
               The retinas of animals living in diurnal environments typically undergo daily
              rhythmic changes in structure and function that optimize the retina for
              functioning in bright light during the day and in dim light during the night. 
              These day-night changes, which are critical for normal vision, are produced by
              the separate and combined effects of biochemical reactions that are driven by
              the circadian clock and by light.  The American horseshoe crab Limulus
              polyphemus is used because in its eyes, the effects of the circadian clock are
              particularly dramatic.  For example, when signals from the circadian clock
              reach the eyes at night their structure and function change such that they
              become one hundred thousand times more sensitive to light.  For Limulus,
              increased visual sensitivity at night is thought critical for
              reproduction.
	Two specific aims of the current research are designed to
              determine the separate and combined effects of clock- and light-driven
              biochemical cascades on the expression of genes encoding proteins that are
              required for the detection of light (opsin) and for the appropriate response of
              photoreceptors to light (arrestin).  Changes in the levels of mRNAs encoding
              these proteins will be assayed.  A third aim is to examine the function of a
              photoreceptor-specific protein (myosin III) which, in Limulus, is modulated by
              both light- and clock-driven cascades.  This protein is of particular interest
              because:  1. it is critical for the survival of at least some invertebrate
              photoreceptors.  2. similar proteins are found in the photoreceptors of a wide
              variety of invertebrate and vertebrate species, and thus the protein may be
              critical for the function and/or maintenance of all photoreceptors.  3. in
              Limulus, it may integrate the signals from both light- and clock-driven
              biochemical cascades.  Limulus myosin III has been expressed in this laboratory
              in an insect cell system and produced in large quantities.  This provides the
              unique opportunity to study its structure and function in detail.
	This
              research will have a number of outcomes important for sensory and cell biology.
               Since environmental cues and the circadian click influence virtually all
              cells, the results should further a general understanding of how these factors
              impact the cell biology of animals exposed to natural lighting conditions,
              including human shift workers.  These studies of myosin III will provide
              specific new information about a protein that is hypothesized to be critical
              for the structure and function of all photoreceptors.
	Furthermore, the
              research will involve undergraduates and pre-collegiate minority students, a
              long tradition in this laboratory.  The materials and information generated
              also will be used in a variety of K-12 outreach programs run by the Whitney
              Laboratory.  Thus the research will contribute toward developing the next
              generation of scientists and a scientifically literate citizenry in a region of
              the nation where access to scientific activities of any kind is limited.
  

