Title       : CAREER: Computational Science Far-from-Equilibrium and in the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0094178

Award Number: 0094178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Egolf egolf@physics.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0094178
Egolf
This is a CAREER award for a program of large-scale computation
              to study the properties of far-from-equilibrium dynamical systems that exhibit
              temporally-chaotic, spatially-disordered behavior.  This persistent, complex
              dynamical behavior found in a wide variety of systems such as fibrillating
              heart tissue, large aperture lasers, planetary atmospheres and oceans, fluid
              turbulence, and environmental ecosystems is currently not well understood due
              to the strong nonlinearities and the lack of an extremal principle in these
              systems.  The grant goals are to develop new tools for analyzing these
              complicated dynamical systems and to use these tools to achieve an
              understanding of the important internal dynamical processes.  Such an
              understanding could ultimately lead to a unified statistical theory for
              describing the macroscopic properties of these systems without detailed
              knowledge of the microscopic behavior.  Through computational studies of
              experimentally relevant equations and simpler model equations, three questions
              will be answered: (i) What are the sources of chaotic behavior in these systems
              and how do these deterministic sources lead to loss of predictability and the
              effective stochastic nature of the systems? (ii) What are the appropriate
              mesoscopic degrees of freedom in a reduced description of the dynamics? (iii)
              Which properties of equilibrium statistical mechanics can we salvage for a
              description of the long-wavelength properties of far-from-equilibrium systems
              with differing microscopic physical processes?  The results of this work will
              lead not only to a better understanding of the behavior of far-from-equilibrium
              systems, but will provide new tools for analyzing and simulating other highly
              complex scientifically and commercially important phenomena.

Also, as part
              of this project, new interdisciplinary courses will be developed in
              computational science for upper-level undergraduates and graduate students in
              the industrial physics program at Georgetown. Through performance of the
              research described above, undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows will develop
              skills in large-scale computing and modeling and in analyzing complex
              phenomena, which will serve the students and postdoctoral fellows well in
              careers in a wide variety of scientific fields.  Also, an outreach program will
              be developed to bring the fast-evolving field of computational science to high
              school students and teachers.  The PI and others at Georgetown will provide
              guidance and mentoring for students preparing computational science projects
              for science fairs and the Intel Science Talent Search.
%%% 
This is a CAREER
              award for a program of large-scale computation to study the properties of
              far-from-equilibrium dynamical systems that exhibit temporally-chaotic,
              spatially-disordered behavior.  This persistent, complex dynamical behavior
              found in a wide variety of systems such as fibrillating heart tissue, large
              aperture lasers, planetary atmospheres and oceans, fluid turbulence, and
              environmental ecosystems is currently not well understood due to the strong
              nonlinearities and the lack of an extremal principle in these systems.  The
              grant goals are to develop new tools for analyzing these complicated dynamical
              systems and to use these tools to achieve an understanding of the important
              internal dynamical processes. 

Also, as part of this project, new
              interdisciplinary courses will be developed in computational science for
              upper-level undergraduates and graduate students in the industrial physics
              program at Georgetown. Through performance of the research described above,
              undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows will develop skills in large-scale
              computing and modeling and in analyzing complex phenomena, which will serve the
              students and postdoctoral fellows well in careers in a wide variety of
              scientific fields.  Also, an outreach program will be developed to bring the
              fast-evolving field of computational science to high school students and
              teachers.  The PI and others at Georgetown will provide guidance and mentoring
              for students preparing computational science projects for science fairs and the
              Intel Science Talent Search.
***


