Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Approach to the Control of Nanoscale Electronic Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0094063

Award Number: 0094063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Eriksson maeriksson@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this grant is to understand and exploit the
              consequences of high surface to volume ratios in nanoscale systems, such as
              carbon nanotubes.  Because of their high surface to volume ratio, the local
              chemical environment has a large impact on single wall nanotube properties. 
              Self-assembled monolayers will be used as chemically adjustable surfaces on
              which to lay carbon nanotubes.  Controlling the surface chemistry will allow
              control of semiconducting nanotube resistance and doping.  Surfaces will be
              patterned with different chemistries at different locations.  Nanotubes
              stretched across the boundaries of these regions will have patterned doping,
              leading to the formation of controlled nanotube devices.  If successful, these
              experiments offer the potential for large-scale nanotube device fabrication. 
              In addition to such potential applications, it is scientifically important to
              understand how local chemical environments affect nanotube resistances. 
              Closely related experiments will study nanocrystal arrays.  The consequences of
              local variations in the electronic environment of the array will be understood
              and exploited to control the array properties. The goal of both these groups of
              experiments is to better control the properties of nanoscale materials, using
              an integrated view of the ultra-small material and its surrounding environment.
              The educational objective of this project is to increase the number of women
              who pursue science past high school.  The transition from high school to
              college has been identified as a time when students' needs can be better
              addressed.  In particular, mentor-type interactions will be used to better
              explain the importance of, and the opportunity offered by beginning a science
              curriculum early in the undergraduate years.  A program to enable these
              interactions will be developed which leverages existing outreach in order to
              better serve high school juniors and seniors.  The program will provide
              practical career information through both personal contact and web-based
              interactions.
%%%
The research objective of this grant is to better control
              the electrical properties of carbon nanotubes.  Nanotubes will be placed on
              surfaces with well controlled chemical properties.  We will use the interaction
              of the nanotube with the surface to control the nanotube resistance.  Changes
              in the surface chemistry will be used to change the nanotube properties.  By
              creating patterns of different surface chemistry, we will create patterned
              electrical properties in nanotubes placed on these surfaces.  If successful,
              this patterning will enable a new method to create transistors in nanotubes. 
              This new process has the potential to produce a higher density of transistors
              than currently possible.  It is also a step towards a solution to the problem
              of connecting many ultra-small transistors together - the interconnect problem.
               In closely related experiments, we will study the effect of the local
              electrical environment on nanometer-size crystals of metal.  As is the case
              with the nanotube experiments just described, the goal of these nanocrystal
              experiments is to better understand how to control the electrical properties of
              nanometer-scale materials, using an integrated view of the ultra-small
              electrical device and its surrounding environment.  The educational objective
              of this project is to increase the number of women who pursue science past high
              school.  The transition from high school to college has been identified as a
              time when students' needs can be better addressed.  In particular, mentor-type
              interactions will be used to better explain the importance of, and the
              opportunity offered by beginning a science curriculum early in the
              undergraduate years.  A program to enable these interactions will be developed
              which leverages existing outreach in order to better serve high school juniors
              and seniors.  The program will provide practical career information through
              both personal contact and web-based interactions.
***




