Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a0094905

Award Number: 0094905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 30,  2001      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Connie S. Swafford cswafford@gadsdenst.cc.al.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda S. Crowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              L. Neal Tharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shelia Lancaster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Susan Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gadsden State Com College
	      George Wallace Drive
	      Gadsden, AL  35903    256/549-8222

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program provides an opportunity for talented but financially disadvantaged
              individuals to acquire a higher education degree in the fields of math,
              engineering, or computer science. More specifically, this program increases the
              number of associate degree graduates in these fields, with significant numbers
              transferring to four- year institutions to pursue baccalaureate degrees, and
              others ultimately earning graduate degrees. The institution is committed to
              providing the student support services necessary to ensure the retention and
              graduation of the scholarship recipients and, when desired, their successful
              transfer to four-year colleges. Overall, the institution fosters an
              institutional climate supportive of the recipients' success. Ten program
              objectives have been formulated to meet these needs: Identification and
              selection, assessment, retention, achievement, career awareness and counseling,
              service-learning, enrichment, graduation, transfer, and employment. In support
              of these goals, there is a comprehensive student support services program that
              includes personal and academic counseling, academic advising and assistance in
              course selection, enrichment seminars and activities, academic programs,
              instruction in study skills, mentoring program, career awareness, services for
              the disabled, transfer initiative, computer literacy, tutorial services,
              service-learning placement, and employment services and placement.
              Specifically, the program impacts both the recipients and the community as a
              whole through the realization of the following outcomes: improved education for
              students in the stated disciplines; increased retention of students to degree
              achievement; strengthened partnerships between institutions of higher education
              and related employment sectors; improved professional development and
              employment; and further higher education placement of participating students.

