Title       : CAREER: The Behavior of Proteins at the Solid-Liquid Interface Monitored in situ
               with Infrared-Visible Sum Frequency Generation: Investigating the Role of
               Interfacial Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a0094332

Award Number: 0094332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Cremer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses the molecular level structure of water at the
              liquid solid interface in the presence of adsorbed protein molecules. 
              Professor Paul Cremer and his coworkers at Texas A&M, with the support of the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, will examine the interactions of
              water, protein molecules, and solid silica surfaces.  An understanding of these
              types of systems is important to a variety of applications, including
              biocompatibility, biofouling in the food and pharmaceutical industries, and in
              the development of biosensors and catalysts.  Infrared-visible sum frequency
              generation methods will be used to probe the structure of substrate associated
              water in the presence of adsorbed protein.  Time resolved studies will be
              implemented to follow structural changes upon adsorption of protein molecules
              at the solid surface.  Educational aspects of this project include the
              development of a bio-physical chemistry course for upper level undergraduates,
              and the implementation of undergraduate research projects in the field of
              protein surface interactions. 

The interaction of protein molecules with
              surfaces is important in the development of biosensors, in enhancing
              biocompatibility for medical implants, and for understanding the process of
              biofouling in food and pharmaceutical process machinery.  The structure of
              adsorbed water in these systems provides the detailed information that can be
              used to design surfaces with desired protein adsorption properties.  This
              CAREER project uses state of the art surface spectroscopic methods to probe
              this structural question.  Integration of this basic research with educational
              goals in the training of bio-physical scientists and in the development of
              course materials in this area is the focus of the educational aspect of this
              project.

