Title       : Identity and Violence: Crime, Competition and Changing Traditions in Unangan
               Villages of the Eastern Aleutian Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0094826

Award Number: 0094826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anna M. Kerttula                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29107              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine L. Reedy-Maschner klr26@cam.ac.uk  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      309 Fine Arts Bldg., Box 8046
	      Pocatello, ID  832098046    208/282-2592

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Identity and Violence: Crime, Competition and Changing Traditions in Unangan
              Villages of the Eastern Aleutian Region

Abstract
The problem of
              interpersonal violence and violent crime is a complex issue and subject of
              considerable debate across disciplines. Causes cited for violence in indigenous
              communities have included acculturation stress, inadequate social support
              systems, economic hardships, restrictions on tradition, and lack of educational
              opportunities. However, violence cannot be understood as a single problem with
              a single solution; it must be investigated in the context of conditions that
              promote it as a solution to social problems over other outlets of conflict
              resolution and management. This dissertation research project uses a
              combination of rigorous theoretical and empirical inquiry to investigate
              particular aspects of violence and crime in a group of Unangan (Aleut)
              communities on the lower Alaska Peninsula and eastern Aleutian Islands.
              Variable levels of morbidity and mortality have been quantitatively established
              for this region but no individual-based research has been conducted there, or
              anywhere else in the western Arctic, which seeks to investigate the actual
              conditions in which violence occurs. The project explores the explanatory
              potential of biologically, socially, and culturally driven models of
              interpersonal violence. These models, which are rarely used in conjunction, may
              well serve to illuminate each other as well as the complexities of Unangan
              social problems. Ultimately, the goal is to address issues of social and
              cultural change, combined with universal and local issues of violence and
              aggression, and test these findings against crime data. The project will
              examine the contexts for various forms of interpersonal violence and violent
              crime and will encompass human-environment interaction, processes and
              consequences of social, cultural and economic change, and cultural vitality.
              This study will have strong theoretical and applied implications and broaden
              the context in which anthropologists study violence.


