Title       : Dissertation Research: Christiaan Huygens: The Construction of Texts and
               Audiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2000  
File        : a0094472

Award Number: 0094472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Domenico Meli dbmeli@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There are two primary goals for this dissertation research project. The first is
              to provide a close examination of the career of Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695)
              by looking at his publication practices. Huygens was a central figure in the
              seventeenth century; therefore, a better understanding of his career, and how
              it developed across intellectual, social and political lines, would
              significantly add to the history of science in this period. By looking at the
              individuals with whom he shared his work through the circulation of
              presentation copies, this project will follow the transitions and movements
              Huygens made from one peer group to another, including the Royal Society of
              London, and the French Royal Academy. Not only will this elucidate Huygens'
              intellectual and social migrations, but more generally it will reveal a great
              deal about how natural philosophy functioned in this period. The second aim of
              this project is to use Huygens' career as a case study for understanding how
              dedicatory copies of texts could be distributed, and what strategies were
              involved in the presentation of such gifts. Correspondence exists which records
              the recipients Huygens selected for most of his works, and letters from many
              recipients are extant as well. These lists will be examined for each of
              Huygens' works, and the recipients evaluated and compared in an attempt to
              understand what audiences he was targeting. Huygens was not alone in his
              efforts to construct audiences for his books through careful distribution
              patterns. Thus, his efforts will be compared to others from the period,
              including Tycho Brahe, Galileo and Newton. From this a more complete picture of
              the various roles of dedicatory texts will emerge.

