Title       : Synthesis and Properties of Helical Conjugated Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0094723

Award Number: 0094723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Katz tjk1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Thomas J. Katz, of the Department of Chemistry at Columbia University continues
              work to synthesize rigid chemical structures in which electrons can move easily
              on helical paths of a single handedness. Heretofore such molecules had hardly
              been studied because they were preparable in only very tiny amounts and with
              substituents that were neither useful nor easily elaborated to be so. The
              procedures developed in the PI's laboratory are producing such compounds in
              large amounts, easily, and with useful functional groups. The work has two
              goals. One is to design and synthesize helical conjugated molecules that should
              aggregate spontaneously into giant corkscrew-shaped structures and in
              consequence exhibit exceptional optical properties. The second goal is to
              design and synthesize helical conjugated molecules with large chiral clefts
              that should endow the molecules with two benefits. First, some of the examples
              synthesized should act as superb asymmetric catalysts, providing a way to make
              chiral medicines and other physiologically active compounds selectively and in
              the desired mirror image forms. Others should act as much more sensitive probes
              to analyze the amounts of mirror image forms in these and other samples, even
              when the constituent molecules have centers of asymmetry that are very remote
              from any functional groups to which reagents can attach.

This very important
              research of Professor Thomas Katz is being supported by the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program to allow his unique methods of synthesis and
              analysis to deliver new materials and to make them available to the wider
              scientific community. Among the reasons this research is important is that
              approximately 40% of chiral medicines (themselves about half of all drugs) are
              stereochemically inhomogeneous, even though contamination by undesired
              stereoisomeric impurities could be deleterious. Although an international
              effort is being devoted to synthesizing molecules in a single handed form (for
              example, similar to making a number of keys to fit a specific lock), these
              efforts have not been matched by methods to analyze the degree of handedness
              the syntheses achieve (determining how many keys are perfect and without
              defects). The helical molecules to be studied in this project promise to be far
              more sensitive than any now available.

