Title       : CAREER: Integration of Product and Process Design for Short Fiber Reinforced
               Polymer Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0094011

Award Number: 0094011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project plans to put design
              optimization and product and process simulation into the core of polymer
              composites processing research.  The focus on the integration of the
              fundamentals of materials processing and design via a new, comprehensive
              framework is promising for both manufacturing education and product realization
              in polymer composites processing.  Today's successful engineering organizations
              continue to make progress towards incorporating manufacturing demands during a
              product's design.  It is unfortunate, however, that at a time when computer
              simulation has revolutionized the way new products emerge, designers continue
              to employ ad-hoc methods to ensure that a product accommodates its
              manufacturing process and vice versa. 

This research seeks a new approach
              that places product specifications and materials processing requirements on a
              common basis where product and process simulation and multidisciplinary design
              optimization methods are central.  The focus is on short fiber reinforced
              thermoplastic products manufactured by the injection molding process where a
              product's structural performance is defined by it's fiber orientation, that is
              itself determined during production. Optimal designs will be computed based on
              mold filling simulation, fiber orientation prediction, and structural
              evaluation. Large-scale industrial products common to automotive design are to
              be considered. Additionally, this research recognizes the increased design
              emphasis in today's undergraduate engineering curriculum and will, therefore,
              study decision making through the merging of multidisciplinary design into the
              educational pedagogy. Educational activities include undergraduate and graduate
              instruction on multidisciplinary design, integration of computational design
              into student competitions, and an effort to make K-12 teachers more familiar
              with modern design methodologies.
