Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0094910

Award Number: 0094910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Cargill kcargill@css.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guanshen Ren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of St Scholastica
	      1200 Kenwood Avenue
	      Duluth, MN  55811    218/723-6000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program targets talented but financially disadvantaged youth by providing
              financial support, academic assistance, and student support services. The
              objectives and corresponding activities are carefully designed to create a
              comprehensive program by supplementing programs and structures already in place
              at St. Scholastica with the creation of new activities. The program includes
              activities that focus on providing the support and encouragement that students
              need to remain in school through graduation. Activities include faculty
              mentoring, tutoring, summer research opportunities, internship opportunities,
              and individual counseling sessions with the Program Administrator. 

Through
              individual discussions with the Program Administrator and the College's Career
              Counselor, students receive both guidance and support as they consider the next
              step in their careers. Many of the same activities that lead to higher levels
              of degree attainment, such as mentoring, internships, and summer research
              opportunities also contribute to greater levels of preparedness as students
              move on to graduate school or employment. In addition, a series of workshops
              are provided for program participants that address such topics as graduate
              school exploration, professionalism, resume preparation, and research skills.
              

By coordinating with local businesses, state agencies, and the College's
              Career Center Counselor, the Program Administrator creates new
              internship/research opportunities for program participants. Activities for this
              objective center on a structure of support and evaluation to ensure that the
              students, partnering businesses, and members of the College community all gain
              from these relationships.

