Title       : Beyond Access: Community Technology Centers and Use of Democratic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0094547

Award Number: 0094547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80543              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lodis Rhodes lrhodes@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research examines how low income communities and neighborhoods make use of
              Internet access being provided through public access channels.  Public access
              is a policy and programming strategy embraced by government and private sector
              organizations, that puts high-speed links to the Internet in publicly
              accessible places, primarily in low income communities.  There are more than
              200 such networks in the US, facilitated through community technology centers
              and other access points.  This project will explore whether and how community
              competence develops through this public access and the role of community
              technology centers (CTCs) in assisting this development.  The research plan
              involves the senior researchers and graduate students at the LBJ School of the
              University of Texas in ethnographic case studies of a variety of CTCs in low
              income neighborhoods in Austin, Texas.  The team will also track the deployed
              technologies in the target neighborhoods, and collect data on uses of the
              Internet in these settings by low-income people and families.  The research
              strategy is participatory; the people who are the staff and volunteers and
              neighborhood residents in the CTCs will help to shape and carry out the
              research.   The working hypothesis is that democratic processes help define the
              extent and degree to which CTC participants engage with and learn from each
              other, thereby influencing the development of community competence.  Examining
              a number of CTCs that differ mostly on this dimension should help to test this
              hypothesis.  To this purpose, several measures of democratic processes and
              technological use have been identified.  The results of this research should
              include project reports presented at professional meetings, training
              conferences, and articles in peer reviewed publications.  
