Title       : Kinship by Design: Adoption Science and Scientific Adoption in Modern America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0094318

Award Number: 0094318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen P. Herman eherman@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT: SES 00-94318
Ellen Herman
Kinship by Design: Adoption
              Science and Scientific Adoption in Modern America

This project explores
              science in action by interpreting child adoption as a scientific enterprise in
              the 20th-century United States. It investigates the work of those
              individuals--in psychology, behavioral genetics, sociology, social work, and
              the human sciences generally--who reimagined an ancient institution in modern
              terms: as an experimental basis for the science of human nature, or as a series
              of technically demanding operations devoted to the systematic architecture of
              identity and belonging.  In a transaction that turns "biological strangers"
              into kin, scientific professionals have seen an unusual experimental
              opportunity, a challenging social laboratory, and a series of intricate
              operations that promise intellectual discovery as well as hope for children in
              need. 

Why did researchers turn to adoption and insist that science was
              central to a social institution that had never been scientific before? What
              scientific questions did adoption answer? How were adoption studies conducted
              and how did the knowledge extracted from them change over time? Understanding
              how adoption was transformed into a science illuminates how science works.
              Understanding how adoption was transformed by science illuminates why science
              matters.  Individuals selected for study span the entire century, are drawn
              from a range of human science disciplines, and have left significant legacies
              for science and social welfare. Two distinctive but interrelated research
              trajectories are usefully distinguished: adoption science and scientific
              adoption. Adoption science refines knowledge of human nature by making adoption
              serve the scientific world, while scientific adoption aims to enhance child and
              family welfare by making science serve the adoption world. Adoption scientists
              have used adoption as an opportunity to explore the nature/nurture problem, to
              ask how and why human beings turn out as they do.

Advocates of scientific
              adoption have asked how adoptees turn out in order to design families more
              effectively.  By examining representative work in these two fields of inquiry,
              this project will contribute new content--examples of kinship by design--to the
              scholarly conversation about the modern human sciences at the same time that it
              adds a much-needed scientific dimension to studies of adoptive kinship. There
              currently exists no historical study that explores the various ways 20th
              -century American human scientists have utilized adoption data, nor has anyone
              considered adoption itself as an important case of social design and
              engineering. Yet adoption exemplifies the modern tendency to view social
              arrangements as de facto experiments that invite the exacting discipline of
              science into the most ordinary, intimate, and private corners of modern
              life--from family dynamics to sexual orientation and self-esteem--all in the
              name of knowledge paired with the public good. This is what makes adoption an
              original vantage point from which to consider the moral careers of modern
              scientific professionals, the intersections of science and questions of value,
              and the social course of scientific rationalization.

This study, which will
              result in a book, has particular potential to contribute to our understanding
              of social engineering, ideologies of nature, border-crossings between the
              biological and social sciences, the complex relationship between basic and
              applied science, and the selective utilization of scientific knowledge and
              research by policy-makers and the public at large.

