Title       : Organic and Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0094349

Award Number: 0094349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $663000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Bergman pgates@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Robert G. Bergman, Chemistry Department, University of   California at
              Berkeley is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for studies of organometallic
              reaction mechanisms in homogeneous solution.  Efforts will be focused on three
              projects.  The first is a systematic development of the synthesis of
              late-metal-heteroatom complexes and studies of the mechanisms of the reactions
              of these compounds with organic substances. Fundamental chemistry of
              metal-oxygen and -nitrogen single bonds, hydrogen/heteroatom transfer
              reactions, and the basicity of the electronegative atom in metal-heteroatom
              complexes are among the topics to be investigated. The second section is a
              detailed study of the rhodium catalyzed hydroformylation of epoxides. The
              hydroformylation of other three member ring systems will be included with hopes
              of developing new, convenient routes to a variety of useful organic products.
              Thirdly, the reactions of organometallic compounds with free atoms and
              metastable diatomics will be investigated. The emphasis will be on species that
              have opened new pathways in organic chemistry, but have not been much applied
              to organometallic systems. 

Chemical reactions involving organic molecules
              and transition metal complexes are fundamental to the understanding of
              important catalytic and biological processes.  This research will expand the
              fundamental chemical understanding of metal-organic interactions, be applied to
              more complicated systems, and aid the development of new practical applications
              in synthetic and catalytic chemistry. 


