Title       : CAREER: Macromolecular Fluid Flow: Experiments, Equations, and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0094167

Award Number: 0094167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew L. Belmonte belmonte@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of an integrated research, outreach, and educational
              effort on the flow of complex fluids, performed in the W. G. Pritchard
              Laboratories of the Department of Mathematics of Pennsylvania State University.
              The research part combines an experimental study of macromolecular fluid
              dynamics with the mathematical study of the modeling equations. The flow of
              fluids such as polymer solutions and melts near a boundary is among the most
              interesting and challenging problems in the field of non-Newtonian fluid
              dynamics, particularly at free, deformable interfaces.  The research will
              explore several different phenomena: interface dynamics of rising bubbles in
              polymer solutions, stress-induced oscillations of wormlike micellar fluids, and
              the long filaments formed by falling drops. These experiments involve a number
              of different fluids including charge-screened polyelectrolyte polymers and
              wormlike micellar solutions. Quantitative measurements will be made of the flow
              and interface using video imaging, as well as of the local velocity and
              birefringent stress of the fluid. The results of these measurements will be
              correlated with the rheological properties of the fluid. The investigator hopes
              to elucidate the connection between the macroscopic fluid flow and the
              microscopic character of its component molecules. The outreach effort has two
              components. In the first, the continuing education of secondary school
              mathematics teachers is pursued through weekend workshops which include
              minicourses, informal discussions, and interactive experimental demonstrations.
              The second part consists of the involvement of a high school mathematics
              teacher in a summer laboratory research project as part of a pilot "Research
              Experiences for Secondary School Teachers" program. The educational element of
              this project includes the development of an advanced undergraduate course on
              modeling, which includes a laboratory component. The purpose of this course is
              to expose students to the true cycle of research, from modeling to analysis and
              measurement and back to modeling. These activities also include continuing the
              one-on-one teaching involved in undergraduate research in the Pritchard Lab. 
              

This project consists of an integrated research-outreach-educational effort
              on the behavior and properties of complex fluids. The study of flowing fluids
              which possess a complex microscopic structure is not only of great
              technological importance to the food, plastics, and other industries, but it
              also presents a challenging mathematical problem. The work combines the
              experimental study of complex fluids with the mathematical study of the
              equations which model them, performed in the W. G. Pritchard Laboratories, an
              experimental facility in the Mathematics Department of Pennsylvania State
              University. The research explores several aspects including the shape dynamics
              of bubbles rising in polymer solutions, and the behavior of polymer-like
              detergent fluids. Quantitative measurements of the flow and boundary shape will
              be correlated with the fluid properties, in an attempt to elucidate the
              connection between the macroscopic flow and the microscopic character of the
              fluid molecules. This project's outreach effort consists of two parts. The
              first part addresses the continuing education of secondary school mathematics
              teachers through weekend workshops which include minicourses, informal
              discussions, and interactive experimental demonstrations. The second component
              involves a high school mathematics teacher in a summer laboratory research
              project. This is part of a pilot program "Research Experiences for Secondary
              School Teachers," inspired by the NSF's summer program for undergraduates. The
              educational element of the proposal involves the development of a new
              undergraduate course on modeling which includes a laboratory component, and the
              one-on-one teaching involved in undergraduate research.  

