Title       : Photoinduced Grafting of Filtration Membranes: Principles and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0094765

Award Number: 0094765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georges Belfort belfog@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0094765
Georges Belfort
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Photo-induced
              Grafting of Filtration Membranes: Principles and Applications
              
ABSTRACT

	The goals of this work are to determine the underlying
              principles of photo-induced graft modification of poly(ether sulfone) (PES)
              membranes and to use this understanding to modify the surface of commercially
              available PES membranes so that they exhibit less fouling during
              ultrafiltration of protein solutions.  Ultraviolet (UV)-assisted graft
              polymerization of hydrophilic monomers is the modification technique chosen for
              this study because it is simple and easy to scale industrially.  PES
              ultrafiltration membranes are selected because they are widely used in the
              biotechnology industry, but they are relatively hydrophobic, exhibit severe
              protein fouling, and are intrinsically photoactive.  The specific aims are:  1.
              To investigate the mechanism of the photo-induced grafting of PES with a view
              towards elucidating the identity of the photoactive chromophore(s) and to
              identify the optimal irradiation conditions.  2. To evaluate a series of
              hydrophilic vinyl monomers in lieu of N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NVP), the most
              well-studied monomer to date.  We postulate that other commercially available
              hydrophilic monomers could offer advantages over NVP.  3. To demonstrate the
              efficacy of using our new surface-modification technology by developing an
              affinity membrane with low protein adsorption and high cation-exchange
              capacity.  4. To evaluate the chemical and physical stability and lifetime of
              the most promising modified PES membranes. 

	There is an urgent need in the
              biotechnology, food and beverage, and wastewater- treatment industries for
              better, low-biofouling synthetic membranes.  The current most widely used
              membrane, poly(ether sulfone), exhibits high non-specific protein fouling and
              needs to be replaced.  However, developing new polymeric materials with
              appropriate surface or functional characteristics as well as mechanical
              properties for diverse membrane-filtration applications involves great effort
              and expense. As a result, over the past 30 years, few polymers have been used
              for membrane production.  In this comprehensive three-year research program, an
              alternate route, i.e. the facile modification of commercial PES membranes, is
              offered.  The new method proffers a relatively inexpensive, simple, scalable,
              and well-tested modification procedure for producing poly(aryl sulfone)
              membranes with improved properties.   


