Title       : Collaborative Research: Rhizosolenia Mats as a Source of Nitrogen Flux into the
               Surface Waters of the Pacific Ocean: Fe Stress, N Excretion and Basin Scale
               Distribution Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0094591

Award Number: 0094591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia H. Pilskaln cpilskaln@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative research: Rhizosolenia mats as a source of nitrogen flux into the
              surface waters of the Pacific Ocean: Fe stress, N excretion and basin scale
              distribution patterns

This project will quantify nitrogen cycling dynamics
              in the euphotic zone by vertically migrating Rhizosolenia mats, and will
              provide the first physiological data on mats below diver accessible depths.
              These macroscopic diatom assemblages sink below the euphotic zone to acquire
              nitrate, store it in their vacuole, and then return to the surface for
              photosynthesis. This new production is based entirely on a biologically, rather
              than physically mediated transport of N. These fragile associations require
              specialized collection techniques such as SCUBA and remotely operated vehicles
              (ROVs). As a result, their biology and biogeochemical importance has been
              largely overlooked. Other taxa also vertically migrate, and this project will
              conduct the first enumeration of this entire community in order to understand
              the broader role of vertical migration in oceanic nitrogen cycling.

In-situ
              video imaging techniques will be used to quantify mats in the eastern central
              N. Pacific gyre. Depth specific (MOCNESS) sampling will be used to quantify the
              remaining taxa. A ROV will be used to collect mats below diver accessible
              depths in order to compare deep mats with surface mats. An existing computer
              model will be used to calculate transport/flux rates with these revised
              estimates.  In addition to transporting N, Rhizosolenia mats under Fe and/or
              light stress may excrete both inorganic and organic nitrogen.  This will be
              evaluated using both laboratory and field Rhizosolenia. Based on previous
              results, oceanic Rhizosolenia mats in nature appear to be chronically
              Fe-stressed.  However, ferredoxin, a common and convenient in situ marker of
              cellular Fe status, may not be produced in these oceanic taxa and thus may not
              be a valid means of characterizing Fe stress in open ocean Rhizosolenia.  As
              part of our research, we will evaluate this indicator for Fe stress in
              Rhizosolenia isolated from the Pacific Ocean.
 
Our goals are to assess the
              Fe quotas of rhizosolenid diatoms, document the validity of the ferredoxin
              index as a measure of Fe stress in large oceanic diatoms, and determine N
              excretion rates by these taxa. A migration model will be rigorously tested by
              examining deep mats. These data will provide additional insight into the
              synergistic relationship between trace nutrient limitation and macronutrient
              acquisition and assimilation, an important developing theme of modern
              biological oceanography.  The rates of biological N import and release for the
              eastern half of the central N. Pacific gyre by the entire migrating community
              will be assessed. This is a fundamental to understanding oceanic N cycles, and
              has direct relevance for both carbon and nitrogen cycling in the upper ocean.

