Title       : Process-Based Scholarship and Retention Program for Low-Income Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a0094907

Award Number: 0094907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Gregory james.gregory@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Akanni S. Lawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lloyd R. Heinze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Bagert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The specific project objectives of the program include: (i) promoting diversity
              and increase the numbers of minority students enrolling in, and completing
              degrees in computer science, engineering and mathematics; (ii) expanding the
              pool of minority talent that have suffered from a long- standing under-
              utilization for industry, government, and academia (i. e., Ph. D. holders);
              (iii) improving the educational experiences of students through connections of
              academic content to the work environment and building new industry
              partnerships; (iv) increasing enrollment of academically- gifted students from
              community colleges; (v) encouraging scholarship recipients to pursue advanced
              degrees; and (vi) providing mentor programs that allow students to devote more
              time to their degree programs as opposed to working on non- discipline jobs.
              The goals of the program are being accomplished by: (i) Recruitment; (ii)
              Academic support to provide participants the tools necessary to succeed; (iii)
              A retention program, which relies heavily on the positive impact of mentors and
              academic contracts that include professional development of the scholars; (iv)
              Building on the existing infrastructure for student and industry support within
              the University as well as local community colleges; (v) Establishing faculty
              mentors in every department to provide one- on- one mentoring by experienced
              faculty and peers; (vi) Requiring the Scholars to participate in research and
              design projects for presentation at professional meetings and industry-
              sponsored workshops; (vii) Maintaining records on the Scholars: progress toward
              degree, research experiences, design projects, resume, career goals, work
              portfolios, mentoring activities, professional development opportunities, job
              interviews, graduate school applications, the change in the number of minority
              students transferring in; and (viii) Initiating an exit interview process to
              evaluates the effectiveness of scholarship programs. The grant award acts as a
              catalyst to reinforce other curricula enhancement programs. The scholarship
              program provides leadership training and experience, and a controlled academic
              process for low- income students to insure successful graduation and entrance
              to graduate school when desired. The scholarship program builds on several
              existing programs that help students achieve academic success.
