Title       : NSF Support of U.S.-based Travel to the Eighth International Conference on
               Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology, August, 2000, San Diego, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0094539

Award Number: 0094539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Gribskov gribskov@sdsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award will support increased participation of students and young
              researchers  in the 8th International Conference on Intelligent Systems in
              Molecular Biology (ISMB) to be held August 19-23 in San Diego.  The ISMB
              conference provides a general forum for disseminating the latest developments
              in bioinformatics, and is noteworthy for bringing together scientists from
              computer science, molecular biology, mathematics and statistics.  Using the
              funds provided by this award, the ISMB organizing committee will provide
              stipends to graduate students, postdocs and other young scientists who have
              authored or co-authored a paper to be presented at the conference.  Other
              criteria including financial need and the diversity of individuals and
              institutions will be used to select recipients and establish the amount of the
              stipend.  It is expected that a minimum of 25 stipends will be offered.

The
              term intelligent systems refers to software which goes beyond straightforward,
              closed-form algorithms or standard database technologies.  Typically, such
              software views data in a symbolic fashion, learns from examples, consolidates
              multiple levels of abstraction, or otherwise synthesizes results in ways that
              make them more readily understood.  Biological areas of great current interest
              include structural biology, genomics, molecular sequence analysis, evolution
              and phylogenetics, molecular interactions, metabolic pathways, regulatory
              networks, and control of development. Emphasis is on practical applications in
              the biological sciences, and on development of novel computational techniques. 
              Attendance at the ISMB conference, which is held annually, has increased 5-fold
              since the first was held in 1993. The conference purposefully alternates its
              venue between North American sites and sites in other hemispheres to foster
              international exchange and cooperation.

