Title       : Model Program to Increase Workforce Education and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0094621

Award Number: 0094621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram Nayar nayarr@dbcc.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex J. Kajstura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Daytona Beach Cmty Col
	      1200 W. International Speedway
	      Daytona Beach, FL  321202811    386/255-8131

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on achieving significant increases in the skill development
              of students selected for the program and implementing strategies and activities
              to increase the students' academic performance, retention, and graduation
              rates. The students are being selected based on financial needs as well as
              other characteristics such as motivation and communication skills. Special
              emphasis is being made in the selection process to ensure proper representation
              of low- income groups including ethnic minorities, women, and students with
              disabilities. Formal collaboration with the local business community and two K-
              12 school districts further strengthen the program. 

The specific objectives
              of the Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarhsip (CSEMS)
              program are the following:
(1) To select 40 students who have financial
              constraints that inhibit them, but do not prevent them, from continuing their
              college education, and who demonstrate a motivation to succeed. 
(2) To reduce
              the rate of attrition of students in the CSEMS field by developing strategies
              that foster retention. The strategies include individual student counseling and
              advisement, tutoring, career planning and placement services, and guest
              speakers from universities and industries. 
(3) To develop formal agreements
              with private industries in the area to provide student workstudy opportunities
              during summer months. 
(4) To improve the professional skills and
              marketability of the CSEMS students for entering the workforce or articulating
              to a four- year university or college for a higher degree. 

An evaluation is
              being conducted including both formative and summative components. The
              evaluation criteria measures the outcomes of the goals established under this
              program, such as increased retention and graduation rates, improved academic
              preparation and performance of students entering and progressing through the
              CSEMS pipeline, and increased representation of minorities, women, and students
              with disabilities.
