Title       : CAREER: Theory and Applications of Complex Social Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0094162

Award Number: 0094162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duncan J. Watts duncan@santafe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The primary aim of this project is to develop a unified theoretical
              framework for addressing network dynamics problems in the social sciences. A
              successful approach to the subject must necessarily be highly
              interdisciplinary, both intellectually and socially. The research itself draws
              upon techniques that are well established in physics, applied mathematics and
              computer science, but applies them to problems about which sociologiest and
              economists have much to teach their natural science counterparts: the large
              scale structure of social networks, potential differences in structure between
              new economy organizations and their industrial era predecessors; the contagion
              structure of viral epidemics,  financial panics, or word-of-mouth
              recommendations. These problems and many others in economics and sociology
              exhibit complex network structure, as specified by the pattern of interactions
              between actors or agents in a distributed system such as a friendship network,
              a large firm or the international banking system.
     Although the study of
              social networks is more than 50 years old, the statistical analysis of large
              social and economic networks is only just becoming feasible, due to the recent,
              but rapidly increasing availability of large data sets and the computational
              capacity to analyze them. Further, the subtle relationship between a system's
              interaction structure and its global behavior has been largely overlooked by
              both economics and sociology. Thus the research proposed holds promise of
              fundamental contributions by uniting newly available data, newly enhanced
              computational methods and an interdisciplinary perspective.
     This focus
              provides considerable opportunity for interdisciplinary education as well as
              research. Thus this career proposal aims to integrate the cutting edge of
              network research into curriculum for specialists, as well as into general
              courses in complex systems and mathematical modeling that focus on applications
              in the social sciences.
