Title       : Use of High Resolution Field Data to Improve Model Microphysics and Investigate
               Orographic Precipitation Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0094524

Award Number: 0094524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251506             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian A. Colle bcolle@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Accurate prediction of precipitation amounts (quantitative precipitation
              forecasting; QFP) is a difficult forecasting problem, but one that has a
              potentially high societal benefit.  For this reason, the U.S. Weather Research
              Program has identified QPF as a high priority research area.  The primary
              objectives of this project are to use high-resolution field observations to
              verify and improve the numerical representation of microphysics in mesoscale
              models and to document the three-dimensional structures and physical mechanisms
              of orographic precipitation.

This research is motivated by the fact that QPF
              continues to be a difficult problem for numerical weather prediction models. 
              Recent studies have suggested that increasing horizontal resolution to a few
              kilometers often does not lead to more accurate precipitation forecasts, even
              over areas of complex terrain such as the Pacific Northwest, where the
              mesoscale flow is highly deterministic and the precipitation is mostly
              stratiform.  There is growing evidence suggesting that these problems are
              associated with deficiencies in model microphysics.  Therefore, a major
              objective of this project is to use remotely sensed (radar) observations, in
              situ aircraft data, and ground measurements to verify and improve the bulk
              microphysical schemes in mesoscale models.  In order to evaluate the model
              microphysics for different types of environmental conditions, this study will
              utilize field data from IPEX (Intermountain Precipitation EXperiment) over
              northeast Utah, PACJET (PACific Landfalling JETs) along the West Coast, and
              IMPROVE (Improvement of Microphysical PaRameterization through Observational
              Verification Experiment) over the Oregon Cascades.

These field studies also
              provide an opportunity to study the detailed three-dimensional structures and
              physical mechanisms associated with orographic precipitation.  For example,
              radar and in situ aircraft data will illustrate how the orographic cloud and
              microphysics are modified by blocking and mountain wave dynamics as well as
              latent heating/cooling within the cloud.  These observational results will also
              be compared and augmented with high-resolution model simulations.  Overall,
              understanding these sensitivities combined with improvements to the bulk
              microphysical schemes will help improve quantitative precipitation
              forecasting.

