Title       : Real and Apparent Complexity in Polydnavirus Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0094403

Award Number: 0094403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research will elucidate the role of polydnavirus (PDV) genome structure in
              generating viral gene variants. PDV genome structure appears to promote
              variability within viral gene families, facilitate alteration of the level to
              which genes are expressed and allow for acquisition of novel genes. Evidence in
              support of this hypothesis the: 1) identification of functionally significant
              variants in PDV genomes, 2) conservation of PDV genome and segment structure
              and 3) functional specialization among segment types.  The preliminary data
              suggest that regulation of gene expression by changing copy number in
              ichnoviruses is but one part of a larger PDV organizational paradigm.  These
              data support the more general hypothesize that PDV genome segmentation not only
              influences gene expression levels but also facilitates production of gene
              variants and acquisition of novel genes from the host genome. This hypothesis
              is tested under three research objectives intended to:  1) determine if
              Campoletis sonorensis ichnovirus (CsIV) genetic variation impacts virus
              function and parasite host range, 2) To determine if the structural
              organization of CsIV is representative of other ichnoviruses, 3) To determine
              if integration-competent segments support gene entry into viral genomes. 
              Polydnaviruses must suppress host immunity and alter other host physiological
              systems in support of parasite development for the virus to be vertically
              transmitted.  A parisite's ability to counter evolving host resistance
              mechanisms may require continual production of functional variants that enable
              continued host exploitation or invasion of new host species.  In wasp
              parasites, where host and parasite life cycles are synchronized, PDVs may
              provide a highly mutable genome co-opted by the parasite to allow continual
              production of immunosuppressive gene variants that confer a sustainable
              evolutionary advantage. In a broader context, this work will elucidate some of
              the critical contributions of captive genomes to the evolution of highly
              variable traits in eukaryotic organisms.  Transposable elements, retroviral and
              non-coding sequence comprise over 90% of the DNA in humans and other organisms
              but this type of DNA is often described as junk DNA because its functional role
              is not clearly understood.  This research may also elucidate the role of viral
              and non-coding sequences in the evolution of biologically relevant traits in
              polydnaviruses and thereby contribute to a better understanding of these
              apparently non-essential sequences in other organisms.


