Title       : The History of Cybernetics: Ashby, Beer and Pask
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a0094504

Award Number: 0094504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85452              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Pickering pickerin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:  SES 00-94504
Andrew Pickering
The History Of Cybernetics: Ashby,
              Beer And Pask

Cybernetics increasingly commands serious interest amongst
              historians of science, in part,
no doubt, because of a sense that it has
              sought to grasp the world in an interestingly different way from the more
              familiar natural and social sciences-holistically rather than
reductively, to
              put it crudely. Most historical interest has focussed on the World
War II
              founders of cybernetics-Norbert Wiener, John von Neumann, Warren
McCulloch,
              Claude Shannon-and the series of Macy conferences (1946-53) in which
their
              views were propagated. And most attention has been paid to the
              conceptual
singularity of cybernetics-cybernetics as a theory of negative
              feedback and control, or as
a world-view or ideology.

This project extends
              our understanding of the substance and history of cybernetics along
several
              axes. First, it examines new characters and a later period. Based on research
              over the past couple of years, the PI believes that some of the most
              fascinating and original work in cybernetics was done from the early 1950s
              onwards by a group of British scientists-foremost amongst them W. Ross Ashby,
              Stafford Beer and Gordon Pask. Second, while I am, of course, interested in the
              ideas of these men, I am also interested in what they did-the practice of
              cybernetics, a largely unexplored topic. This leads, third, into the material
              stratum of cybernetics. Like Wiener's before them, the cybernetics of the
              English group referred directly to a constellation of fascinating material
              systems and artefacts. The singularity of cybernetics, the PI argues, resides
              at least as much at this level as it does at the level of ideas. The interest
              in practice also leads, fourth, into the social structure of cybernetics. We
              are familiar with the usual academic/disciplinary centering of the traditional
              sciences, but cybernetics was not like that. The cyberneticians have typically
              been wanderers or vagrants, moving readily between institutional bases that we
              generally think of as distinct, including the university, but also the arts,
              business, industry and the military. This social level constitutes another,
              hitherto not well recognised, aspect of the singularity of cybernetics.
              

This proposal for a sabbatical year supports preparation of a book on the
              British
cyberneticians, especially the research on Beer and Pask.  (The PI's a
              graduate student is already working intensively on Ashby). Key informants have
              agreed to be interviewed and furnish documents in their possession.   The book
              seeks to emphasise that, in its specific entanglements of the material, social
              and conceptual, cybernetics was a different kind of historical formation from
              the reductive sciences-a new and fascinating kind of object for study by the
              STS community that may increasingly command much wider scholarly and popular
              interest.  Certain theoretical concerns of the PI go along with his interest in
              cybernetics, which he intends to open up in the last chapter of the book by
              locating cybernetics within a larger body of cognate work, including current
              work on 'complexity' and his own work on the 'mangle of practice.'  The project
              contributes significantly to theoretical discussions within and beyond science
              and technology studies.  The PI also explores the relevance of such discussions
              for contemporary work in artificial intelligence, information technology and
              cognitive science.


