Title       : Modeling interactions among environment, behavior, and mortality in the Western
               James Bay Cree
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0094449

Award Number: 0094449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Sattenspiel SattenspielL@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Hoppa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Ann Herring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The effects of infectious disease epidemics on the demographic history of
              Aboriginal peoples of the Americas were strongest at different times in
              different regions of the hemisphere. In northern Canada, substantial changes in
              demographic structure and disease experiences occurred during the 19th century
              and extend well into recent historical times, providing a wealth of documents
              on these changes. The primary focus of this research is to explore the health
              transitions in the 19th and 20th centuries in four Western James Bay Cree
              communities (Moose Factory, Fort Albany, Attawapiskat and Kashechewan) in the
              central Canadian subarctic and to address the question: what was the relative
              impact of infectious diseases on the health of these communities and how
              consistent and homogeneous were changes in health and disease in Aboriginal
              communities during this time?
     This research addresses this issue through
              a broad examination of the historical interaction of environment, behavior and
              mortality in the four communities. The project has two primary components:
              historical analyses of records for the four Cree communities (funded
              separately) and development and analysis of mathematical models that can be
              used to explore factors leading to changing mortality patterns in these
              communities from 1820 to 1970.  Data and results from the first component will
              be used in the mathematical modeling activities, which focus on assessing the
              effects of changes in social structure, economic activities, and environment on
              both infectious disease transmission and on general health of the four study
              communities.
     This project brings together researchers from the United
              States and Canada with differing expertise in the areas of demography,
              ethnohistory, mathematical epidemiology and ethnography. The project allows not
              only for the exploration of the patterns of mortality over time in several
              Western James Bay Cree communities, but also for the proposal and testing of
              specific hypotheses regarding the principal mechanisms for these changes. The
              multifaceted approaches of the project will provide significant contributions
              to understanding the importance of shifts in economic and social activities on
              the health and well-being of aboriginal populations. The project will result in
              opportunities for students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels to
              learn specialized and useful techniques not commonly found in anthropology
              curricula, especially in the areas of mathematics and statistics. It also
              facilitates an ongoing international institutional collaboration between
              McMaster University and the University of Missouri-Columbia and extends that
              collaboration to the University of Manitoba.


