Title       : Dissertation Research: The Country House as Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0094442

Award Number: 0094442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11335              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally G. Kohlstedt sgk@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0000904   Science Information                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a dissertation research study of science and scientific practices within
              and beyond late-Victorian and Edwardian country houses. Country house
              laboratories, observatories, botanical gardens, and museums thrived well into
              the last third of the nineteenth century, challenging in some ways the middle
              class visions for professional science put forth in mid-century by figures such
              as T.H. Huxley, J. Tyndall, and N. Lockyer. The production of scientific
              knowledge in these private contexts involved a complex network of aristocratic
              intellectuals, distinct country house values shaped by characteristic
              religious, political, and social norms, and a social process of research
              involving collaboration of family members, hired staff, and visiting scientific
              colleagues. The results of research in these sites contributed significantly to
              scientific knowledge whilst earning practitioners high reputations among their
              peers. Despite the political and social conservatism often found in these
              circles, gentlewomen experienced a high degree of flexibility to pursue their
              intellectual interests and make original contributions in science during a time
              when new professional norms, undervalued their participation in more public
              arenas.  Rich collections of documents pertaining to the work and affairs of
              scientific aristocratic families reveal in detail the operations of these
              country house laboratories amidst domestic and professional norms. Several
              well-documented cases demonstrate how such contexts proved to be crucial both
              for the construction of scientific knowledge and the influence of aristocratic
              values on new institutions of science. Particularly influential were the
              scientific households managed by the Rosses, Balfours, Rayleighs, and
              Sidgwicks. The research funded allows the researcher to undertake a detailed
              analysis of these cases, as well as several others involving families in
              related same circles, in order to demonstrate the complicated networks of
              scientific practices shaped by country house norms which had significant
              consequences for gender roles and scientific institutional developments. This
              study thus reinterprets our historical understanding of the developments in
              late-Victorian science, about which historians have more often emphasized new
              university and industrial research facilities. The study will show the
              continuing importance of privately sponsored research well into the Edwardian
              period. It promises a broader impact both for the public understanding of
              science, as in the museums at Darwin's Down House and Lord Rosse's Birr Castle,
              and for a fuller understanding of the way in which the sciences-especially the
              physical science-have become gendered, relevant to initiatives that encourage
              women's successes in the sciences. Funds will allow the researcher to conduct
              archival research of collections still largely unexplored in England, Scotland,
              and Ireland. 
