Title       : CAREER: Electrochemical Ceramics - Understanding the Gap between Localized and
               Collective Viewpoints of Electronic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0094253

Award Number: 0094253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart B. Adler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Electrochemical ceramics encompass a variety of present and emerging
              technologies, including gas sensors, fuel cells, gas-separation membranes, and
              membrane reactors.  Of critical importance to modeling the properties of
              electrochemical ceramics, and developing new materials with improved
              performance, is a strong understanding of electronic structure. Since most
              electrochemical ceramics possess complex intermediate-length scale order, their
              properties often defy explanation when viewed from traditional paradigms
              invoking localized or collective viewpoints of electronic structure.  In order
              to gain a more complete understanding of electronic structure in
              electrochemical ceramics, we propose to measure the populations of localized
              and delocalized electrons in transition metal perovskites having general
              composition LaSrCoFe oxides (LSCF) using a novel high-sensitivity Faraday
              balance. These measurements will be used to interpret parallel studies of
              electrochemical properties, including electron transport, ionic defect
              structure, chemical expansion and stress, and catalytic activity. In addition,
              the PI is currently developing a new program of undergraduate laboratory
              experiments that integrate research and teaching. This program provides
              undergraduates with formal opportunities to contribute to Ph.D.-level research
              in modern growth areas of chemical engineering, producing real data that will
              be published (not just put into a lab report).  In this way research and
              undergraduate education are on the same track, with a complementary agenda. The
              proposed project will contribute one experiment to this educational program,
              which is linked (and feeds directly into) our research program in
              electrochemical ceramics. Students will screen new materials for electronic
              structure using high-temperature magnetic susceptibility measurements and
              Taguchi analysis methods.
%%%
This project will contribute broadly to our
              understanding of electronic structure in complex materials. The results are of
              general interest to all branches of materials science, including solid-state
              electrochemistry, electronic materials, ceramics, as well as inorganic
              chemistry and physics.  This project will also provide specific information
              about electronic structure in one class of materials, of immediate value to
              workers developing reaction/separation membranes and solid-oxide fuel cells. 
              The principal investigator has 8 years academic and 4 years industrial
              experience in this field, bringing a strong mix of fundamental and practical
              perspectives.  This work is highly original, and contributes several novel
              advances to proven experimental techniques.  The experimental plan is well
              organized, and the proposing institution has a world-class infrastructure for
              work in this cross-disciplinary field.  In addition, the career development
              plan of the PI will help establish a strong fundamental research and
              educational program in a new, exciting, area of technology. This program will
              not only educate individual scientists in its field, but will also tightly
              integrate research and teaching in a way that benefits both, and opens new
              opportunities for undergraduates (many of whom, at CWRU, are women and
              minorities) to participate in cutting-edge research on a broad scale. This
              approach provides a new template for teaching that other higher-educational
              institutions may benefit from. Knowledge gained from both research and
              educational development will be disseminated broadly through the literature,
              and directly through strong ties of the PI to industry and the American Society
              of Engineering Education. 

