Title       : Helping Students Succeed: Scholarships for Computer Science, Mathematics, and
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0094650

Award Number: 0094650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal T. Rogness rognessn@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/331-7105

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides 40 scholarships to low- income, academically- talented
              college students majoring in computer science, mathematics or engineering. The
              project provides each recipient with a faculty mentor, and academic and career
              support. The scholarship program is composed of three phases: Recruitment,
              Selection, and Evaluation. The Recruitment phase includes making individuals
              aware of the program (visiting departments on campus, visiting student clubs,
              paper and electronic advertisements, and visiting local junior colleges) and
              identifying potential scholarship recipients. Phase two, Selection, begins with
              screening applications to verify basic eligibility. Phase three, Evaluation,
              consists of multiple assessments to determine how well the program's objectives
              are being met. Tutoring is available through the Academic Resources Center and
              the Math and Science Support Services. Specialized support services are
              available through the federal TRIO programs, the Office of Academic Support,
              and the Minority Affairs Office. The Career Services Office provides
              information about jobs, career search strategies, and graduate school. These
              existing forms of support are supplemented for scholarship recipients under
              this program. A scholarship recipient is required to attend weekly
              instructional sessions for each mathematics, computer science, or engineering
              course in which he or she is enrolled. Further, a scholarship recipient is
              required to submit periodic progress reports for these classes and to meet with
              his or her academic advisor and faculty mentor on a regular basis.
