Title       : CAREER: Reaction Dynamics of Hydrogen Halides on OH-Functionalized Surfaces and
               Development of Guided-Inquiry Experiments for Analytical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a0094269

Award Number: 0094269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Morris jrmorris@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1312,9161,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              focusses on the interfacial adsorption, diffusion, and reaction of hydrogen
              halides with hydroxy-functionalized organic surfaces.  Professor John R. 
              Morris and his coworkers of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univeristy
               will examine reactions of interest in a number of environmentally important
              processes.  Molecular beam scattering from functionalized self-assembled
              monolayers will be used to examine these interactions.  The translational
              energy of the scattered product species will be monitored by TOF analysis, and
              reflection-absorption infrared spectroscopy will be used to identify the
              surface adsorbed reaction products.  Gas-surface energy transfer, interfacial
              reaction probability, and the role of coadsorbed solvent molecules on the
              surface reaction process will be examined.  This research effort will be
              integrated with the development of an introductory analytical chemistry course
              at VPI incorporating inquiry based cooperative learning methods.  Examples will
              be drawn from real world environmental problems, and will be tied to the basic
              research underway in the P.I.'s laboratory.

This CAREER project focusses on
              the basic understanding of the interfacial chemistry of hydrogen halides, using
              detailed dynamic experimental methods.  This surface chemistry is of
              considerable interest in a number of environmental applications, and the
              educational component of this project will focus on these environmental
              connections in the integration of this research with the education of graduate
              and undergraduate students.  Inquiry based learning methods will be
              incorporated into the introductory analytical course offerings as part of this
              project.

