Title       : Career: Mesoscopic Spin-Dependent Transport in Two-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0094055

Award Number: 0094055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean J. Heremans heremans@helios.phy.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Conventional electronic devices exploit the property of electron charge.  Yet,
              recent efforts seek to utilize the electron spin as well, promising unique
              device functionality.  Toward this aim, this Faculty Early Career Development
              (CAREER) project at Ohio University will investigate spin-dependent mesoscopic
              transport in high-mobility semiconductor heterostructures.  The spin-orbit
              interaction leads to energy splitting in the bandstructure of carriers confined
              to a quantum well, which in turn results in two populated spin sub-bands, each
              featuring individual carrier dynamics.  The dynamics can be probed directly by
              utilizing ballistic magnetotransport in mesoscopic structures, where the spin
              subbands each yield separate ballistic orbits.  The ballistic orbital effects
              will be exploited as a unique probe to study spin phase coherence, mesoscopic
              spin transport, and spin-orbit coupling in quantum wells.  Besides
              investigating these fundamental aspects, the work aims to apply the orbital
              effects to realize spin transistor structures.  The semiconductor fabrication
              knowledge present in this work forms fertile ground for a cooperative education
              program that will be established with students of nearby two-year technical
              colleges.  These students will be presented with the opportunity to acquire
              skills the region presently does not offer, improving their participation in a
              high-technology area.  
%%%
Conventional transistors exploit the property of
              electron charge to encode information.  Yet, the electron also possesses the
              quantum mechanical property of spin, and research has been initiated to utilize
              the electron spin as well, in the quest for superior electronic devices. 
              Toward this aim, this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at Ohio
              University will investigate spin phenomena in thin semiconductor layers, where
              the spin modifies the electron's motion, offering the exciting possibility of
              spin-controlled transistors.  The project will study the mechanisms and
              magnitude of the spin's motional effect in different semiconductors, and new
              spin-controlled transistors will be fabricated and tested.  To use the electron
              motion directly, avoiding electron scattering mechanisms, the semiconductor
              devices planned in this project have to be very small, and such nanoscale
              devices fit naturally in the ongoing electronic miniaturization trend.  The
              advanced semiconductor fabrication knowledge present in this work forms fertile
              ground for a cooperative education program that will be established with
              students of nearby two-year technical colleges.  These students will be
              presented with the opportunity to acquire skills the region presently does not
              offer, improving their participation in the growing high-technology area of
              nanoscale electronic devices.  
***


