Title       : PECASE: Relative frequency and phase of extreme expansions of the Antarctic Ice
               Sheets during the late Neogene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0094078

Award Number: 0094078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Bart pbart@geol.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1304,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0094078
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Bart, Philip
INSTITUTION NAME:
               Louisiana State University & Agricultural and Mechanical College
TITLE:
              CAREER: Relative frequency and phase of extreme expansions of the Antarctic Ice
              Sheets during the late Neogene
NSF RECEIVED DATE:  07/27/2000

PROJECT
              SUMMARY

Expansions and contractions of the Antarctic Ice Sheets (AISs) have
              undoubtedly had a profound influence on Earth's climate and global sea-level.
              However, rather than being a single entity, the Antarctic  cryosphere consists
              of three primary elements: 1) the East Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS); 2) the West
              Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS); and 3) the Antarctic Peninsula Ice Cap (APIC).  The
              distinguishing characteristics include significant differences in: 1) ice
              volume; 2) substratum elevation; 3) ice-surface elevation; and 4) location with
              respect to latitude. Various lines of evidence indicate that the AISs have
              undergone significant fluctuations in the past and that fluctuations will
              continue to occur in the future. The exact nature of the fluctuations has been
              the subject of many lively debates. According to one line of reasoning, the
              land-based EAIS has been relatively stable, experiencing only minor
              fluctuations since forming in the middle Miocene, whereas the marine-based WAIS
              has been dynamic, waxing and waning frequently since the late Miocene.
              According to an alternate hypothesis, the ice sheets advanced and retreated
              synchronously. These two views are incompatible. 

The first objective of
              this proposal is to compare the long-term past behavior of the WAIS to that of
              the EAIS and APIC.  The fluctuations of the AISs involve many aspects (the
              frequency of changes, the overall magnitude of ice-volume change, etc.), and
              the activities proposed here specifically concern the frequency and phase of
              extreme advances of the ice sheet to the continental shelf. The project will
              build upon previous seismic-stratigraphic investigations of the continental
              shelves. These studies have clarified many issues concerning the minimum
              frequency of extreme expansions for the individual ice sheets, but some
              important questions remain. During the course of the project, the following
              questions will be evaluated.

Question 1) Were extreme advances of the EAIS
              and WAIS across the shelf of a similar frequency and coeval?  This evaluation
              is possible because the western Ross Sea continental shelf (Northern Basin)
              receives drainage from the EAIS, and the eastern Ross Sea (Eastern Basin)
              receives drainage from the WAIS. Quantitative analyses of the extreme advances
              from these two areas have been conducted by Alonso et al. (1992) and Bart et
              al. (2000), respectively.  However, the existing single-channel seismic grids
              are incomplete and can not be used to determine the stratigraphic correlations
              from Northern Basin to Eastern Basin. It is proposed that high-resolution
              seismic data (~2000 kms) be acquired to address this issue.

Question 2) Were
              extreme advances of the APIC across the shelf as frequent as inferred by Bart
              and Anderson (1995)?  Bart and Anderson (1995) inferred that the APIC advanced
              across the continental shelf at least 30 times since the middle Miocene. This
              is significant because it suggests that the advances of the small APIC were an
              order of magnitude more frequent than the advances of the EAIS and WAIS. Others
              contest the Bart and Anderson (1995) glacial-unconformity interpretation of
              seismic reflections, and argue that the advances of the APIC were far fewer
              (i.e., Larter et al., 1997).  The recent drilling on the Antarctic Peninsula
              outer continental shelf has sampled some but not all of the glacial units, but
              the sediment recovery was poor, and thus, the glacial history interpretation is
              still ambiguous. The existing high-resolution seismic grids from the Antarctic
              Peninsula contain only one regional strike line on the outer continental shelf.
              This is inadequate to address the controversy of the glacial-unconformity
              interpretation and the regional correlation of the recent ODP results. It is
              proposed that high-resolution seismic data (~1000 kms) be acquired in a
              forthcoming (January 2002) cruise to the Antarctic Peninsula to address these
              issues.

The second objective of this project is 1) to expand the PI's effort
              to integrate his ongoing and the proposed experiments into a graduate-level
              course at LSU, and 2) to develop a pilot outreach program with a Baton Rouge
              public high school. The Louisiana Department of Education has adopted
              scientific standards that apply to all sciences. These standards reflect what
              9th through 12th grade-level students should be able to do and know. The PI
              will target one of these standards, the Science As Inquiry Standard 1
              Benchmark. The PI will endeavor to share with the students the excitement of
              conducting scientific research as a way to encourage the students to pursue
              earth science as a field of study at the university level. 



