Title       : Improving Opportunities for Students with Disabilities through Cooperative
               Dissemination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a0094986

Award Number: 0094986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60398              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg P. Stefanich stefanich@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0094986
Institution: University of Northern Iowa
Principal
              Investigator: Gregory Stefanich
Title: "Improving Opportunities for Students
              with Disabilities through Collaborative
Dissemination"


ABSTRACT


This
              project is a communication/dissemination project for teachers, administrators  
              and teacher educators to improve their knowledge and familiarity with resources
              for the teaching science to students with disabilities.  The project will
              continue an existing alliance with NSTA to enhance equity for all students in
              science.  The mode of delivery will be a two-day pre-conference program
              presented at the NSTA Annual Meeting in St. Louis, Missouri on March 20-25,
              2001, a sectional presentation at the NSTA meeting, and maintaining an exhibit
              booth in the exhibition hall throughout the conference. 

This project will
              educate professionals providing services to students with disabilities about
              effective resources, and teaching/assessment strategies.  The disability areas
              addressed will include motor/orthopedic impairments, deaf and hard of hearing,
              visual impairments, learning disabilities, cognitive impairments, and
              behavioral disabilities.  Information in the areas of assistive technologies,
              teacher education, research on effective teaching, methods of instruction,
              materials and programs, evaluation and assessment, and educational
              organizations and agencies will be disseminated to participants in the
              pre-conference and to those visiting the exhibit booth.  The proposed effort
              will address responsibilities of educators contained in legislative mandates
              (i.e. Disabilities Education Act, 1973; Americans with Disabilities Act, 1989,
              Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 1997), inequities reflected in the
              literature concerning opportunities in science for students with disabilities,
              and informational needs of teachers and teacher educators in making science
              instruction responsive to students with disabilities.

