Title       : Adaptive Regression for Dependent Data by Combining Different Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a0094323

Award Number: 0094323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuhong Yang yyang@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns research and education on adaptive regression
when the
              random errors are dependent. Many procedures have been 
(and will be) proposed
              for nonparametric regression based on
different assumptions. In applications,
              a difficulty a user often
faces is the choice of the best method for the data
              at
hand. This is specially the case for high-dimensional function
estimation,
              where to overcome the curse of dimensionality, various 
parsimonious models
              such as projection pursuit, CART, neural nets, 
additive models, MARS, etc.
              are proposed according to different 
characterizations of the target function.
              A main interest in this 
research is to construct adaptive estimators by
              combining a
collection of candidate procedures. The goal for the
              combined
procedure is to perform automatically as well as (or nearly as
              well
as) the best original procedure without knowing which one it is.  
The
              random errors will be assumed to be generally dependent,
including both short-
              and long-range cases. The effects of
dependence on adaptation capability will
              be studied. It is
anticipated that theoretically proven and computationally
              feasible 
algorithms will be proposed to combine regression
              procedures
targeted at various characteristics of the regression function and
              
different dependence structures for the random errors.

Function estimation
              is an important statistical tool that tries to
understand accurately the
              functional relationships between variables based on 
data and it has
              applications in many disciplines for successfully  
addressing scientific
              questions. In reality, observations are always
subject to random noise (error)
              from different sources. When the
random errors are dependent on each other,
              the dependence may
disguise the functional relationship of interest.
              Long-range
dependence refers to a situation where the errors are still
              highly
correlated even when they occur at times or locations that are
              far
away from each other. It is known that such a long-range dependence
              makes
the estimation of the target function much harder. In applications,
the
              degree of dependence between the errors is usually unknown,
which makes the
              function estimation problem even harder. In this
proposal, we intend to
              develop methods that adaptively handle
different degrees of dependence among
              the errors so that the
function of interest can be estimated optimally without
              knowing the
dependence structure of the errors. The research results and
              related
work by others on long-range dependent data will be brought
              to
students at various levels in several statistics
courses. Collaborations
              will be conducted with several professors at
Iowa State University and their
              students in atmospheric science, 
electrical engineering, agronomy and
              possibly other fields to
appropriately address long-range dependence
              phenomena, which have
been encountered often and known to cause problems in
              data analysis 
with the existing statistical methods. 

