Title       : CAREER: In Situ Monitoring of Surface Phenomena during Silicon Germanium
               Deposition and Etching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0094145

Award Number: 0094145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sang M. Han meister@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project centers on nanoheteroepitaxy of SiGe on Si for future
              optoelectronic applications. Integrating nanostructure architectures into
              manufacturing poses numerous engineering challenges such as selective
              deposition of SiGe on Si and ideal pattern transfer with minimal critical
              dimensional loss. The strategy here is to understand fundamentally interfacial
              phenomena occurring on SiGe surfaces. The approach utilizes in situ real time
              infrared and Raman spectroscopic techniques. The real time diagnostics provide
              a means to capture the dynamic SiGe surface response to deposition and etch
              precursors. In this regard, the detection sensitivity and the polarization
              dependence of attenuated-total-reflection Fourier transform infrared
              spectroscopy and attenuated-total-reflection surface enhanced Raman
              spectroscopy will be exploited. The two techniques will help distinguish
              sidewall surface phenomena from trench bottom phenomena during plasma etching
              of SiGe. It is also intended to extract the ion energy distribution function in
              etch plasmas from experimentally measured time-varying plasma and substrate
              potentials. Capacitive divider and Langmuir probes can measure these
              potentials. The distribution functions will be correlated to resulting etch
              profiles. The salient information gained from the comprehensive diagnostics is
              expected to bring improved understanding of deposition and etching mechanisms
              of SiGe as well as ion/neutral transport inside the SiGe trenches. The
              knowledge gained will also facilitate ideal pattern transfer, help realize
              novel applications of SiGe, and guide development of computational profile
              simulators. Three educational activities will be pursued: (1) develop new
              elective courses in semiconductor processing, (2) provide close mentorship and
              career counseling through research, and (3) initiate a high school outreach
              program. These educational activities will draw strongly from the research.
              Courses in chemical vapor deposition and plasma/surface diagnostics will be
              developed to provide students alternate venues to prepare for a career in the
              electronics industry or related research fields. In addition to graduate
              students, undergraduate students will actively be involved in the research.
              High school seniors will be aggressively recruited using the outreach program
              to inform prospective high school students of the research-oriented educational
              opportunities at UNM. The outreach program additionally serves to improve the
              percentage of high school students pursuing post-secondary education and
              particularly to increase the enrollment of Hispanic-descent students. The
              latter goal meets an institutional interest of UNM, a federally recognized
              Hispanic-serving institution.
%%% The project addresses fundamental research
              issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
              relevance. The scope of the project will expose students to challenges in
              materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An important feature of
              the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of
              research and education. 
***  

