Title       : CAREER: Atomic Processes in Low Temperature Molecular Beam Epitaxy of Diluted
               Magnetic III/V Compound Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0094105

Award Number: 0094105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lian Li lianli@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project focuses on synthesis of dilute magnetic III/V compound
              semiconductors. These materials are expected to be used in next generation
              electronics-spintronics, where both the spin and charge properties of electrons
              perform functionality. This represents a major materi-als science challenge
              because incorporation of high concentrations of magnetic ions in host
              semi-conductors causes phase separation and destruction of material integrity.
              The approach to over-come this difficulty is utilization of low temperature
              molecular beam epitaxy. Using a combina-tion of epitaxial growth, in-situ and
              ex-situ measurements, direct correlation between atomic scale processes
              occurring during epitaxial growth and electronic/magnetic properties of the
              films will be investigated. Two candidate material systems, GaMnAs and GaMnN,
              will be examined. Epitaxial thin films will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy,
              and their physical properties di-rectly characterized in situ with atomic-scale
              precision by variable-temperature scanning tunnel-ing microscopy (STM),
              reflection high-energy electron diffraction and cross-sectional STM. In
              conjunction, structural, electrical and magnetic characteristics will be
              determined by ex situ tech-niques such as transmission electron microscopy,
              high-resolution x-ray diffraction, and magneto-transport measurement. A model
              of low temperature growth of diluted magnetic III/V compound semiconductors
              will then be developed. This may help to create new manufacturing methods that
              are compatible with existing compound semiconductor processing.
This project
              also emphasizes the enhancement of educational experiences for students at both
              undergraduate and graduate levels. Substantial curriculum development for a new
              focus area in spintronics is proposed. Particularly, courses on the concepts
              and techniques of condensed matter at nanoscale will be developed. A sense of
              commitment to the education of the students also ex-tends to assisting them in
              finding a career where they can utilize their skills and knowledge ac-quired in
              school. New initiatives in industrial and educational outreach will be
              instituted. Spe-cifically, an industrial advisory and career committee will be
              formed to help foster industrially relevant activities and opportunities for
              students including internship and industrial research ex-periences. Outcomes of
              the educational effort of this project are expected to bring new concepts and
              techniques into the classroom and outstanding opportunities for students for
              future employ-ment in industry.
%%% The project addresses fundamental research
              issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
              relevance. The scope of the project will expose students to challenges in
              materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An important feature of
              the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of
              research and education. 
***  

