Title       : Non-Methane Hydrocarbon Emmissions from Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1994  
File        : a9312153

Award Number: 9312153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Ray Fall fall@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ATM-9312153  Fall     Although tremendous quantities of volatile organic
              compounds (VOCs) are released from vegetation into the atmosphere annually, it
              is not clear why plants expend  a considerable amount of energy synthesizing
              volatile and reactive VOCs.  The fact that these emissions shape global 
              tropspheric chemistry underscores the importance of developing an understanding
              of the underlying processes that regulate emissions.  Plants evolved under
              conditions which, due to man's influence, are much different that present day
              conditions throughout the industrial world.   Until we better understand the
              basic mechanisms that are responsible for the emission of these compounds, we
              will not be able to assess the effects that these changing conditions have on
              vegetation currently, or how these plants and their emissions will respond to
              further global change.     This research will address three fundamental
              questions: 1) What are the underlying mechanisms for the biosynthesis and
              emission of major classes of VOCs to the atmosphere?  2) What are the major
              physical and biological "drivers" that regulate VOC emissions?  3) How do VOCs
              exit plant surfaces?  The biogenic VOCs to be studied include those organics
              that make up the majority of natural emissions:  the non-methane hydrocarbons,
              isoprene and monoterpenes; and the oxygenated hydrocarbons, methanol, ethanol,
              acetaldehyde, acetone, 2 methyl-3-buten-2-ol (methyl butenol), and the hexenal
              family (hexenal, hexenyl acetate).  For example, detailed experiment will
              examine; 2) the mechanisms of methanol, acetone methyl butenol, and isoprene
              biosynthesis; b) the possibility that isoprene is a "leaky" metabolic
              intermediate and that  leafiness may explain why isoprene-emitting plants range
              form high to low emitters: and c) the role of  light, temperature, humidity, 
              carbon dioxide  concentration, stomatal conductance and leaf development as
              major "drivers" of VOC emissions.  In addition,  d) experiments will be
              conducted to establish the role of cuticle  surfaces and stomatal pores in the
              exit of VOCs from leaves, including the emission of monoterpenes from conifer
              needles.     These studies should provide new insights into how and why plants
              emit VOCs, reduce uncertainties about the "drivers" of emissions, and allow
              prediction of future VOC emissions in response to global change.
