Title       : Dissertation Research: Redefining Reproduction in Urban Greece: A Cultural Study
               of Family Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1994     
File        : a9312633

Award Number: 9312633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane F. Collier jcollier@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0312000   Population                              
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Collier/Parson  9312633    The researcher will investigate whether and how the
              recent expansion of women's social and economic opportunities, the
              implementation of pro-natalist policies, and the availability of new pre-natal
              technologies in urban Greece are prompting people to rethink ideas about
              gender, kinship, and individualism.  Through ethnographic interviewing,
              participant-observation, and archival research in Thessaloniki, the study will
              investigate how urban Greeks form ideas about biological reproduction and
              methods of family planning at the same time these ideas are used by Greeks to
              negotiate the production of social status through personal achievement. The
              research will collect data on family planning rhetoric and practice as an index
              of such changes.  Reproductive ideas and practices will be explored in
              political-economic context.  Consideration will also be given to way in which
              reproduction is implicated in the ongoing construction of the Greek
              nation-state.    Through interpretation of women's reproductive histories in
              the broader context of their life experiences, the study will seek an
              understanding of contemporary Greek abortion practices at the historical
              intersection of 1) "traditional" and "modern" ideas about motherhood,
              procreation, and sexuality;  2) legal and economic constraints on family
              planning and parenting; and 3) new contraceptive and prenatal technologies. 
              The dissertation resulting from this research will extend the insights of
              feminists studies of reproduction i by investigating how "traditional" Greek
              reproductive understandings are defined and valued against Westernizing
              influence s.  ***                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              _                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 !         ! 
                     !              F                             y             y            
                                  (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial       u   u        
              u           "             h        e   e   e          m         j    collier
              paxson abstract abstract collier paxson abstract thesis  Raymond Hames Raymond
              Hames                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
