Title       : Mathematical Sciences:Regional Conference on "Bayesian Methods in Finite
               Population Sampling Theory"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1994      
File        : a9312931

Award Number: 9312931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Gelfand alan@stat.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dipak K. Dey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312931  Gelfand        The subject matter of this conference is Bayesian
              Methods in Finite  Population Sampling:  Theory and Applications.  Bayesian
              techniques have found  applications in virtually every branch of statistics,
              and have proved to be  useful in the analysis and interpretation of a wide
              range of data.  Bayesian  analysis which utilizes prior information in addition
              to the information from  the collected data, is particularly well-suited in
              finite population sampling.   In most surveys, there is some prior information
              available about the units of  the population to be sampled.  For example, for 
              estimating the yield of a  certain crop based on samples from a large number of
              agricultural units,  information is usually available regarding the area
              devoted to that particular  crop in all these units.  Bayesian methods enable
              one to incorporate this  prior information formally in the form of a prior
              distribution, and produce  estimates in a fairly straight forward manner.      
               In addition, there is a growing need to produce reliable small-area 
              estimates, that is estimates for counties, municipalities, and other local 
              areas.  Classical sample survey methods are usually designed to provide 
              effective estimates at a much higher level of aggregation, for example at the 
              state level.  But standard estimation based only upon data for a given local 
              area typically results in unacceptably large standard errors due to small 
              sample size within a local area.  Bayesian methods enable borrowing strength, 
              or use information from similar areas or sources to improve accuracy of 
              individual local area estimates.  This is used for a wide range of survey data 
              being collected by both the public and the private sectors.        The
              Conference will provide a mechanism for synthesizing the substantial  and
              diverse literature in the general area of Bayesian finite population  sampling,
              and will illustrate the methods with a number of real life  applications.  ***
