Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems for Incomplete Survival Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1994       
File        : a9312170

Award Number: 9312170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane-Ling Wang wang@wald.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with three general statistical problems for  survival data
              which are either incomplete or subjected to  selection bias. For demonstration
              simplicity we focus on right  censored/left truncated data. Such incomplete
              data may arise in  follow-up studies with delayed entries. The first problem
              deals  with some basic properties like the strong law of large numbers  (SLLN)
              and the central limit theorem (CLT) for functionals of  product-limit estimates
              based on incomplete data or data with  selection bias. Except for censored data
              such fundamental results  are not available so far and will be investigated.
              Applications  of SLLN and CLT are plentiful in statistical inference and will 
              also be studied. The second problem deals wth M-estimators for  incomplete
              data. General approach to handle the limit theory of  M-estimators is not yet
              available for incomplete data even for  right censored data. We intent to
              develop general analytical  sufficient conditions for the strong consistency
              and asymptotic  normality of M-estimators based on incomplete data. Robustness 
              issues of M-estimators for incomplete data will also be explored.  The third
              problem deals with dimension reduction methods for  incomplete data. Such
              methods have not caught on in the  literature for incomplete data where the
              curse of dimensionality  is much more serious than the widely explored
              noncensored case.  We focus in particular on a recent promising method, sliced 
              inverse regression (SIR). Some issues on robustness of the  procedure and
              estimating statistical quantities of the response  variable for a given
              covariate, such as the regression function,  will be included. The project
              deals with general statistical  problems for lifetime data, for example, the
              life time of a  certain mechanical or electronical product or the incubation
              time  of a disease such as AIDS. One common feature of lifetime data is  the
              difficulties of observing some of the actual lifetimes and  those observations
              are thus termed "incomplete" sta tistically.  Incomplete data arise in various
              forms among which "censoring"  and "truncation" are the most common ones. Our
              study focus on,  but not limited to, those types of incomplete data. In the 
              idealistic situation where all data can be observed fully most  statistical
              quantity of interest, such as the survival  probability or risk of certain
              disease, can be estimated  empirically. Compared to such a situation the
              incompleteness of  the data poses very challenging statistical problems and
              many of  the basic properties or structures remain unsolved or unknown. In 
              this project, three specific open problems for incomplete data  will be
              investigated. The first one deals with the two most  fundamental probability
              properties, the strong law of large  numbers and central limit theorem for
              incomplete data. Such  properties play central role in probability theory and
              are  essential for statistical inferences. However, it is only until  very
              recently that researachers are able to put their hands on  some special type of
              incomplete data. Our goal is to establish  such fundamental results for other
              general type of incomplete  data. The findings in this part of the project will
              facilitate  the study of robust statistical procedures, such as M-estimators, 
              for incomplete data. The third problem to be explored in this  project deals
              with high dimensional data analytical methods when  the response variable are
              possibility incomplete. Even for  complete data, the handling of high
              dimensional data, via  dimensional reduction methods, requires special skills
              and is on  the cutting edge of statistical research. The proposed procedure 
              for handling incomplete data extends the scope and usefullness of  existing
              dimension reduction procedures.
