Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Occurrences at East Turkana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9312010

Award Number: 9312010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11400              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. K. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. John Harris, Mr. Michael Rogers will                
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct                    
              archaeological survey and excavation in the region East of Lake                
              Turkana in Kenya. He will focus his attention on a geological                  
              stratum known as the Okote Member and which dates to ca. 1.64-1.39             
              million years ago. Previous work has recovered both stone tools and            
              associated faunal remains and thus demonstrated that this region               
              was inhabited by early hominids. However little is known about the             
              behavior of these early humans. Through a study both of the                    
              distribution of different kinds of lithic remains over space and of            
              their association with faunal remains and each other, Mr. Rogers               
              should gain insight into how activities were spaced over the                   
              landscape.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. First, it will                 
              increase our understanding of the emergence of modern humans. It is            
              clear that behavior, and behavioral changes have played a major                
              role in the development of our species yet for the earlier stages              
              of this process, relatively little is known. Mr. Rogers' research              
              will help to fill this gap. Secondly, this research will help to               
              develop and refine techniques of archaeological analysis. The                  
              methods Mr. Rogers will use may be applicable in many time periods             
              and many regions of the world. Finally this grant will help to                 
              train an extremely promising young scientist.
