Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research: Stochastic Simulation of Transport
               Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9312811

Award Number: 9312811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. De Pablo depablo@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,5948,9193,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312811   DePablo  This award supports Dr. Juan DePablo and two graduate
              students of the  University of Wisconsin to collaborate in theoretical chemical
               engineering research with Professor Hans C. Oettinger of the Polymer 
              Institute of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich.   Professor
              Oettinger is a world-renown authority in the mathematical  aspects of
              stochastic methods, and his institution has some of the  world's fastest
              supercomputers.  The Department of Chemical  Engineering at the University of
              Wisconsin is one of the world's  foremost centers for the development and
              application of the theory of  transport phenomena to the solution of chemical
              engineering problems.   These complementary strengths are well suited to the
              goal of their  collaboration, which is to develop stochastic methods to the
              point  where they become a standard tool for the solution of problems in 
              transport phenomena. They will do this by investigating the  mathematical
              foundations of such methods and by applying these to a  wide variety of
              engineering applications, beginning with the  rheological behavior of polymer
              melts after cessation of different  types of flows.  They will compare their
              theoretical work with  experimental data generated by colleagues of Professor
              Oettinger at  ETH-Zurich.    Stochastic methods are playing an increasingly
              important role in the  solution of complex, multidimensional problems.  They
              were first  developed and are now widely used in physics and mathematics, but 
              this  sophisticated mathematical approach has not been fully  exploited in
              chemical engineering.  Stochastic methods are remarkably  simple compared to
              some other methods, and they appear to work in  some complex problems resistant
              to traditional analytical treatment.   On the other hand, they are not always
              superior to numerical methods.   Substantial work, such as that proposed here,
              is necessary to explore  the advantages and practical applications in chemical
              engineering.  ***
