Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotical Analysis of Dynamical Systems with Markov
               and Semi Markov Random Perturbations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9312255

Award Number: 9312255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anatoli Skorokhod skorokhod@stt.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dynamical systems with random perturbations have been used  intensively in
              mechanics, physics, biology, and engineering.   Many of these problems concern
              the asymptotic behavior of  randomly perturbed dynamical systems under
              unbounded growth of  intensities of perturbation.  This research will
              investigate  boundedness in probability, ergodicity, boundedness with 
              probability 1, and stability for such systems.  This will allow  the
              investigator to develop the principle of random averaging for  systems in
              general spaces and types of perturbations and to  establish theorems on weak
              convergence of the distributions of a  perturbed system for large times to
              distributions of a diffusion  Markov process.  The methods of investigation are
              based on  martingale theory, stochastic differential equations for complex 
              systems, and limit theorems for stochastic differential  equations.  The
              investigator will consider new general limit  theorems for jump processes in
              extending phase spaces to study  the weak convergence of complex Markov
              processes to more simple  ones.  Dynamical systems with random perturbations
              have been used  intensively in mechanics, physics, biology, and engineering.  
              There are many unsolved problems which are connected with the  study of the
              asymptotic behavior of randomly perturbed dynamical  systems under conditions
              of unbounded growth on the intensities  of perturbation.  This research will
              investigate the main  properties of such systems.  The research will advance
              the  knowledge of the behavior of stochastically perturbed systems and  will
              provide significant applications to the engineering  sciences.
