Title       : Development of Ice-Jet Machining Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9312980

Award Number: 9312980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest S. Geskin geskin@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9312980 Gordon          The overall goal of the research is to develop a
              practical shaping and grinding technology based on the use of a high speed
              water ice microparticle mixture (icejet).  The acquired knowledge will be used
              for equipment design, selection of operational conditions, and demonstration of
              the capability of the technology. Preliminary experiments have yielded some ice
              in a high velocity water stream.  The main technical uncertainty in the work is
              the ratio of ice to water that can be achieved in practical implementations. 
              Several approaches will be studied, but one is favored because it will clearly
              work to at least some extent and is relatively straightforward to implement. 
              The desired technology may include the following, individually or in
              combination:  (1) The use of cooled water as it enters the nozzle;
              decompression and mixing of the water as it emerges, putting it into a
              turbulent, supercooled state which will produce ice on a microsecond time
              scale.  (2) Use of liquid CO2 or other low temperature fluid as part of the
              stream to achieve further cooling during decompression.  (3) Entrainment of ice
              particles in the stream as in conventional abrasive waterjet.  (4) Injection of
              a waterjet (WJ) into a water ice layer.  A second area of uncertainty involves
              the effectiveness of ice particle as an abrasive medium.  A practical procedure
              for icejet formation will be developed and the interaction of the resulting jet
              with various engineering materials will be investigated.  The experiments will
              be conducted under a wide variety of process variables (pressure, temperature,
              flow rate) and various designs of the nozzle and mixing chamber.  The
              temperature change a nd size of generated particles will be closely monitored. 
              Parameters for IJ machining will be established and the range of practical use
              of IJ machining will be identified.  The end result of the study will be a
              design for a pilot plant for IJ machining.          It is anticipated that the
              developed IJ will combine the positive features of a laser (the high material
              removal rate, ability to remove a wide variety of engineering materials, and
              small beam diameter when desired) and a WJ (cleanliness, high continuous power,
              a wide range of flow cross section areas, simplicity of the process control,
              minimal heating, and limited  damage area).  Such combination of features will
              enable development of an effective, flexible tool for material shaping,
              grinding and cleaning.  The expected use of IJ includes such fields as high
              productivity drilling of small diameter holes (<5 mils) in multilayer circuit
              boards, food processing, precision grinding of very large metal and glass
              surfaces, and bioengineering/medical applications.  Success in this endeavor
              will result in an effective and productive alternative to laser and waterjet
              machining that would be useful for cleaning and polishing hard materials and
              for high speed cutting of food and live tissue.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
