Title       : Practical Dynamics and Time Series Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1993    
File        : a9312693

Award Number: 9312693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy L. Klein jklein@mbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mary Baldwin College
	      
	      Staunton, VA  24401    540/887-7235

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              9312693  Klein  It is important to remember that relationship between science
              and  society is not a one-way street.  While clearly science has 
              revolutionized our lives, society has itself influenced the  development of
              science.  This is true even of the most esoteric of  sciences, i.e.
              mathematics.  Dr. Klein is examining the direct  influence of commercial
              bankers and merchants on the development of  modern statistical practices.   
              Statistics, originally developed as a study of mass phenomena in a  state of
              rest, eventually came to be used to analyze dynamic  systems.  Dr. Klein is
              investigating the practical roots to the  techniques statisticians use to
              transform time series data from  fluctuations into deviations.  Her research so
              far has indicated a  chronological primacy to what she calls `monetary
              algorithms,'  which were developed by European merchants and financiers in the 
              17th through 19th centuries.  In applications of relative time  frameworks,
              first differences, index numbers and moving averages,  commercial practice
              preceded political arithmetic, which in turn  fed into scientific investigation
              and statistical theory.  Her  periodization from commercial to political to
              scientific arithmetic  parallels a comparison of forms of statistical
              representation of  temporal phenomena from the tabular to the graphical to the 
              algebraic modes.  This investigation addresses the interplay of  deception and
              accountability in the development of statistical  tools, the relative
              contributions of the practice and the theory of  monetary exchange to
              mathematical statistics, and historical  distinctions between processes modeled
              as functions of time and  those modeled as functions of place in a sequence. 
              The endpoint  for this study is the identification in 1938 of stationary 
              stochastic processes.  ***
