Title       : Theoretical Treatment of Environmental Effects on Spectra and Chemical
               Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9312651

Award Number: 9312651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Zerner zerner@qtp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Katritzky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is supported by the NSF theoretical and computational   chemistry
              program.  Reaction field models will be developed for the   prediction of
              solvent effects on structure, reactivity and spectroscopic   properties of
              large molecular systems.  Initial tests of the theory will   employ
              semi-empirical molecular electronic structure methods.  Subsequent   tests will
              be carried out using ab initio calculations for small   molecular systems. 
              Specific aspects of the reaction field model to be   studied include the shape
              of the solute cavity and the  nature of the   electronic distribution that
              generates the reaction field.  The   theoretical model will be applied to the
              calculation of: (a)   solvatochromic effects in dyestuffs, (b) solvation
              effects on reaction   rates and equilibria, and (c) absolute solvation energies
              for various   solutes ranging from nonpolar to zwitterionic to ionic.   
              Remarkable success has been achieved in recent years in understanding and  
              predicting the properties of gas phase molecules from first principles   (by
              approximately solving the electronic Schroedinger equation), but far   less
              success had been achieved for molecules dissolved in liquid   solution.   It is
              well known that dissolving a molecule (the solute)  in   a solvent can
              dramatically change its color, its other spectroscopic   properties, and its
              chemical reactivity.  Reaction field models attempt   to describe the
              solute-solvent forces  responsible these observed   effects.   A number of such
              reaction field models have been proposed, but   considerable testing is still
              required to determine the validity of the   many mathematical approximations
              which must be introduced if the model is   to be of practical use for large
              molecules such as dyes or various   light-sensitive pharmacological agents.
