Title       : Sonoluminescence in Cryogenic Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1993  
File        : a9312205

Award Number: 9312205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Williams gaw@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,9237,
Abstract    :
              9312205  Williams  This exploratory proposal is to study the properties of
              synchronous  sonoluminescence (SSL) in fluids in order to gain some fundamental
               insights into the nature of the phenomenon. The exact mechanism by  which
              there is a conversion of sound into light (first observed in  air bubbles in
              water) is not understood, although there is some  evidence that the
              compressional heating of the gas is enough to  yield appreciable black-body
              radiation. However, it is not clear  whether there are also chemical or atomic
              processes occurring in  the hot gas or plasma which may control the emission.
              The work in  this proposal is composed of three main thrusts: The study of the 
              oscillation properties of a single bubble trapped at the center of  a spherical
              continuous wave acoustic resonator. The investigation  of the intensity of the
              light emitted by the bubbles as a function  of the applied acoustic fields. The
              measurement of the spectrum of  the emitted light in the visible to
              ultra-violet wavelength range.   The SSL research will be undertaken in
              cryogenic liquids as these  fluids have several advantages over water. They
              have high chemical  purity and the spectroscopic studies can be carried out
              over a  wider wavelength range.  %%%  This exploratory proposal is to study the
              properties of synchronous  sonoluminescence (SSL) in fluids in order to gain
              some fundamental  insights into the nature of the phenomenon. The exact
              mechanism by  which there is a conversion of sound into light (first observed
              in  air bubbles in water) is not understood. There is some evidence  that the
              compressional heating of the gas is enough to cause the  emission of radiation.
              However, it is not clear whether there are  also chemical or atomic processes
              occurring in the hot gas or  plasma which may control the emission. The work in
              this proposal is  composed of three main thrusts: The study of the oscillation 
              properties of a single bubble trapped at the center of a spherical  continuous
              wave acoustic resonator. The  investigation of the  intensity of the light
              emitted by the bubbles as a function of the  applied acoustic fields. The
              measurement of the spectrum of the  emitted light in the visible to
              ultra-violet wavelength range.  The  SSL research will be undertaken in
              cryogenic liquids as these  fluids have several advantages over water. They
              have high chemical  purity and the spectroscopic studies can be carried out
              over a  wider wavelength range.  ***
