Title       : Special Migration Data Tabulations From the 1990 Census
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1993    
File        : a9312528

Award Number: 9312528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3620               (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis C. Roseman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9312528  Roseman       A persistent problem in carrying out research on spatial 
              aspects of internal migration has been the lack of data at a  sufficiently
              disaggregated spatial scale in order for meaningful  analyses to be conducted. 
              The increasingly differentiated nature  of subpopulations means that
              age-specific or sex-specific  migration streams, for example, are evident only
              at very fine  scales of spatial resolution.  In addition, theoretical 
              explanations for migration behavior are based on characteristics  of migrants. 
              Existing migration data, whether survey based or  archival, are either too
              geographically coarse or lacking in  sufficient detail on migrant
              characteristics to allow for  comprehensive analysis and testing of migration
              theory.  The U.S.  Census Bureau will prepare a special tabulation of the 1990 
              Census of Population which contains county-to-county internal  migration counts
              broken down by migrant characteristics for the  entire United States.  This
              award permits a consortium of social  scientists, including geographers, to
              purchase the data at a  special price at this time so as to make this data set
              available  to the largest possible number of scholars doing research on 
              internal migration in the United States.  For spatial analysis of  migration
              these data are especially valuable.  The data will be  distributed free of
              charge to interested researchers by the  Population Studies Center at the
              University of Michigan, and its  availability on a wide basis will facilitate
              research on general  migration theory, spatial differences in migration
              behavior,  analyses of population redistribution, and on detailed aspects of 
              the migration behavior of particular subgroups within the  population.      
              The timely compilation and distribution of this important  data set on
              population migration at the county level will permit  researchers to examine
              and test a number of theories related to  population movement which heretofore
              had not been facilitated by  existing data.  The futur e availability of these
              data to a large  number of individual researchers will accelerate research on 
              internal migration, and it will provide them with the ability to  carry out
              research using the 1990 Census much earlier than  anticipated.  Migration
              research will be greatly enhanced as a  result.  ***
