Title       : Dynamics of Cytoskeleton in Higher Plant Cells (addendum)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1993    
File        : a9312672

Award Number: 9312672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew S. Bajer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5939,9109,
Abstract    :
              9312672  Bajer    This proposal is a request for support of an international
              collaboration.  The proposed project addresses specific aspects of microtubule
              dynamics and organization of interphase cells and mitosis in endosperm of the
              African lily plant, Haemanthus.  The investigators will use techniques that are
              routine in their laboratory, combining observations of living cells, followed
              by immunolocalization of cytoskeleton and motor proteins in these cells, video
              enhanced microscopy, pressure injection and electron microscopy.  The
              investigators have recently visualized single microtubules in living cells and
              greatly improved detection of the dynamics within a kinetochore fiber.  They
              have also developed a simple method to produce abundant microtubule converging
              centers during telophase-interphase transition, in some stages of mitosis, and
              in anucleated cytoplasmic fragments.  Thus far, microtubule converging centers
              are the only well-documented microtubule nucleating centers in higher plants. 
              The data from this laboratory suggest that microtubule converging centers are
              basic structural units that establish microtubule polarity of interphase
              cytoskeleton and mitotic spindles.  The microtubule converging centers may
              transform into accessory phragmoplasts, providing a conceptually important
              precedent, that the formation of the same fundamental cellular structure
              (phragmoplast) may occur along very different pathways in the same cell type of
              the same organism.  The understanding of microtubule converging center
              organization and function remains very fragmentary.  In this study, the
              investigators will study their formation, reorganization, and function, and
              will follow the dynamics of single microtubules in vivo.  To understand their
              function in interphase and in mitosis, specific antibodies will be injected and
              their effect will be followed both in vivo and after immunolocalization.  These
              studies will supply pertinent information on spindle dynamics and cytoskeleton
              differentiation in higher p lants.  %%%  This is an international cooperative
              project to study an area of cell biology which is fundamental to the very
              definition of life itself:  cellular replication.  In eukaryotic cells, at the
              time of cell division, the replicated chromosomes are separated into daughter
              sets, and each set is moved away from the other in an orderly fashion, thereby
              ensuring that each daughter cell has a complete set of the mother cell's genes.
               This orderly separation and movement of chromosomes is accomplished by means
              of a dynamic cellular apparatus, the mitotic spindle, the working parts of
              which are microtubules.  This project will address the problem of how the
              spindle works.  ***
