Title       : Electrons in the Geomagnetic Tail
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1994   
File        : a9312467

Award Number: 9312467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Timothy E. Eastman                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maha Ashour-Abdalla mabdalla@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,9237,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9312467  Ashour-Abdalla  The proposed theoretical investigation is to calculate
              electron  distributions in the geomagnetic tail to the Earth's magnetosphere 
              and to evaluate the local and global problem of charge neutrality  between
              electrons and ions.  Although the dynamics of ions in the  magnetotail has been
              the subject of extensive theoretical  investigations using single particle
              orbit calculations, hybrid  simulations, and magnetohydrodynamic fluid
              simulations, electron  dynamics have been virtually ignored.  Yet, the most
              fundamental  aspect of a plasma - the establishment and maintenance of charge 
              neutrality - depends on electron behavior.  Some electrons move at  high speeds
              and rapidly traverse large volumes of space; the  establishment of local charge
              neutrality depends on both the global  sources and sinks of electrons and the
              large scale structure of the  electric and magnetic fields in the tail.  Until
              now, no scientific  methodology has existed capable of addressing global
              transport and  calculating the local distributions of electrons in the tail. 
              In  the proposed large scale kinetics approach, starting from various  source
              regions, electrons will be allowed to propagate throughout  the entire volume
              of the magnetotail along trajectories which are  determined using model
              electromagnetic fields to represent the tail  configuration.  The local
              electron distribution function will be  calculated by summing the contributions
              of each trajectory passing  through the local spatial region, and the electron
              density will be  compared to the local ion density (which is similarly
              calculated by  the large scale kinetics technique) to determine the extent of 
              charge neutrality violation.  Parallel electric fields will be  added to the
              electromagnetic field model, and will be adjusted to  obtain the closet
              reasonable balance between electron and ion  charge densities.  The potential
              significance of this proposed is  profound in that, with its success we could
              for the first time  directly asses s the problem of charge neutrality in a
              space plasma,  determine the large scale potential electric fields required to 
              maintain charge neutrality, and establish the extent to which  charge
              neutrality demands the exchange of electrons between the  tail plasma and the
              ionosphere.    ***
