Title       : Dissertation Research: Diet and Health in a Classic Mimbres Pueblo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1993  
File        : a9312472

Award Number: 9312472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6710               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Bennett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9312472  Bennett    Under the direction of Dr. Kenneth Bennett, Ms. Diane
              Holliday will  collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze
              human  skeletal materials excavated from the Classic Mimbres site of NAN 
              Ranch, which is located in southwestern New Mexico. The site was  occupied
              between ca. 1000 - 1150 AD. Ms. Holliday will use a series  of techniques to
              reconstruct the health status (when they were  alive) and diet of individuals
              who lived in two different areas of  the site to determine whether significant
              differences exist and  whether they can be explained on the basis of social
              status. To do  this she will conduct both osteological and chemical analyses.
              She  will examine the bones to determine subadult growth rates, adult  stature
              and the incidence of skeletal abnormalities which indicate  either malnutrition
              or disease. Both trace element and carbon  isotope analyses will then be
              conducted and these allow estimation  of relative amounts of meat and corn in
              the diet.    Prior to the arrival of Columbus in the New World, Native American
               societies in the U.S. Southwest reached a chiefly level of  organization
              characterized by aggregates of people in towns  composed of large pueblos, some
              including several hundred rooms.  Anthropologists wish to understand both the
              processes which led to  this aggregation and the mechanisms which permitted
              these groups to  persist for hundreds of years. In many parts of the world,
              this  process was accompanied by the appearance of status differentiation  and
              the emergence of a stratified society with a chiefly form of  organization.
              However the Mimbres culture is interesting because,  from extant archaeological
              evidence at least, such status  differentiation is not apparent. Through use of
              skeletal analysis  and the application of chemical techniques Ms. Holliday will
               examine this question.    This research is important for several reasons. It
              will increase  our understanding of how complex societies emerge. It will
              provide  new data on t he prehistory and achievements of Native Americans in 
              the U.S. Southwest. It will also contribute to the training of a  promising
              young scientist.  ***
