Title       : Coupled Modeling of Annual and Interannual Tropical Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1995  
File        : a9312888

Award Number: 9312888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fei-fei Jin jff@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1324,5740,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                       PROJECT SUMMARY                                        
                            PROPOSAL ID:   ATM-9312888      PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Jin,
              Fei-fei  INSTITUTION:  University of Hawaii  PROGRAM:  TOGA, CDP      TITLE: 
              Coupled Modeling of Annual and Interannual Tropical Ocean-  Atmosphere
              Interaction    Investigations of the tropical ocean-atmosphere interaction have
               focused largely on aspects of the interannual variability related  to the El
              Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon.  Coupled  models of differing
              complexity have been developed to understand,  simulate, and predict this
              phenomenon.  However, there are  increasing indications from both observational
              and modeling studies  that the annual cycle and interannual variability are
              intrinsically  related.  This project will use a series of intermediate and
              hybrid  coupled models, proven to be useful and economical in tropical  coupled
              modeling, to investigate annual and interannual variability  with an emphasis
              on the role played by the annual cycle in the  interannual tropical
              ocean-atmosphere interaction.  The goal of  this research is improved
              understanding of the annual and  interannual variabilities observed in the
              tropical ocean-atmosphere  system.      The intermediate coupled model, based
              on a simplified version of  the 1987 Zebiak & Cane model, has been developed
              and extensively  analyzed by Jin & Neelin.  This model incorporates asymmetric 
              components of sea surface temperature and ocean dynamics to give a  realistic
              simulation of the climatological annual cycle and will be  used to investigate
              the role of the annual cycle on the interannual  variability.  The mechanisms
              of frequency locking that give rise to  coupled annual and sub-harmonic
              oscillations will be investigated.   The regimes of coupled annual,
              quasi-biennial and low-frequency  modes will be explored in an extensive range
              of parameter space.   The intermediate coupled model will be improved with
              better  parameterization of the physics and used fo r further studies of the 
              coupled dynamics of the annual cycle and the interannual coupled  modes.   
              This investigation will be extended, based on the results from the  research
              with the intermediate coupled model, to studies with a  hybrid coupled model
              system which includes an ocean general  circulation model and a quasi-steady
              tropical atmosphere model.   The hybrid coupled model system permits a more
              sophisticated  examination of the interaction between annual and interannual
              nodes  and an exploration of the regime which supports the quasi-biennial  and
              low-frequency variability with a regime diagnostic tool based  on the
              intermediate model.
