Title       : Raman Spectroscopic Characterization of Transition-Metal Surfaces in Catalytic
               Reactor Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1997     
File        : a9312008

Award Number: 9312008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Weaver   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christos G. Takoudis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9312008  Takoudis    This is an exploration of the utility of surface-enhanced
              Raman  spectroscopy (SERS), in conjunction with mass spectrometry and  other
              methods, for the in-situ molecular characterization of  transition-metal
              surfaces involved in gas-phase catalytic  reactions.  In particular, the
              program exploits the ability to  prepare ultrathin films of transition metals
              and other materials by  electrodeposition onto gold and the fact that such
              films exhibit  remarkably stable and intense SERS activity.  This approach
              allows  the measurement of vibrational spectra for a variety of species on 
              transition-metal surfaces to be obtained rapidly, with high  sensitivity, over
              a wide frequency range, at pressures of ambient  or higher, and at moderately
              high temperatures.  Coupling real-time  SERS measurements with  simultaneous
              mass-spectrometric assay of  the gas-phase composition enables linking of the
              molecular state of  the surface under working conditions with reaction rates
              under  either transient or steady-state conditions.  Initial studies are  on
              surfaces of platinum, rhodium, ruthenium, and palladium;  reactions of interest
              include the oxidation of carbon monoxide by  nitric oxide or by oxygen, the
              production of dicyandiamide from  ammonia and carbon monoxide, the formation of
              methane from carbon  dioxide and hydrogen, and the oxidation of alcohols and
              unsaturated  organics.  Parallel studies using SERS and X-ray photoelectron 
              spectroscopy or scanning force microscopy permit association of  vibrational
              bands with surface structures.       This study is devoted to the elaboration
              of a new method to study  surface-mediated chemical processes.  Although the
              present effort  is devoted  to heterogeneous catalysis, the approach should be 
              applicable to a family of related processes, including  electrochemical
              transformations, thin-film formation, and  corrosion.
