Title       : Dissertation Research: Pre-hispanic Argentinian Settlement Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1993    
File        : a9312006

Award Number: 9312006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy K. Earle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9312006  Earle    Under the direction of Dr. Timothy Earle, Ms. Elizabeth
              DeMarrias  will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct 
              archaeological research in the Calchaqui valley which lies on the  eastern
              slopes of the Andes in northwest Argentina. This location  was selected for
              several reasons. First Ms. DeMarrias can  coordinate her work with other U.S.
              researchers who are currently  present in the area. Of greater importance
              however is that fact  that this well defined geographical entity contains an 
              archaeological sequence which begins approximately 6,000 years ago  and extends
              up through late Inka times to the appearance of the  Spanish. The region
              documents therefore the shift from hunting and  gathering to agriculture and
              the change from small mobile human  grouping to larger more highly organized
              entities which were  incorporated into a state society. Ms. DeMarrias is
              interested in  the latter portion of the sequence and wants to determine how 
              social stratification and centralization of political power took  place. To do
              this, she will survey broadly within the region.  Following an initial
              reconnaissance, she and her colleagues will  note all sites which fall within
              selected sample areas. Surface  materials such as pottery and stone tools will
              be collected and  architectural and agricultural features such as irrigation
              canals  mapped. With these data Ms. DeMarrais will be able to reconstruct 
              changing group size and organization over time.    While archaeologists
              recognize that the general picture observed in  the Calchaqui is repeated in
              many parts of the world and that with  the adoption of agriculture groups
              become sedentary and increase in  size and organizational complexity, the
              mechanisms by which these  changes take place are not well understood. In
              particular it is not  clear how authority becomes concentrated in the hands of
              limited  numbers of individuals. By examining the development of 
              centralization such as public works and by focussing on evidence  of 
              inequality as reflected in differential distribution of metals and  other
              valuable goods, Ms. DeMarrais hopes to gain insight into this  process.    This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide  data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It will shed new light on  the process which leads to
              social complexity and finally it will  assist in the training of a promising
              young scientist.  ***
