Title       : Using Kerr-Type Nonlinear Optical Materials for Artificial Neural Network
               Implimentations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9312345

Award Number: 9312345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Skinner srs@ece.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312345  Skinner  The objective of this project is to  investigate the
              usefulness of Kerr-  Type nonlinear optical materials  for all-optical
              implementations of  feed forward artificial neural  networks with optical error
              back-  propagation training.  These types  of materials have pico-second 
              response times and allow both  weighted connections and nonlinear  neuron
              processing to be implemented  using thin materials layers  separated by free
              space.  This  gives such networks and advantage  over other optical
              implementations  which require complicated hardware  devices to implement the
              weighted  connections and separate hardware  for neuron processing. In
              addition,  a layered network of Kerr-Type  material can process both forward 
              calculation signals and backward  error propagation simultaneously.   The
              nonlinear layers serve as  processing layers and the linear  layers (fee space)
              serve as  connection layers.  Each nonlinear  layer can be thought of as a
              plane  continuum of neurons connected with  the layers before and after it by a
               continuum of optical paths.  The  number of available neurons and  connections
              are limited only by the  available resolution of the system  optics.  The
              inputs and weights are  a distribution of irradiance in 2D  space and the
              weights vary the  refractive index profile of the  nonlinear medium.  The
              nonlinear  forcing and processing functions  necessary for neural computing are
               given by the self-action effects of  the propagating wave coupled with  the
              optical with signals applied to  the nonlinear layers.  Such a  network has
              been numerically  simulated in two dimensions and  trained to perform logic
              functions  and a simple optical demonstration  of this network is constructed. 
               Further simulation and training of  the network to preform more  complicated
              tasks as well as  implementation of these networks in  two dimensions is
              proposed,  followed by an extension of the  simulation and implementation to 
              three dimensions.  This well  involve both theoretical and   experimental
              investigations in  parallel with computer simulation  to determine the optimal
              network  geometry (number and type of  layers, size and required  resolution of
              with and signal  fields) as well as better  techniques for controlling the 
              application of the weight light  fields.  ***
