Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Issues in Gravitation and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9312335

Award Number: 9312335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Brandenberger resadmin@brownvm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5950,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9312335  Brandenberger  This award supports a group of three U.S. researchers
              and their graduate  students, led by Professor Robert H. Brandenberger of Brown
              University,  to collaborate in theoretical physics with Professor Christoph
              Schmid  and others of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) and the 
              University of Zurich.  These research groups represent centers of  excellence
              that share an interest in understanding the physics of the  very early
              universe.  The participants bring complementary expertise in  particle physics,
              field theory, astrophysics, and cosmology to the  cooperative effort.  A
              collateral goal of the proposed project is to  enable the junior U.S. and Swiss
              participants to broaden their  intellectual horizons through international
              collaboration.  The joint  research will focus on three topics of mutual
              interest: 1) applications  of the theory of cosmological perturbations to
              gravitation and  cosmology; 2) application of entropy arguments to the theory
              of  cosmological phase transitions; and 3) construction of a nonsingular 
              universe.      This research addresses several intriguing questions about the
              physics  of the early universe.  The combinations of different backgrounds and 
              perspectives among the participants increases the potential contribution  of
              the research toward improved understanding of the formation of large  scale
              structures in the universe.  This area of cosmology is  particularly
              interesting now because of recent and planned satellite  observations that
              measure anisotropies in the cosmic microwave  background and the clusters,
              superclusters and the walls and voids of  galaxies.  These observations may
              provide means of evaluating and  refining the models and otherwise advancing
              the research of the U.S. and  Swiss collaborators.  ***
