Title       : Survey of Academic S&E Research and Development Expendituresand Management of
               the NSF Academic Survey Database for FY93-FY95
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9312584

Award Number: 9312584
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: John E. Jankowski, Jr.                  
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 29,  1993     
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $976797             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Nozicka gnozicka@qrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Research Corp
	      
	      Chevy Chase, MD  20825    /   -

NSF Program : 8802      RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT STATIST
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this procurement are two-fold.  First, the                   
              contractor shall perform all functions related to the conduct and              
              data processing of the annual "Survey of Scientific and                        
              Engineering R&D Expenditures at Universities and Colleges."  The               
              contractor shall provide support for all activities related to                 
              survey and sample design, survey conduct, data tabulation, and                 
              production of diskettes and data tapes for general dissemination.              
              The contractor shall also provide technical support for                        
              analytical, descriptive, and comparative purposes for data                     
              maintained in the system.  Second, the contractor shall provide                
              maintenance and support of the academic Integrated Data Base                   
              (IDB).  The IDB includes the survey mentioned above as well as                 
              two additional academic surveys conducted under separate                       
              contracts within the Division of Science Resources Studies.                    
              Under the IDB task, the contractor will produce summaries of                   
              institutional data, as well as perform systematic edit checks                  
              across surveys to assess the relationship of financial and                     
              personnel resources and the validity of the data as reported.                  
                                                                                             
              As part of its statutory charge to provide a central                           
              clearinghouse for the collection, interpretation, and analysis of              
              data on the current and projected availability of scientific and               
              technical resources in the United States, NSF collects and                     
              disseminates statistical data on detailed characteristics of                   
              science and engineering resources in colleges and universities.                
              The annual survey that is the subject of this study as well as                 
              other academic surveys in the IDB provide statistical data and                 
              analytical reports for dissemination to users including internal               
              NSF management and the National Science Board, other science and               
              technology policy makers, institutional researchers, and private               
              organizations interested in higher education.
