Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleogene to Neogene Depositional Sequences on the New
               Jersey Coastal Plain: A Drilling Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9312204

Award Number: 9312204
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne L. Newell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey
	      Mail Stop 970
	      Reston, VA  22092    /   -

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This project involves an integrated transect of boreholes on              
              the U.S. mid-Atlantic region to address the continental margin                 
              record of the Oligocene-Recent global sea-level changes.  These                
              changes have been controlled by glacioeustatic (ice-volume)                    
              variations.  Transects of passive continental margins from outcrop             
              to the deep sea are needed to evaluate the timing and amplitude of             
              sea-level variations.  The transect requires drilling both onshore             
              and offshore (ODP Leg 150).  The Principal Investigators will drill            
              three continuously cored and logged boreholes in the New Jersey                
              coastal plain near Island Beach, Atlantic City, and Cape May, NJ.              
              The project will be a collaborative effort among Rutgers,                      
              LDGO/Columbia, and the Eastern Regional Branch of the USGS.                    
                                                                                             
                   The multidisciplinary use of magnetostratigraphy,                         
              biostratigraphy, Sr-isotope stratigraphy and oxygen isotope                    
              glacioeustatic curves combined with seismic stratigraphy to tie                
              together onshore and offshore wells will provide a comprehensive               
              data set.  The geologic record of sea level changes gives factual              
              constraints for developing models of global paleoclimatological                
              change.
