Title       : Surfactants with Two Hydrophilic and Two Hydrophobic Groups;Chemical
               Structure/Interfacial Property Relationships, Molecular Interactions, and
               Synergism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1994  
File        : a9312715

Award Number: 9312715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton J. Rosen mjr192sri@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312715  Rosen    The environmental impact of chemicals causes increasing 
              concern.. One method of minimizing the environmental effects of  chemicals such
              as surfactants that are used for their  "performance" is to increase their
              efficiency and effectiveness.   For a given level of performance, less chemical
              raw material is  then required and less chemical effluent must be treated.    A
              new type of surfactant that contains two hydrophilic groups of  two hydrophobic
              groups in the molecule (called "gemini" type)  has recently been shown to have
              surface activity form one to  more than two orders of magnitude greater than
              comparable  conventional surfactant, depending upon surfactant structure.   It
              has also been shown, in initial studies, to interact more  strongly with other
              surfactants than comparable conventional  surfactants.  Since increased
              interaction strength increases the  probability of synergy in mixtures of
              surfactants, this  indicated that geminis are more likely to exhibit synergism
              in  interfacial properties when mixed with other surfactants.    This proposal
              is for a systematic study of chemical  structure/fundamental interfacial
              property relationships,  including interactions in mixed monolayers and mixed
              micelles,  of well-defined, well-purified geminis, to be synthesized for  the
              most part in our institute.  The necessary data can be  obtained from
              equilibrium and dynamic surface tension  measurements, supplemented by NMR
              studies on micellar solutions  and reflectance-absorbance FTIR studies on
              monolayers.  In  addition to increasing our knowledge of structure/interfacial 
              property relationships and of molecular interactions in mixed  micelles and
              monolayers, the results of this study should  provide guidelines for the design
              and use of surfactant systems  with maximized desired interfacial properties
              and minimized  environmental impact for industrial use.  ***
