Title       : Behavior, Ecology and Genetics of an Apparently Communal Halictine Bee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9312225

Award Number: 9312225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Forbes sforbes@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Penelope F. Kukuk  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9312225  Kukuk    Ecological, behavioral, and genetic approaches will be used to
              explore the origin  and maintenance of cooperation among non-relatives in the
              group-living halictine  bee species Lasioglossum hemichalceum.  Field studies
              of nest parasitism, ant  predation, and nest availability will address the
              question of why living in groups  is advantageous.  Field studies of individual
              survival and reproductive success will  provide data to test a mathematical
              model of how this form of cooperation works.   This model uses state-of-the-art
              methods to predict the number of individuals  that will perform risky tasks
              (such as foraging) for any given group size.  Genetic  studies, using DNA
              fingerprinting, will allow Dr. Kukuk to establish genealogies  for groups to
              precisely assess the reproductive success of group members.  This  multifaceted
              research project represents a significant advance in the study of  cooperation
              among non-relatives.    The importance of sociality as an evolutionary
              innovation cannot be  overemphasized.  Cooperation among groups of individuals
              led to the success of  Homo sapiens, and is paramount in nature.  Social
              insects are ecologically  dominant in most terrestrial habitats in terms of
              both energy consumption and  biomass.  Social innovation and diversity have
              evolved in many insect lineages.   The halictine bees are of central importance
              in the study of social evolution  because of the enormous diversity of social
              organization found in this subfamily.   In addition, the form of cooperation
              found in the halictine species L. hemichalceum  is not well studied, even
              though it is common.  Answering the how and why  questions about the evolution
              of cooperation among non-relatives will challenge  currently held theories that
              emphasize the importance of genealogical  relationships among group members,
              and will provide insights into alternative  forms of social organization.
