Title       : Mineralogy, Paragenetic Sequence, Geochemistry, & Charac- terization of
               Phosphorus in the Fluorite-Barite Mineral Deposits at Okorusu, Namibia:
               U.S.-Namibia Coop. Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9312728

Award Number: 9312728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Hagni   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 5928,
Abstract    :
              9312728  Hagni    This three-year cooperative research project  supports field
              research and mineralogical and  geochemical study of the Okorusu 
              fluorite-barite mineral deposit in  north-central Namibia.  The PI  and a
              graduate student from the Department of  Geology and Geophysics at the
              University of  Missouri-Rolla will collaborate with Dr.  Gabriele I.C.
              Schneider, chief geologist at the  Geological Survey of Namibia, in studying
              the  deposits and collecting specimens for  subsequent laboratory study at UMR
              and in  Namibia.  The Namibian partner will travel to  Rolla during the third
              year to participate in  the development of conclusions from  the field and
              laboratory research.    This research will document several fundamental 
              aspects of the mineral deposit at Okorusu which  have not been studied to date,
              including:  mineralogy, paragenetic sequence, fluid  inclusion geothermometry
              and salinities, rare  earth element geochemistry, trace element  geochemistry,
              and the character of  apatite-fluorite intergrowths.  This study  could improve
              understanding of the  origin of fluorite deposits, explaining why a  few
              carbonatites contain economic  concentrations of fluorite, whereas most do 
              not.  The project also promises practical  applications of interest to the
              Okorusu mining  operation - improving separation of apatite and  fluorite in
              order to produce superior fluorite  concentrate.  Since somewhat similar
              deposits  occur in parts of the U.S., the economic as  well as the scientific
              implications of the  research could be mutually beneficial.     In addition to
              the benefits outlined above,  this project advances the Division of 
              International Programs' objective of  strengthening human resources:  it offers
              a US  graduate student an opportunity for field  experience in a collaborative
              research project  with a distinguished scientist in Africa, who  also happens
              to be female.   ***
