Title       : CISE: Enhancement of the Introductory Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1996     
File        : a9312578

Award Number: 9312578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhys Price Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Salter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2888,9218,
Abstract    :
              9312578  Jones         This project is for the development of a two-course 
              introductory computer science sequence that uses results from  recent research
              in programming languages. A number of later courses  will be modified as well.
              Utilizing a new software environment and  working collaboratively with
              colleagues at Indiana University, this  project will incorporate Infer, a
              dialect of Scheme, with simple  and powerful semantics and a strong polymorphic
              type system.  Additionally, this language offers good support for modularity
              and  programming in the large. The additional rigor encountered when  learning
              to derive correct programs in such languages is expected  to promote computing
              as a science. By making the introductory  course equally challenging to all
              students, it is further  anticipated that these curricular changes will improve
              the position  of underrepresented groups in the discipline.         A
              significant number of students in introductory courses have  considerable
              experience of programming in some imperative language.  Since the similarities
              between different imperative languages are  more pronounced than their
              differences, other students with no  previous programming experience are often
              discouraged on observing  the comparative ease with which their peers approach
              the subject.  The curricular changes incorporated in this project are expected
              to  reduce the effects of this disparity in student backgrounds. With  all the
              students starting from scratch in a new and challenging  programming
              environment and new language, it is anticipated that  women and
              underrepresented minorities can be encouraged to  persevere. The project
              includes a plan for analysis and evaluation  of this hypothesis. Increased
              retention and eventually increased  enrollment of women and minorities are
              expected long-term results.         Because the use of imperative programming
              languages in the  introductory courses is common across the country, it is
              believed  that the curricular changes incorporated herein wil l serve as a 
              model for changes at other institutions. The results of the project  will be
              widely disseminated through workshops, conference  presentations and
              publications.  ***
