Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: A Comparison of U.S. and Japanese Bridge
               Foundations with Emphasis on Construction Techniques and Seismic Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1994   
File        : a9312786

Award Number: 9312786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Yashinsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Dept of Transportation
	      
	      Sacramento, CA  95814    /   -

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,5983,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Yashinsky  9312786    This award will support a cooperative research  project
              between Mr. Yashinsky, Office of  Earthquake Engineering, California Department
               of Transportation (Caltrans) in Sacramento and  Dr. Kazuhiko Kawashima,
              Earthquake Disaster  Prevention Department, Public Works Research  Institute
              (PWRI) in Tsukuba, Japan.  During a  six month visit Mr. Yashinsky will conduct
               research on a comparison of U.S. and Japanese  bridge foundations with
              emphasis on  construction techniques and seismic behavior.   He will identify
              how the geology, soil and  bridge characteristics relate to the choice of  a
              foundation.  This will be followed by an  examination of the construction
              techniques used  for each type of foundation.  He will then  review how the
              Japanese model the stiffness of  different foundations, how they input the 
              ground motion, techniques they use to determine  the seismic demand and
              capacity of the various  foundation types and how they account for  incoherence
              and multiple support excitation.   The collaborators will then model the
              different  foundations using current Caltrans computer  codes and compare their
              performance with  Caltrans' foundations.    The research findings could result
              in U.S.  bridges with a greatly  improved response to  earthquakes.  Also, the
              many innovative  construction techniques used for foundations in  Japan could
              benefit the U.S. construction  industry.  Mr. Yashinsky's expertise lies in 
              the area of major seismic  redesign/rehabilitation programs for bridges.   Both
              Dr. Kawashima and his Institute (PWRI) are  world leaders in the area of
              foundation design  of seismically resistant bridges.  It is  anticipated that
              this collaboration will  benefit both countries and will continue  informally
              after this project is completed.   This project is supported by the NSF-CGP 
              (Center for Global Partnership) Science  Fellowship Program.  ***
