Title       : Implementation of an Environmental Focus in an UndergraduateChemistry Curriculum
               by the Addition of Gas Chromatography -Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9750583

Award Number: 9750583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43744              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia A. Atterholt atterholt@wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Butcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Royce S. Woosley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Roger Bacon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry Faculty members are implementing an environmental focus to the
              curriculum.  This focus is a natural progression based on the institution's
              ecologically diverse location and the students' employment record in
              environmental sciences.  To achieve this focus, suitable instrumentation is
              being used to develop novel environmental experiments to promote student
              learning in (1) the identification of synthesized and natural compounds, (2)
              monitoring compounds and their degradation in the environment, and (3)
              analytical method development.  Gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is
              a powerful technique used to facilitate this kind of learning and is also
              widely used in environmental analysis.  Using environmental applications, a
              benchtop GC-MS instrument is being integrated into the curriculum.  The first
              objective is being met by GC-MS characterization of natural products and an
              environmentally benign chemical synthesis (green chemistry) involving a
              dye-sensitized irradiation.  GC-MS is also being employed to research carbonyl
              compounds as thiazolidine derivatives in cigarette smoke.  In a new
              environmental chemistry course, kinetic factors in compound degradation can be
              illustrated by monitoring the degradation of insect pheromones and
              organophosphate pesticides by GC-MS.  GC-MS is being employed to illustrate
              analytical method development by the identification and determination of
              volatiles in samples.
