Title       : An Undergraduate Laboratory for Building and Programming Intelligent Mobile
               Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9750858

Award Number: 9750858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladik Y. Kreinovich vladik@cs.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chitta R. Baral  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael Gelfond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes an undergraduate laboratory for building and
              programming intelligent mobile robots.  This laboratory is mainly used in the
              undergraduate courses titled Building and Programming Mobile Robots (BPMR),
              Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Computer Control.  The BPMR course is a new
              course that adapts materials from the MIT 6.270 robot contest  OMS+  and the
              course on robots taught at Stanford by Konolige to this urban university of
              17,000 that has 62.7 Hispanic students.  The current course on AI will be
              significantly modified to incorporate hands-on exercise on mobile robots.  The
              goals behind establishing the laboratory include increasing the number of
              computer science majors, the number of students from the area pursuing computer
              science, the number of computer science graduates with a significant background
              in robotics, the number of computer science undergraduates involved in
              research, and the number of computer science undergraduates continuing on to a
              graduate program or to a research career.    The faculty associated with this
              project have ongoing research programs on topics, such as reasoning about
              actions, planning, robot navigation, fuzzy control, and neural networks, that
              play a big role in creating an autonomous mobile robot.  Undergraduate
              students, after taking courses that use the new laboratory, are able to
              participate in the related research programs.  As a motivational tool, a team
              that includes undergraduate students is sent to the annual AAAI/IJCAI robot
              contests.    Robot building workshops are provided, as are robot demonstrations
              for high school students and teachers and other university students.  These
              workshops encourage a larger number of students to pursue a degree in computer
              science.
