Title       : Enhancing Thermal and Fluid Sciences Undergraduate Laboratory Through the
               Introduction of Optical Diagnostic/ Image Processing Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9750785

Award Number: 9750785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34583              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chiang Shih shih@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project integrates innovative optical/digital diagnostic techniques,
              including particle image velocimetry (PIV) into the current senior-level
              Thermal and Fluid Sciences laboratory course.   The inclusion of PIV and other
              image processing techniques introduces students to state-of-the-art
              optical/image processing technology and enhances students' understanding of
              fundamental flow physics through hands-on laboratory experience.       The PIV
              technique not only provides a global visualization of the entire flow field, it
              also allows the flow data to be evaluated quantitatively and compared directly
              with the results predicted by relevant theories or principles.  Three
              experiments are specifically designed to take advantage of the unique
              capabilities of PIV and strengthen the curriculum.  Detailed laboratory manuals
              can be prepared and made available through the Intemet.  Additionally, the PIV
              image processing system provides real-time image acquisition and analysis to
              complement other traditional flow visualization methods such as smoke-wire,
              shadowgraph, and schlieren techniques.       Integration of modern
              optical/digital image processing techniques into this class increases students'
              interest by allowing them to visualize concepts that are otherwise difficult to
              grasp.  These courses showcase PIV demonstration experiments, both in the
              laboratory and through the use of full motion MPEG video format, to provide
              students with a better understanding of the lecture material.     *
