Title       : Digital Signal Processing/Image Processing: Freshman to Senior Year
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9750697

Award Number: 9750697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hisham Alnajjar alnajjar@uhavax.hartford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis F. Godbout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hemchandra M. Shertukde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Digital Signal Processing (DSP) and DSP hardware are extremely important in many
              areas of industry.  The use of these applications is expanding rapidly
              throughout the world, creating an extraordinary demand for professionals well
              versed in this technology.  Recent efforts in the College of Engineering have
              resulted in introducing a new hands-on project course that focuses on DSP
              hardware and applications.  The course material emphasizes the use of
              Application-Specific Integrated Chips in standard kits, manufactured by Texas
              Instruments.  It is extremely important that students know about these
              state-of-the-art DSP processors, which can be used in real-time applications.  
               This project addresses the resources needed for introducing DSP hardware and
              their real-time applications in the B.S.E.E. program.  This DSP course, with
              newly developed DSP experiments and projects, gives students hands-on
              experience.  Since these DSP tools are important and relatively easy to
              interface, they can be used to introduce first-year students to the design and
              application process of digital signal/image processing despite their lack of
              theoretical background in this subject.  The process involves analyzing a
              problem, making a decision on how to approach it, trying different design
              procedures and comparing the different outcomes.  This approach keeps the
              freshmen focused on their engineering major and helps in increasing overall
              retention.    The courses developed can be disseminated to departments that do
              not have a DSP hardware course.  Students also are encouraged to publish their
              research material in conference proceedings in signal processing, such as
              ICSPAT and ASEE.  *
