Title       : A Modernized Undergraduate Psychology Laboratory for Curricular Enhancements in
               Learning, Animal Cognition and Behavioral Psychopharmacology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9750568

Award Number: 9750568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kerchner mike.kerchner@washcoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington College
	      
	      Chestertown, MD  21620    301/778-2800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in neuroscience have revolutionized current theories of animal
              learning and cognition.  In addition, advances in neuroscience and
              psychopharmacology have provided new insights into the neurochemical factors
              that regulate behavior and thought.  Unfortunately, undergraduate curricula in
              psychology and neuroscience often has had to struggle to keep abreast of these
              advances.  The Psychology Department at Washington College has implemented a
              new concentration in behavioral neuroscience, revised the general psychology
              requirements, and is in need of updating the laboratory experiences available
              to majors in both components of the curriculum.  This proposal requests
              automated operant systems and an acoustic startle platform that will be used by
              students to investigate contemporary issues in animal learning and cognition,
              and in behavioral psychopharmacology.  The equipment will enable us to make
              significant revisions to our operant learning laboratory - eliminating or
              revising laboratory exercises that have changed very little from the 1970's and
              adding new exercises that utilize paradigms which examine current theories of
              animal cognition.  The equipment will also be used to expand the laboratory
              experiences that are components of a new course in behavioral
              psychopharmacology - one of three core courses in our new behavioral
              neuroscience concentration.  The automated systems will be used in exercises
              that are modeled on standard protocols employed by investigators conducting
              both basic and applied drug research.  These systems will also be useful to
              students conducting independent research and their senior thesis project that
              is required for graduation.
