Title       : Cross Curricular Addition of Molecular Biology/Biochemistry Lab Experiences for
               Undergraduate Students in Biology and Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9750770

Award Number: 9750770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19964              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Thieman   (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Pardee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marta D. de Jesus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Redding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ventura Cty Cmty Col Dist
	      71 Day Road
	      Ventura, CA  930032037    805/642-0161

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               An assembly of educational  professionals from biology and biochemistry have
              designed contemporary exercises that challenge students in undergraduate
              laboratories to solve modern molecular problems.  Specific new experiments from
              molecular biology and biochemistry are being added to the Biochemistry,
              Biology, Physiology, Anatomy/Physiology, Marine Biology and Microbiology
              courses at Ventura College. These lab course revisions will serve to better
              prepare students for transfer and high-tech vocations by providing varied
              contemporary problem-solving experiences, using modern techniques in molecular
              bioscience.  Improved preparation for those entering the biotechnology training
              program, and transfer programs results from an advisory collaboration with the
              UCSB Math/Sciences Division.  The addition of DNA isolation and
              characterization, restriction enzyme analysis, cloning prokaryotic vectors,
              mitochondria and chloroplast isolation and measurement, bacterial contamination
              spectroflurometic asssays, and analysis of protein and aromatic bioproducts,
              represent significant lab experience revisions.  The equipment that will be
              needed includes chromatography, electrophoresis, spectroflurometer, UV
              spectrometer, gas chromatogram (upgrade), and metabolic oxygen sensors (the
              associated restriction enzymes and reagents will be provided by a local
              biotechnology company).  The new Science building State Equipment Fund has been
              cut by more than 40%, making it impossible to offer these experiences without
              outside funding.  This project will provide the matching funds needed to
              purchase the equipment.  Each year, over 1,600 students at the college enroll
              in these courses.  Funding of this project will provide students with: 1.
              Comprehensive problem-solving activities in traditional classes: 2. Improved
              activities in majors and non-majors classes; 3. Opportunities for individual
              students to perform individualized research in special courses with equipment;
              4. Increased hands-on learning meaningful to transfer requ irements.
