Title       : NMR Spectroscopy in the Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9750803

Award Number: 9750803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei G. Kutateladze akutatel@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Hornback  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the  purchase of a nuclear-magnetic-resonance (NMR)
              spectrometer (Varian Unity INOVA 300 NB) and a software package designed for
              the analysis of data obtained from the spectrometer.  This equipment enables a
              large number of undergraduate students to obtain spectra for their own
              individual samples.  The students can then analyze the data on the computer,
              interpret the spectra, and, when necessary, return to the computer to refine
              some feature of the spectra.  In the organic chemistry laboratory, five
              experiments involve this instrument being used to answer structural questions. 
              In addition, alternating organic laboratory sections are using the spectrometer
              on a weekly basis to characterize the other compounds that are synthesized. 
              This continuing use strongly reinforces the learning process.  The spectrometer
              is being similarly used in the inorganic chemistry laboratory to answer
              structural questions and to characterize products that are synthesized.  In the
              higher level laboratories, the spectrometer is being employed in experiments
              that illustrate more advanced techniques.  The biochemistry laboratory is using
              the instrumentation to study protein dynamics.  The advanced laboratory is
              using the machine's variable temperature capabilities to measure equilibrium
              constants. INOVA 300 NB is capable of performing all the modern NMR experiments
              at a reasonably high field of 300 MHz, which is sufficient for undergraduate
              experiments.  This project is part of a larger program to introduce computers
              and instruments into lectures and laboratories to further the development of
              the students' skills in device-computer interfacing, handling and manipulating
              information, and communicating the results of their experiments.   *
