Title       : Laboratory Revision in Genetics & Improvements in Cell & Molecular Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9750452

Award Number: 9750452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12795              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Hanson HANSON@CANISIUS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula F. Dehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Lein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Grebenok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Zapisek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Canisius College
	      2001 Main Street
	      Buffalo, NY  142081035    716/883-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent biology program revisions have placed a greater emphasis on cell and
              molecular biology.  We are now engaged in a total revision of Genetics, and are
              continuing to improve other courses in the cell and molecular area.  The major
              thrust of this project is to redesign the genetics laboratory and enhance
              previously revised cell and molecular courses, by exposing upper division
              undergraduate students to advanced instrumentation and techniques critical to
              scientific experimentation in modern cell and molecular biology.  These
              techniques will be presented in an investigative, student-initiated,
              project-based laboratory designed to turn "science students" into "student
              scientists".    Requested instrumentation vital for the successful completion
              of this project are a PCR thermal controller, sequencing gel electrophoresis
              units, imaging densitometer and sequencing software, and DNA analysis software.
               The thermal controller provides for the ability to amplify small amounts of
              DNA, the electrophoresis units allow for separation of DNA samples, the imaging
              densitometer for quantifying protein gels, Western and dot and slot blots, and
              the DNA analysis software for analyzing sequences of DNA, cDNA's, and protein
              sequences for conserved motifs, designing PCR primers, and protein structural
              and restriction site analysis.    By providing state-of-the art instrumentation
              and engaging students in the design and analysis of exciting, relevant
              problems, this project will increase their knowledge of the scientific process,
              and prepare them more completely for scientific careers.  We believe this
              approach will be of interest to colleagues in other undergraduate institutions,
              and a projected outcome from this project will be the creation of laboratory
              materials that can be adapted for use in other programs.
