Title       : Incorporation of Basic DNA Laboratory Techniques into Science Courses at the
               Two-Year College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9750730

Award Number: 9750730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7114               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna Harrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stark State Col of Tech
	      6200 Frank Avenue N W
	      Canton, OH  447207228    216/494-6170

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While Stark State College of Technology (SSCT) and many other community and
              technical colleges in the U.S. address the scientific and public policy
              dimensions of genetic research and the Human Genome Project in their curricula,
              it is imperative that we also focus on the technical dimensions.  These are
              necessary to foster a truly meaningful understanding of this rapidly expanding
              field of science which will have profound implications on all of our lives in
              the very near future and for many years to come.    SSCT students currently
              have no laboratory experiences related to molecular genetics.  Unfortunately,
              this is a common scenario at many two-year colleges.  With $7,114 of NSF-ILI
              funds, Stark State will develop the project, Incorporation of Basic DNA
              Laboratory Techniques into Science Courses at the Two-Year College.  With the
              purchase of DNA laboratory equipment, several laboratory experiences will be
              added to reinforce the lectures of two courses:  Principles of Microbiology and
              Organic & Biological Chemistry.  These courses are taken by students in the
              College's Nursing, Respiratory Therapy Technology and Medical Laboratory
              Technology programs -- who will be among the next generation of medical
              technicians in the U.S.    The primary objective of the project is to develop a
              greater understanding of molecular genetics, which will enhance
              students/graduates' ability to perform technician-level functions in science
              and health care settings, and participate in the discussion of developing
              issues related to human genetics.  Faculty involved with this project also will
              share their hands-on expertise with area high school and middle school
              teachers.  by expanding SSCT's capabilities in this area.  We will be
              positioned to share project outcomes with faculty at two-year institutions
              throughout the country.
