Title       : Improvement of Microscopes for Material Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9750734

Award Number: 9750734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46903              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. McInerney michael.mcinerney@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Stienstra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Equipment is being used to improve the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and
              the Zeiss optical metallurgical microscope. The SEM is being improved by the
              addition of an Energy Dispersive Spectral (EDS) analyser and digital image
              acquisition capability. The Zeiss is being improved by the addition of
              low-light digital image acquisition capability.    The new equipment is being
              used to make observations from the SEM and the Zeiss easily available to many
              students. These microscopes have not gotten the usage in teaching that they
              should because observations are difficult to make and images are expensive to
              record. This problem is being solved by fitting both microscopes with digital
              image acquisition capabilities.    It is also being used to improve the
              experimental components of materials science courses by including experiments
              that require the determination of surface element composition. With EDS, the
              SEM has the ability to determine surface element composition. This ability
              allows analysis of weld and solder failures and cases studied in Engineering
              Design and Machine Design.    Multidisciplinary student teams that work on
              industrially relevant projects in the field of materials failure are being
              formed. The improved capability for failure analysis given by the new equipment
              upgrades open up opportunities to study industrially relevant projects.
              Problems involving material failure are inherently multidisciplinary, so
              student teams are being formed from several disciplines to tackle them. This
              sort of team interaction is a valuable learning experience.    More students
              are being encouraged to take advanced physics courses. The Physics Department
              wishes to expand into the materials science area as a part of its long-term
              plan to increase enrollment. In particular, they would like physics to be the
              major of choice for students wishing to continue into the semiconductor device
              industry. The new equipment is making the department's material science and
              solid state courses more relevant to this goal .  *
