Title       : Integrating Multimedia-Based Life-Science Applications into College Physics
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a9750638

Award Number: 9750638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62487              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Plano Clark vpc@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Fuller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project improves the general physics courses for life science students
              with a new sequence of introductory college physics laboratories that unites
              intrinsically motivating medical and life science applications with the power
              of scientific computing tools.  This project addresses the two introductory
              college physics courses at the university by (1) intrinsically motivating
              applications and (2) using the computer for data acquisition and analyses.    
              Most introductory college physics students are enrolled in a physics course in
              order to fulfill the requirements for careers in the medical and life sciences.
               Therefore, an entire group of students shares common interests that are
              virtually ignored in the present traditional physics laboratory sequence.  This
              project develops a complete set of lessons that focuses on fundamental physics
              concepts, but also attempts to motivate the study of these concepts based on
              medical and life science applications.     Computer technology is becoming an
              important part of every day life, but no where is this more true than in the
              field of medical sciences.  Essentially all scientific data are collected using
              automated data acquisition systems and analyzed using computers.  If students
              use computing tools for the study of medical and life science applications of
              physics concepts, they have a unique opportunity to develop their awareness of
              and sophistication with the appropriate application of scientific computing
              tools.  In addition, students develop skills at using large electronic
              databases to find needed information.
