Title       : Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometer System for Undergraduate
               Teaching and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9750603

Award Number: 9750603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Felix A. Carroll fecarroll@davidson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Blauch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth F. Beeston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell A. Rhea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Rodger Nutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Davidson College
	      102 North Main St.
	      Davidson, NC  28035    704/894-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer system consisting of
              a Hewlett Packard model 6890 gas chromatograph and a Hewlett Packard model 5973
              mass selective detector.  This instrument system is used to remedy the most
              significant deficiency in our instrument holdings by allowing students to gain
              first-hand experience with mass spectrometry and with gas chromatography mass
              spectrometry.  Students also learn the principles of computer-interfaced
              instrumentation and of spectral database searching.    The gas chromatograph
              mass spectrometer system is used throughout the chemistry curriculum, including
              courses for chemistry majors, other science majors, and non-science-majors.  On
              average, 330 students per year enroll in these courses.  The instrument system
              is used in each course in such a way that there is a progression, both in
              laboratory skills and in conceptual understanding of gas chromatography and
              mass spectrometry, from the introductory courses through the advanced courses. 
                The gas chromatograph mass spectrometer system also enhances many
              student-faculty research projects, including ongoing studies of photochemical
              reactions in micelles, new legends for the synthesis of bridged or caged metal
              complexes, products of metal complex-catalyzed reactions on stabilized clay
              colloids, molecules designed to study the principles of intramolecular
              catalysis, aminogallane precursors for new semiconductor materials, and unusual
              pyridine rinds and brominated allylic and nonallylic alcohols.
