Title       : Mechatronics Experiments in Mechanical Engineering Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9750672

Award Number: 9750672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amitava Jana jana@cluster.engr.subr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mariea C. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mehmet Sozen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel I. Ibekwe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ghanashyam A. Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern University
	      P O Box 9614
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708139614    504/771-4500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is integrating mechatronics experiments in mechanical engineering
              (ME) laboratories and courses. The essence of mechatronics is the application
              of complex decisionmaking to the operation of physical systems. Although
              mechatronics provides many exciting challenges, it is extremely difficult to
              establish as a major or as an option in undergraduate education. This project
              is developing an integrated approach for the dissemination of mechatronics
              principles across the existing undergraduate curriculum using experiments. The
              operation of machines, processes, and systems is being covered with a focused
              perspective in specific courses such as freshman design, programming,
              computer-aided design (CAD), fluid mechanics, heat transfer, measurements,
              material science, and manufacturing. The existing ME laboratories are being
              enhanced with new equipment, including a thermal system, fluid control systems,
              robots, DC motors, stepper motors, model building kits, and toy trains. All
              these physical systems are being controlled by computers through suitable
              electronic interface, and are being tested by using general instruments such as
              an oscilloscope, function generator, amplifier, power supply, and multimeter.
              Using this equipment, several mechatronics experiments are being implemented
              for fluid, heat transfer, measurements, CAD, freshman design, control, and
              mechatronics laboratories. This project is generating the necessary thrust to
              modernize ME courses.  *
