Title       : Managing Divergent Networks: Internet/Intranet and Internetworking Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9750713

Award Number: 9750713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57814              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry V. Mauldin zpmauldin@trident.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Bodkin  (Principal Investigator former)
              Eugene B. Straub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Hobday  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trident Technical College
	      P O Box 118067
	      Charleston, SC  29411    843/574-6195

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is the improvement of networking programs by providing
              hands-on training in router installation and configuration, router operations
              support, network router security, and remote access communications, as well as
              web server deployment, operations, and management.  This approach is giving
              graduates the ability to manage Internet/Intranet and internetworking services
              within today's highly diverse business environments and giving the college the
              ability to respond to curriculum deficiencies and industry demands.  Specific
              project objectives include (1) providing students with the equipment to apply
              the Internet/Intranet and internetwork theory and concepts currently taught in
              the program; (2) exposing students to a variety of Internet/Intranet and
              internetwork service design options, resulting in increased critical-thinking
              and problem-solving skills; and (3) expanding the current networking curriculum
              by introducing four new courses and the accompanying laboratory experiments
              addressing Internet/Intranet and internetwork services.  The laboratory
              equipment is designed to build a wide variety of Internet/Intranet and
              internetworking scenarios that mimic real-world operation.  With the addition
              of new courses and the complementary laboratory exercises, students are being
              provided a responsive, well-rounded, hands-on educational experience in
              information technology.
