Title       : Improvement of Field and Laboratory Instrumentation for Environmental
               Hydrogeology: Part 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9750874

Award Number: 9750874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek G. Zreda marek@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Ferre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D LaBrecque  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Brusseau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P.H.S.W. Kulatilake  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate environmental education for students majoring in hydrology and
              other environmental science and engineering disciplines should be centered
              around practical applications.  Students must understand the critical
              scientific and engineering issues and become proficient in solving
              multidisciplinary problems using high-technology tools.  This project improves
              existing field and laboratory facilities by providing such tools to
              undergraduate students from several departments in three colleges at the
              university.    Undergraduate environmental courses have been taught with
              laboratory components, in which practical aspects of environmental science and
              engineering are emphasized.  This project provides for the field and laboratory
              equipment needed to improve the current disciplinary laboratory courses and to
              initiate new multidisciplinary courses that aim to develop in students the
              ability to integrate knowledge across traditional disciplines.  The facility
              consists of three integrated parts: (1) a field site equipped with
              pumping/injecting wells, monitoring wells, and accessories; (2) a physical and
              chemical laboratory equipped for determination of soil and water properties;
              and (3) a computer laboratory equipped for data acquisition, analysis,
              interpretation, and visualization.  Field experiments deal with water flow,
              water resources evaluation, water chemistry and quality, and geophysical
              methods.  In the laboratory, tests are performed to determine physical and
              chemical properties of soils and chemical composition of water.  The results of
              field and laboratory experiments are analyzed using data reduction and data
              visualization software.  The following courses use the laboratory:
              hydrogeology, subsurface hydrology, water chemistry, vadose zone monitoring
              methods, vadose zone hydrology, groundwater resources evaluation, well logging,
              and environmental monitoring.  *
