Title       : Mating Multimedia and Computer Data Acquisition in The Undergraduate Chemistry
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9750602

Award Number: 9750602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Vorndam vorndam@uscolo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda M. Wilkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Colorado
	      2200 Bonforte Blvd
	      Pueblo, CO  810014901    719/549-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The university's previous general chemistry laboratories suffer from a lack of
              modern equipment.  Laboratories are not tailored to the needs of students. 
              Standard texts in use employ the experimental recipe book approach.  Students
              perceive the experiments as uninteresting and irrelevant to their lives. 
              Laboratories reinforce lecture but do not presage lecture to spark student
              interest in discovery and the scientific method.  Workplace competency issues
              are not emphasized.    A pilot project to remedy these problems through the
              incorporation of computer-controlled data acquisition instrumentation is
              coupled with innovative collaborative exploration experiments.  The new
              laboratory curriculum is structured to introduce concepts that are more fully
              developed in subsequent lecture.  Collaborative learning projects where
              students use shared computer collected data across a local Intranet compose the
              principal laboratory effort.  Experiments are presented using a variety of
              contextual relevance and include digitized video images to supplement and
              enhance the traditional student hands-on laboratory experience.  An ultimate
              goal, upon extension of the pilot project, is the creation of a laboratory text
              and accompanying software tailored to the needs of students.  The student
              population is 23 percent Hispanic and 2 percent other minorities.  A typical
              general chemistry class may have over 60 percent biology majors.    Students
              actually perform experiments based on traditional topics; however, they explore
              and discover, guided and facilitated by the technology and their peer groups. 
              This laboratory-directed approach employs computerized data acquisition
              instrumentation and student team collaboration and holds promise for solving
              the Nation's science education problems.  *
