Title       : Development of Environmental-Problem Solving Curriculum: Acquisition of GC/MS
               and Sample Preparation Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9750477

Award Number: 9750477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62015              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Libes susan@coastal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coastal Carolina U
	      P O Box 261954
	      Conway, SC  295286054    843/347-3161

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project enables the implementation of modern environmental chemical
              analyses in the university's area of emphasis in environmental chemistry, which
              is offered as an option within the bachelor's chemistry degree program.  The
              program's goal is to prepare students for careers in environmental monitoring,
              assessment, and industrial ecology research and development by teaching them
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) methods of environmental analysis
              and assessment.  This is done in two lecture/laboratory courses and a required
              independent research project.  Students learn environmental assessment
              techniques by working as a group to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement
              (EIS) using National Environmental Policy Act (1970) guidelines.  Samples are
              collected and analyzed to obtain data in support of the EIS.  The only
              inorganic priority pollutant that had not been measured is Hg, and hence this
              project provides a vapor generator accessory to be used on an existing AAS. 
              The project also provides a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to enable
              measurement of specific organic compounds including chlorinated pesticides,
              PCBs, PAHs, and petroleum hydrocarbons.  Other new equipment upgrades sample
              preparation procedures to improve safety, efficiency, and analyte yield and
              reduce the environmental impact of the analysis itself.  This equipment
              includes a microwave-assisted digestor, a grinding mill, a tissue homogenizer,
              a freeze drier, a sonic dismembrator, solid-phase extraction units, and
              equipment to heat and recover solvents from Kuderna-Danish evaporators.  The
              new laboratory experiences can be added to the university's Environmental
              Chemistry Laboratory manual, which is in use at other institutions.  No other
              undergraduate teaching manual is available for teaching USEPA methods.  The new
              equipment can also be used in mandatory student research projects, whose
              results are traditionally presented off campus.  *
