Title       : An Undergraduate Parallel/Distributed Computing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9750648

Award Number: 9750648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82421              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. Ben-Avi benavi@cooper.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, the Department of Electrical Engineering (EE) continues to
              update and expand its Undergraduate Parallel/Distributed Computing Laboratory. 
              The project supports existing curriculum offerings and widens the use of the
              technology by using it as a base in other, non-parallel-focused courses, such
              as Databases, and Artificial Intelligence.    Modern computers connected by a
              LAN can provide a parallel virtual machine with sufficient reliability that the
              parallel/distributed techniques can become an ordinary, everyday tool rather
              than just the focus of special interest courses.  Old transputer boards have
              become obsolete and almost impossible to use after 6 years of heavy
              utilization, and this project is designed to retain the
              parallel/message-passing paradigm in the EE's curriculum.    Many algorithms
              have portions that could be executed at the same time if facilities to do this
              exist.   Except for expensive special purpose machines, computers have
              traditionally been SISD (Single Instruction Single Data) processors, executing
              instructions without the possibility of simultaneous execution.  On a parallel
              machine or facility, such as this new heterogeneous PVM (Parallel Virtual
              Machine), students are able to execute parallel simultaneous instructions over
              separate vectors or partitions of data.  A modern EE curriculum should include
              the application of parallel/distributed techniques to problems at the frontiers
              of computing speed such as image or speech analysis, neural nets, modeling, and
              graphics.    The machines must also be the object of study and be available for
              student experimentation.  A reconfigurable heterogeneous PVM lends maximum
              flexibility to the laboratory, at modest cost, and uses existing facilities. 
              The refurbished laboratory is immediately available owing to prior expertise in
              this area, the readiness of space, current computers, and extant LAN
              facilities.  *
