Title       : A Hands-On Data Communications Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9750823

Award Number: 9750823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9718               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. De Palma depalma@gonzaga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. McFarland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gonzaga University
	      502 East Boone Avenue
	      Spokane, WA  992580087    509/323-6102

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is improving the education of computer science and engineering
              students in the field of data communications by providing a model for a
              hands-on computer network laboratory.  The rapid rate of growth in the area of
              digital communications and networks will cause a shortage of knowledgeable
              personnel who are capable of administering computer networks and services. 
              This demand will be felt first in technical industry, and then in the general
              corporate world.  It will be the responsibility of colleges and universities to
              prepare their computer science graduates for the coming advances in networking
              technology and the practical issues surrounding the current communication
              technologies.    To solidify the theory traditionally taught in data
              communications courses, the project is developing a laboratory to put theory
              into practice.  In the same way that a chemistry student will better understand
              their discipline from practice in the laboratory, a hands-on laboratory is
              essential for a computer science student's understanding of network topics,
              including remote procedure calls, spanning tree adaptive routing, dynamic
              versus static routing, routing information protocol, hardware interface
              configuration, cabling issues, bandwidth and timing limitations, network file
              systems, protocol analysis, port-based network services, and peripheral
              configuration (such as networked printers and routers).  The hands-on
              laboratory is directed at upper-division computer science and engineering
              students.
