Title       : Manufacturing Process Laboratory/Instructional Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9750788

Award Number: 9750788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance W. Ziemian cziemian@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project develops an integrated laboratory to facilitate and strengthen the
              current undergraduate instruction of manufacturing processes within a
              Mechanical Engineering (ME) curriculum.   Along with the college's materials
              testing equipment and computer-aided engineering and design facility, the new
              Manufacturing Processes Laboratory allows for vital hands-on experience in
              conjunction with the study of manufacturing processes, while emphasizing the
              integration of manufacturing with other key disciplines of the product
              realization process, including product design, stress analysis, and material
              selection.    The main incentive motivating the development of the
              Manufacturing Processes Laboratory is the lack of a physical laboratory
              experience associated with the previous junior-level Manufacturing Processes
              class.  The new facility allows students to learn about manufacturing processes
              through hands-on experience and participation in the fabrication and inspection
              of parts.  The equipment thus serves to provide the vital link between theory
              and application and creates a more comprehensive and interesting learning
              environment.    With this knowledge serving as a prerequisite, the students are
              given the opportunity to use the laboratory facility in the following
              additional courses:  (1) Capstone Senior Design, offering a full year
              design-to-fabrication experiment to ME seniors, (2) Computer-Integrated
              Manufacturing, a proposed senior elective where the issues of computer-aided
              design, manufacturing, and quality control are addressed, and (3) Science of
              Materials, where the analysis of thermoplastics and their solidification
              properties has been without the benefit of physical demonstration.  In
              addition, the new equipment can be introduced to freshmen engineering students
              in Exploring Engineering, a course providing an introduction to basic
              engineering concepts and issues.
