Title       : Applying Digital Technologies to the Biology Laboratory Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9750553

Award Number: 9750553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64735              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. McShaffrey mcshaffd@mcnet.marietta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Spilatro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marietta College
	      
	      Marietta, OH  45750    614/373-4643

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biology is enhancing the teaching of data acquisition,
              analysis, and presentation in its curriculum.  These goals are being achieved
              by the introduction of digital instrumentation into student laboratories and
              the availability of these technologies for student independent research
              projects.  The department currently emphasizes hands-on, investigative
              laboratory experiences in introductory and advanced laboratories.  Digital
              instrumentation and computers are modernizing data acquisition and analysis and
              creating greater opportunities for interactions between students and
              instructors.  A networked laboratory of 16 Pentium computers with associated
              hardware is being established.  Students are using the laboratory for data
              analysis and manipulation as well as presentation preparation.  New
              instrumentation includes analytical sensors and probes interfaced with older
              generation computers with upgrades.  This equipment is being used in
              introductory-level laboratories to introduce students to techniques for
              continuous data logging and basic statistical and graphing software, and by
              upper-level students needing to log pH, conductivity, temperature, or other
              parameters.  Other digital instrumentation is being purchased for use in
              upper-level courses and student independent research projects.  Students are
              learning the modern methodologies of ultraviolet/visible spectrophotometry,
              densitometry, and photomicroscopy using a digital camera and image analysis
              software.  Application of digital instrumentation can result in enhancements to
              laboratory investigations of photosynthesis, yeast respiration, rat tissue
              histology, plant tissue culture, electrophoresis and immunoblotting, metabolite
              analysis, and ecological microcosm construction.  Overall, the project is
              strengthening the pedagogy of the scientific process and greatly expanding
              opportunities for student undergraduate research.  *
