Title       : Integrating Science and Mathematics -- A Laboratory Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9750853

Award Number: 9750853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane D. Gant jgant@fccj.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              M J. Bain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clare C. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter P. Mullen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Aidinejad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fl Cmty Col Jacksonville
	      501 West State Street
	      Jacksonville, FL  322024030    904/632-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is improving undergraduate education in science and mathematics
              through the integration of scientific content and statistics in a hands-on
              laboratory environment centering on real-world problems. With emphasis on
              increasing the number of women and minorities in science and mathematics, the
              project is providing a setting in which students are studying in cooperative
              learning teams taught by faculty from various scientific fields.    The
              laboratory is designed around workstations, each serving four students. Each
              workstation houses two major pieces of equipment a standard microscope and a
              personal computer with built-in CD ROM drives with probes to conduct online
              experiments in the sciences. A fluorescent microscope and a gas chromatography
              mass spectrometer is being used by all students. The equipment is permitting
              guided investigations of a real-world problem:  the possible causes of lung
              cancer in Jacksonville, which have resulted in the city having the highest
              incidence of lung cancer of any U.S. city.    The new scientific equipment is
              permitting analyses of air and water samples for possible contaminants.
              Computers are allowing for the manipulation of data and access to the Internet
              and CD ROMs are permitting simulated experiments. The laboratory is meeting
              requirements for laboratory experience for students enrolled in special
              sections of introductory courses in biology, chemistry, physics, and
              statistics.  *
