Title       : Components and Systems for Communications: An UndergraduateDesign Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9750993

Award Number: 9750993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda B. Katehi Katehi@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabriel M. Rebeiz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian E. Gilchrist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kamal Sarabandi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project introduces a new concept in the undergraduate curriculum through
              the development of a Design Laboratory that aims at providing students with the
              fundamental concepts of communications system and component design. The novel
              approach intends to introduce a new teaching and learning experience based on
              the concept of a complete exposure to the engineering design cycle. This Design
              laboratory initially has two associated senior-level courses and senior
              independent design courses but may be expanded to provide a nucleus for
              developing other modern engineering courses that focus on enhanced learning by
              means of novel visualization and hands-on approaches such as fabrication and
              measurements.    This project establishes two Design Laboratories that allow 50
              senior-level students per year to develop a strong background on system- and
              component-level engineering. During these courses, the students use
              state-of-the-art design and measurement tools and come in contact with
              engineers from industry through industry affiliation program developed
              specifically for this laboratory. The teaching effort evolves around a
              practical communications system such as a 2.5-GHz down-link and learning is
              accomplished through lectures and experiments that follow the signal flow graph
              of this typical communications system. Teaching is augmented by analysis and
              design tools currently used by industry and state-of-the-art fabrication and
              measurement equipment.  The integration of system and component concepts and
              their application to a real system makes this effort unique in the department
              and a model for other courses.  This laboratory provides the students with a
              strong background in the area of communications and with a motivation for
              further study. Furthermore, throughout the course development and during
              teaching, industry plays an important role in casting young engineers with
              combined practical experience and strong foundation in basic science concepts.
