Title       : HF and Microwave Laboratory Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9750676

Award Number: 9750676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Smith eedept@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darko Kajfez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Pressure to use up-to-date technology mandates that network analyzer (NA)
              measurements be included in high-frequency (HF) laboratories for electrical
              engineers.  Therefore, this project enhances a HF laboratory through
              introduction of network analyzers and through representation of standing waves
              on the NAs by reprogramming the controllers to maintain this proven approach to
              teaching.  With the recent development of vector NAs that possess the
              capability of measuring both magnitude and phase, a new era in measurement
              metrology has begun.  NAs based on self-contained, microprocessor-driven
              instruments have, to some extent, taken over the role from manual measurements.
               The ability to characterize a component in terms of magnitude and phase
              changes the methods used in design and development and, thus, how the student
              or practicing engineer thinks about and visualizes these processes.  Vector
              measurements are not usually covered in undergraduate HF and microwave
              laboratories, primarily because of cost and a reluctance by instructors to move
              away from slotted line techniques because of their intuitive visual
              representation of standing waves.  It is possible to emulate the classical
              standing-wave pattern on the NA display.  This requires developing new computer
              program modules.  Therefore, the intuitive advantage of the slotted line
              technique can be preserved even in the future laboratory environment provided
              through this project.    With new, low-cost NAs and customized displays,
              students can be educated in current measurement metrology employed in industry
              while teaching is based on intuitive concepts of standing waves.  This combined
              NA environment can be employed to enhance learning in laboratories that can
              serve as a model for future laboratory development.  *
