Title       : "Integration of GC-MS into the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9750833

Award Number: 9750833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Perry C. Reeves reeves@chemistry.acu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim L. Pamplin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric L. Hardegree  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Abilene Christian Univ
	      
	      Abilene, TX  79699    915/677-1911

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is based on the need for a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer
              (GC/MS) system for use in the improvement of the undergraduate chemistry
              curriculum.  Theoretical discussions of mass spectrometry, as well as actual
              use of the instrument, can be incorporated into most of the lower level
              courses.  The basic principles of mass spectrometry and its use in determining
              isotopic distributions of various elements can be introduced in the
              freshman-level General Chemistry course.  Also in this course (taken by all
              pre-health-professions majors), the use of GC/MS in biomedical screening and in
              the detection of hazardous materials in water can be discussed and experiments
              conducted.  In the Organic Chemistry course, GC/MS can be used to determine the
              composition of various natural products and to determine the identity of
              various halogenated hydrocarbons, as well as structural isomers of esters.  The
              junior/senior-level Analytical Chemistry courses focus on theoretical aspects
              of the instrumentation and detailed analyses of fragmentation patterns.  In
              Physical Chemistry, diffusion rates of liquids and gases are measured.  The
              department is also in the process of developing a bachelor's degree program
              with an Environmental Chemistry emphasis.  One of the components of this
              program is a course in which analyses of water and soil samples are conducted
              according to EPA guidelines.  Thus, this project affects a wide range of
              students (including both chemistry and non-chemistry-majors), whose career
              fields make use of GC/MS technology.  *
