Title       : Physics and Exercise and Sport Science: An Interdisciplinary Approach to the
               Study of Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9750945

Award Number: 9750945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43054              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Davidson rdavidson@Acad.Ursinus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Bashus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tina D. Wailgum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Delwyn C. Engstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ursinus College
	      Office of the Treasurer
	      Collegeville, PA  19426    215/489-4111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students should experience physics as an exciting experimental science with
              applications extending beyond the laboratory or classroom setting.  Students
              often believe that physics is too complicated, and they fail to recognize
              relevant applications.  The interdisciplinary approach being developed by the
              Physics and Exercise and Sport Science Departments allows the student's
              perspective of physics to expand beyond a symmetrical frictionless model, to a
              model that has connections to the real world.    Introductory physics,
              kinesiology, biomechanics, and upper-level research courses in both departments
              now have opportunities to experimentally examine and analyze complicated human
              motion through the use of digitized video applications.  More than 40 percent
              of the students are affected by the interdisciplinary approach that is
              currently being developed.       The project provides a PC-based motion
              analysis system that enables students to more efficiently and effectively
              understand and apply physics principles and theories.  Current protocols,
              including manual tracing, are long, tedious and often difficult processes.  The
              old system has not allowed for the analysis of more complex movements and
              integration of related force data.  The new system allows students to make
              efficient use of laboratory experiences with the focus on learning rather than
              preparing to learn.  *
