Title       : Development of an Environmental Chemical Engineering Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9750523

Award Number: 9750523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Abraham martin.abraham@utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. LeBlanc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The resolution of today's environmental problems requires a fundamental
              knowledge of mass transfer, reaction engineering, and separation processes. 
              These technical areas are the foundation of the chemical engineering
              curriculum.  Chemical engineers will thus play an integral role in protecting
              the environment in the 21st century.  However, environmental engineering is
              commonly housed in civil engineering, where it grew out of sewage treatment,
              wastewater treatment, and landfill efforts. The future of environmental
              engineering, and major developments in the field, lies in the realm of chemical
              engineering.  The development of an Environmental Chemical Engineering
              Laboratory (ECEL) is one step in a departmental initiative to provide
              undergraduate chemical engineering students with a thorough grounding in the
              principles of environmental engineering.    Within the ECEL, a series of waste
              treatment processes are investigated.  With the media in which the waste is
              located as an organizing tool, this project is primarily concerned with
              experiments investigating air pollution control, wastewater treatment, and
              hazardous waste redemption.  As a result, the experiments are demonstration and
              performance of an automotive catalytic converter, supercritical fluid
              extraction of solid waste, chemical oxidation of process wastewater, adsorption
              of aqueous contaminants onto activated carbon, and reverse osmosis for the
              recovery of low-concentration hazardous waste.  Each of these experiments not
              only illustrate environmental applications, but are based on the fundamental
              principles of chemical engineering.  Taken together, this group of experiments
              represent the synergy of chemical and environmental engineering.  *
