Title       : Integrated Thermal Science Laboratory Instruction with Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9750571

Award Number: 9750571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36498              (Estimated)
Investigator: N.V. Suryanarayana nvsuryan@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K.V. Rao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Previous curricula have provided undergraduate students very little laboratory
              experience in the thermal sciences.  To many students, thermal sciences is an
              abstraction with many equations and block diagrams.  Societal attitudes impede
              underrepresented groups from entering engineering programs.  Through this
              project, an integrated thermal science laboratory is set up for undergraduate
              and precollege students, where basic principles and component and system
              operations are illustrated through several systems employing commercially
              available hardware (system denotes a collection of components to achieve a
              desired output).  Additionally, air compressors, small engines, small turbines,
              diesel fuel injection pumps, and so on are available to the students to
              disassemble and assemble the equipment.      The objectives of the laboratory
              are (1) to demonstrate the basic principles in the context of systems and to
              demonstrate component and system operation, (2) to expose the students to
              current technology in instrumentation, data acquisition, and processing, and
              yet retain some of the simpler methods of measurement, (3) to involve
              precollege students in the study of engineering systems, and (4) to encourage
              the students to disassemble and assemble hardware to make the study of
              engineering exciting.  The laboratory is introduced as an elective course to
              departmental students and opened to precollege students who participate in the
              many summer programs at the university (with emphasis on underrepresented
              groups).      The effectiveness of the laboratory can be evaluated through
              questionnaires at the beginning and end of the laboratory course and by
              tracking the precollege students to determine if participation in the
              laboratory has an effect on their interest in studying engineering.  The
              results of the study can be presented before an ASEE session and by making the
              laboratory manual available to other institutions.  *
