Title       : Implementing Experiential Education in the Anatomy and Physiology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9750521

Award Number: 9750521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24477              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Witz bwwitz@naz.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew J. Temple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nazareth College Rochester
	      4245 East Avenue
	      Rochester, NY  146183703    716/586-2525

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Biology Department is implementing experiential learning in anatomy and
              physiology through the use of computers and other digital technology.  The new
              equipment, coupled with an on-line laboratory manual and Internet access in the
              laboratories, allow both major and nonmajor biology students to explore
              physiological and anatomical concepts in both supervised and independent
              laboratory experiences.    The equipment is used to meet two identified
              curricular needs.  The first need is for students to become active participants
              in physiological experiments by using computer interfaces to record, compare,
              and analyze data.  A single MacLab station has been used with great success;
              however, it has been limited to instructor demonstrations.  Four new mobile
              computer workstations, each equipped with digital data acquisition technology,
              can be used in conjunction with an on-line laboratory manual to allow students
              to have hands-on experience in physiological investigation.  The second need is
              for students to have the ability to learn sophisticated anatomical
              relationships by using a computer-based anatomical package and digital camera
              to capture, modify, and link three-dimensional anatomical images and to record
              dissections.  Students are able to compare homologous structures from
              representatives of multiple taxa.  The equipment also allows biology faculty to
              help students link form and function in physiology and anatomy courses.    The
              project greatly enriches introductory-level courses for nonmajors, many of whom
              are preservice teachers.  By modeling computer-enhanced instruction and
              experiential learning for preservice teachers, the project has a significant
              impact on science teaching at the K 12 level.  It also allows biology majors to
              do more sophisticated senior research projects in physiology and anatomy.
