Title       : Enhancing the Undergraduate Experience With Innovative LaserFluorescence
               Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9750636

Award Number: 9750636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanette K. Rice jkrice@gsvms2.cc.gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. LoBue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Georgia Southern University requests matching funds to purchase a modern
              laser-based fluorescence spectrometer. This purchase will enhance middle and
              upper division elements of our dynamic undergraduate curriculum, and will
              provide experimental capabilities not currently available at this institution,
              or in the entire South Georgia region. Several new experiments, as well as some
              of a more traditional nature, are proposed. This instrument provides a unique
              opportunity for undergraduates to investigate chemical phenomena on the
              picosecond timescale in addition to being able to perform standard fluorometric
              investigations ALL within the same routine, user-friendly environment. Student
              exposure to the instrument will begin at the sophomore level and continue
              throughout the chemistry curriculum, allowing for critically needed enhancement
              of our existing upper-level classes. A new course will be developed as a direct
              result of a successful proposal. Further, dozens of chemistry students and
              faculty from area universities will have access, allowing the benefits to reach
              far beyond the confines of GSU. Finally, our department is committed to local
              outreach, frequently hosting K-12 students on campus for interactiw
              demonstrations. Lasers are traditionally excellent captivators of student
              interest and their presence will further enliven these visits. A successful
              proposal will bring much needed modern technology to a strong department
              composed primarily of young and enthusiastic chemistry educators committed not
              only to the highest quality of chemistry education, but also to innovation and
              reform in the discipline.  *
