Title       : Undergraduate Laboratory Development for Computer Architecture and Real-Time
               Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9750516

Award Number: 9750516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yann-Hang Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jih-Kwon Peir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To project its computer engineering education program for the needs in the 21st
              century, the Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) department is
              developing a curriculum enhancement plan.  The plan calls for an emphasis on
              system design and integration methodologies that include the use of
              computer-aided design (CAD) tools, hardware prototyping with field programmable
              gate arrays (FPGA), and hardware/software co-design.  In the center of the
              plan, an undergraduate computer hardware design and real-time embedded systems
              laboratory is established.    The new laboratory consists of PC workstations
              for hardware design and implementation, as well as for embedded system
              development.  Included also are CAD tools, FPGA rapid-prototyping systems, test
              instruments, and other necessary laboratory instruments.  An existing
              undergraduate computer architecture course can be restructured to take
              advantage of the new laboratory.  Laboratory projects, based on FPGA devices
              and PCs PCI bus platform, enable students to gain hands-on experience in
              designing key architecture components.  A new course on real-time embedded
              system design can be added into the curriculum.  Using the laboratory
              facilities, the students can revise a real-time kernel, implement real-time
              servers and device drivers, and design embedded systems for data acquisition
              and I/O control.    This new laboratory and curriculum improvement plan can be
              vital to the computer engineering program of the CISE Department which had no
              existing hardware design facility.  The department is firmly committed to
              strengthen the hardware development and hardware/software co-design components
              and to continually incorporate leading technology into its curriculum.  All
              Computer Engineering students can use the laboratory effectively, learn
              practical design approaches, and thus be well prepared to undertake system
              design tasks in the coming century.
