Title       : Microcomputer-Controlled Automated Nuclear Counting for Advanced Physics
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9750545

Award Number: 9750545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Desmond C. Cook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is an innovative project which introduces nuclear counting techniques for
              the study of materials into a senior undergraduate physics laboratory course at
              a typical research university.  The specific goal of the project is to instruct
              physics majors in the use of nuclear counting instruments and their use with
              computer controlled automated data acquisition system.  Through the Virginia
              Physics Consortium, students from our regional universities and teachers
              undergoing re-certification, are also participating in the project. 
              Additionally, students from Old Dominion's other science and engineering
              departments are being integrated into the project through the Materials Science
              Program.  The nuclear counting instruction are aimed at developing and
              improving experimental skills in Nuclear Physics as well as Condensed Matter
              and Materials Physics.  Experiences with the nuclear instrumentation are being
              obtained by using a popular nuclear resonance probe to measure low temperature
              microscopic magnetic properties of some common iron oxides.  The project is
              being introduced in order to train science and engineering students who are now
              finding employment at our local research affiliations, The Jefferson National
              Laboratory (formerly CEBAF) and NASA Langely.  In addition, since many of our
              graduating seniors are entering our expanding research program in Nuclear
              Physics, we see this need as an important improvement to our undergraduate
              program.  This undergraduate project meets the goals of our recently revised
              undergraduate curriculum by exposing graduating seniors to a near research
              experience.   The project will also continue to allow our senior students to be
              involved with oral and poster presentations and possibly publication of some of
              their original findings.  The project is a novel role model for senior level
              undergraduate instruction using inexpensive nuclear counting techniques for
              investigations in Condensed Matter and Materials Physics.   *
