Title       : Enrichment of Comparative Physiology Courses Using Modern Physiological
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9750854

Award Number: 9750854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24380              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Rivers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola College in Maryland
	      4501 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212102601    301/323-1010

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              New research tools available to physiologists working in academia and industry
              have lead to major breakthroughs in our understanding of physiological
              mechanisms.  The college, like many medium-sized, liberal arts schools, offers
              a very good program in traditional physiology, but offers courses that provide
              only limited opportunities for gaining hands-on experience using these modern
              physiological techniques.  Thus, many of the graduates lack a thorough
              education in physiology that is necessary to succeed in graduate and
              professional programs.  The Department of Biology is cmrrecting this curriculum
              deficiency by revising its current Comparative Physiology course to offer a
              strong laboratory component that emphasizes modern physiological approaches to
              basic biological questions.    The new physiology laboratory concentrates on
              providing practical experience for biology majors and accommodates students
              with broad interests and backgrounds.  The laboratory uses a goal-oriented
              approach, with students working cooperatively in small groups to answer a basic
              biological question.  The student teams formulate hypotheses, develop protocols
              from the primary research literature, and conduct the experiments that they
              design.  Students completing this course should display an increased interest
              and curiosity toward biology and be equipped with skills essential for any area
              of the biological sciences.   The course is intended to enhance instruction in
              upper-level biology courses, prepare students for independent research
              programs, and serve as models for similar efforts at other undergraduate
              institutions.
