Title       : The Environmental, Health, and Safety Resource Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9750935

Award Number: 9750935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis K. George dennis.george@wku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Assessing the hazards faced by workers and the local community due to various
              industrial processes is an effort that requires extensive technical
              information.  The risk assessor must accumulate and evaluate qualitative data
              regarding the nature of each industrial process being assessed.  The
              information required to make a reasonable assessment includes (1) a knowledge
              of the workers' interactions with the process; (2) the chemicals emanating from
              the process; (3) the toxicological effects, and environmental fate, of these
              chemicals; the potential for, and the result of, the escape of these chemicals
              into the community environment  through the air, water, or waste; (5) any
              physical hazards associated with the process (e.g., ionizing radiation); (6)
              and any effective risk reduction measures.  Significant effort and
              investigative abilities are essential in obtaining this information.    The
              process of competent environmental risk assessment is a skill learned by
              students in the Environmental Science curriculum. The database resources
              necessary to effectively research specific information about industrial
              processes and the associated risks are essential to the curriculum. It is
              essential that students are able to practice these skills in either laboratory
              scenarios or real-world projects.  The Environmental Safety and Health Resource
              Laboratory being developed in this project consists of computers and
              CD-ROM/software databases. It is providing a variety of excellent resources
              from which specific environmental risk assessment searches can be launched. 
              The laboratory is also serving as a significant resource to the local
              industrial community as students assist local environmental health and safety
              professionals in obtaining this critical information about processes in their
              facilities.  *
