Title       : Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Instrumentation to Enhance Project-Based
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9750895

Award Number: 9750895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34692              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Acheson eacheson@post.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A GC/MS system, with mass spectral libraries and complementary mass spectral
              tutorial software, is being used in a project-based lab curriculum. Students
              work on realistic projects from the day they enter the lab in first semester
              General Chemistry. By the time they are seniors, they are ready to tackle true
              real-world problems that are open-ended and ill-defined. In order to
              successfully solve these problems, students need the sophisticated tools
              necessary to bring these problems to a complete, professionally satisfying
              closure. Although GC, FT-IR, and NMR are useful techniques for characterizing
              compounds, GC/MS allows students to positively identify unknowns, reaction
              products, by-products, and impurities. The Instrumental Analysis lab course is
              being restructured with the acquisition of GC/MS to incorporate Problem-Based
              Learning. Real-world problems that require GC/MS and that reflect the concerns
              of the local community are being developed with the help of an outside panel of
              industrial experts. These projects in particular engage students in community
              outreach activities, a model that can be emulated at other institutions. The
              GC/MS system also is used in the undergraduate research program. Acquisition of
              GC/MS enhances the research program by putting another powerful problem-solving
              tool at the disposal of students, better preparing them for the transition to
              graduate school or industry. Finally, we are training our senior chemistry
              majors to act as GC/MS student technical experts. These technical experts
              assist lower division and research students who need to use GC/MS in their
              projects but who do not necessarily need to learn the intricacies of running a
              GC/MS. This model, too, can be emulated at other institutions. Dissemination of
              our approach to incorporating GC/MS into the curriculum will be accomplished at
              regional meetings and through chemical education journals.  *
