Title       : Inprovement of Force Measurement Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9750831

Award Number: 9750831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24238              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina L. Bloebaum clb@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Rae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Baruch B. Lieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering is improving an
              undergraduate education and research laboratory for force balance measurements.
               The multiphase development effort involves the manufacture of a new test
              section for the low-speed wind tunnel to permit force balance testing of true
              three-dimensional models in the tunnel; the purchase of a six-component
              (degree-of-freedom) sting balance with data acquisition and visualization
              system; and the incorporation of force balance-based experimental and virtual
              laboratories in key undergraduate courses and student projects to enhance
              students' preparation to enter the workforce.  The project initially targets
              first-year through fourth-year undergraduate students within the mechanical
              engineering and aerospace engineering programs and expands to include high
              school students.  The establishment of an undergraduate research program
              involving an exciting project to test the forces and torques associated with
              flow around a football the results of which provide substantial insights to
              aerodynamic flow about rotating bodies that transfer to numerous fields within
              engineering represents a truly unique laboratory problem.  There are
              significant pedagogical aspects of the project that make it uniquely suited for
              transference to other universities.  The football is an exciting application
              that motivates students to learn, question, and reason.  It is used to
              demonstrate basic aerodynamic concepts and introduce new ones in a way never
              before presented.  Dissemination can occur through direct mailings to
              undergraduate program committee chairs of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
              Departments to inform them of a web page address describing the project(s) and
              most recent developments, a journal article about the undergraduate Football
              Flight research project in the ASEE Journal of Engineering Education, and a
              more technical paper in the AIAA Journal.
