Title       : NSF Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement Program in Microprocessor and
               Intelligent Control Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  1999    
File        : a9750944

Award Number: 9750944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Addisu Tesfaye   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ji C. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guna S. Selvaduray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Modern mechanical systems are becoming increasingly reliant on sophisticated
              methods of sensing, signal processing, and control technology.  Within this
              industry, rapid growth in terms of function, flexibility, and reliability is
              being paralleled with a comparable rise in complexity.  From the human resource
              point of view, the implication of this trend is clear:  college education must
              appropriately advance the technical level of undergraduate education in order
              to serve the needs of modern industry.  As part of a concerted college effort
              to meet this challenge, an application-oriented laboratory on microprocessor
              and intelligent control applications is provided to enhance undergraduate
              hands-on experience by providing exercises that emphasize detailed modeling,
              basic controller design, simulation, practical considerations, and
              implementation; simultaneously, to expose students to current and emerging
              technology (e.g., smart instrumentation and actuation using piezoelectric
              elements/shape memory alloy and intelligent control systems design for instance
              based on fuzzy logic); and to improve students' integrative thinking and
              teamwork skills through interdisciplinary faculty instruction, team formations,
              and open-ended assignments.      The new laboratory is the accompanying
              laboratory to an existing undergraduate course entitled Electromechanical
              System Control and Microprocessor Applications.  While the emphasis is to serve
              this course, the facility of the new laboratory affects several other
              undergraduate and graduate courses within the department.   New equipment
              includes one Windows NT server, one printer, multi-application boards, training
              units in microcontroller applications, 1/0 interface boards, real-time kernel
              and control toolbox software, dc motors, and servo amplifiers.  *
