Title       : Professional Design Laboratory - Bridging the Gap Between Classroom and Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9750572

Award Number: 9750572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha E. Sloan masloan@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Noel N. Schulz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan R. Hambley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Schulz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis O. Wiitanen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An improved educational model for preparing graduates to enter the engineering
              profession addresses the problem that past graduates had been inadequately
              prepared to enter the engineering workplace.  The project objectives are to
              instill the attributes of professional design engineers into engineering
              seniors.  These attributes include team skills, interpersonal communication
              skills, leadership abilities, and an appreciation of diversity.  A systems
              perspective; a commitment to quality, to timeliness, and to continuous
              improvement; and sound technical knowledge are also sought.  Specifically, a
              Professional Design Laboratory specializing in communication systems and
              modeled after the industrial work setting is being established in the
              Electrical Engineering Department.  The key attribute of this unique facility
              is the establishment of a new environment of expectations and performance for
              the students.  The laboratory provides a rich complement of resources to
              support open-ended design projects proposed by industrial partners. 
              Collaborative learning, practice with interpersonal communication skills, and
              hands-on learning are key features of the student experience.  Students spend 2
              full days per week in the laboratory modeled after the industry work setting. 
              Besides a new model for engineering laboratory education, several video-taped
              instructional modules are being prepared, including those on written and oral
              presentations, and digital communication systems.  Each module consists of
              video, notes, references to literature, problems, and laboratory exercises. 
              The modules can be made available to educators at other universities.    *
