Title       : Integrated Bioprocess Experiments for the Undergraduate Chemical Engineering
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9750570

Award Number: 9750570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21286              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Odde   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Caspary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward R. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Shonnard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The university was originally established with a vision to support the
              industries of Michigan and the upper midwest.  In the Department of Chemical
              Engineering, this has meant supporting the traditional chemical processing
              industries that are vital to the region.  Yet, each year chemical engineers
              enter a marketplace more technically diverse than it was in years past.  Today,
              a greater percentage of chemical engineers are finding employment in the areas
              of environmental engineering, electronics fabrication, and biochemical
              processing.  To meet this growing diversity, the department has committed
              substantial resources to a new biochemical engineering emphasis, which was
              recognized in particular because of both student interest and regional demand
              for engineers trained in bioprocessing.  To initiate this effort, the
              department has added two new faculty with expertise in biochemical engineering.
               These faculty have responded by developing new biochemical engineering courses
              for the students that will provide the needed classroom training.  The missing
              ingredient in the development has clearly been the lack of hands-on, laboratory
              experience in biochemical engineering.    To meet this need, this project
              establishes a pair of integrated bioprocess engineering experiments that allows
              students to both produce a biochemical from raw materials and purify it using
              industrially relevant bioseparation techniques.  The new system, L-lysine
              production by bacterial fermentation and recovery by ion-exchange
              chromatography, gives students first-hand experience with a complete
              pilot-scale facility, while also serving to demonstrate the application of
              chemical and biochemical engineering fundamentals.  Thus, the project serves
              not only the students interested in biochemical engineering but also the
              students interested in traditional chemical engineering since it provides a
              unique system for studying chemical process fundamentals such as heat and mass
              transfer, process control, and chemical kinetics.  This project  builds on the
              department's multimillion-dollar chemical processing pilot-plant facilities by
              integrating a bioprocessing pilot-plant facility.       *
