Title       : Electron Spin: An Important Experimental Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9750591

Award Number: 9750591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34143              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Desrochers partickd@cc1.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Experimental support is needed to augment the treatment of electron spin in
              lecture courses.  This project is focused on the experimental verification of
              electron spin concepts across the chemistry curriculum using an electron
              paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer and a magnetic susceptibility
              balance.  Two purposes will be served:  (1) experimental reinforcement of the
              fundamental concept of electron spin and (2) improved understanding of the
              breadth of magnetic resonance spectroscopies (EPR and NMR).  Specific EPR and
              magnetic susceptibility experiments are proposed for six different chemistry
              courses:  Intermediate Inorganic, Organic Spectroscopy, Physical Chemistry,
              Advanced Inorganic, Biochemistry, and Advanced Analytical.  These experiments
              will demonstrate specific electron spin concept such as magnetism and electron
              configuration of transition metal centers, hyperfine coupling in organic
              radicals and transition metal complexes, and molecular orbital theory.  A
              unique undergraduate biochemistry EPR experiment involving the paramagnetic
              copper center of plastocyanin extracted from spinach leaves is proposed. 
              Chemistry majors and minors, including some pre-service secondary science
              teachers, will be most affected by this project.  A primary reason for the
              scarcity of electron spin experiments at most institutions is lack of proper
              instrumentation and the lack of cohesive plan to implement such experiments in
              the curriculum.  The proposed multi-course approach to electron spin
              experiments provides such a plan and will be shared nationally through
              appropriate presentations and publications and shared locally through a
              workshop once this project has been initiated.
