Title       : Introducing "Chiroscience" in the Organic Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9750883

Award Number: 9750883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth B. Lipkowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith S. Anliker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Organ  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie E. Sen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin J. O'Donnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chiroscience is prevalent in academic research laboratories, as well as in many
              industries, but  most issues of chirality are either inadequately described or
              not coherently integrated into undergraduate curricula.  In response, this
              project is reformulating the undergraduate organic laboratory curriculum around
              the topic of chirality.  The new curriculum is designed to:    make the
              connection between synthesis, separation, and identification;  introduce
              synthetic methodology and reagents for stereoselective synthesis;  introduce
              new technology and instrumentation for chiroptical measurements; and  provide
              an equipment base for enantiomer separations and analysis.    Experiments from
              the previous curriculum are being revised and new experiments are being
              developed to incorporate aspects of chirality and biotechnology.    This
              project is making it possi`le for instructors to teach a traditional
              undergraduate laboratory curriculum, with the inclusion of new synthetic
              reagents and methodology.  This approach is directed toward teaching asymmetric
              induction, providing techniques for the separation of enantiomers and
              quantification by chiral chromatography, introducing chiroptical measurements,
              and using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy with chiral shift reagents
              for analysis.  The project is also extending the scope of the laboratory to
              better overlap with industrial science and biological chemistry while
              maintaining writing in the curriculum.  Finally, several group projects are
              being provided to promote collaborative learning.
