Title       : Improvement of Biology Teacher Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9750728

Award Number: 9750728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16581              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice S. Greene jsg326f@vma.smsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Missouri State U
	      901 South National
	      Springfield, MO  658040027    417/836-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Statement of Objectives    1.  To increase preservice biology teachers
              (stusdents) knowledge of the use of computerbased technologies in the sciences,
              including video microscopy, digital imaging, and computer interfacing with data
              collectors.  2. To allow students to develop inquiry-based laboratories using
              the above technologies.  3.  To provide opportunities for students to practice
              intergrating these technologies with their teaching as they give demonstrations
              to other biology classes and to inservice teachers.    Methods        During
              the teaching methods courses for secondary and middle school biology preservice
              teachers, students, will participate in variety of inquiry-based laboraties and
              demonstrations using computer-based technologies.  After they have become
              familiar with this equipment, they will develop their own lessons and will
              teach lessons to their peers.  As another opportunity to develop their teaching
              skills using this equipment, they will conduct demonstrations and workshops for
              the elementary teachers biology course, graduate students who teach the
              introductory biology courses, and to inservice teachers.  During the training
              workshops, participants will not only participate in or observe use of the
              equipment, they will have the opportunity to develop their own laboratories and
              /or develop videotaped or computer disks with images from the video microscopy
              equipment and digital imaging system.  This will allow teachers, who do not
              have this equipment in their classrooms, to have this equipment in their
              classrooms, to have use of the equipment.    Significance of activity to the
              advancement of education       Currently, few biology courses at Southwest
              Missouri State University use computer-based technologies in their
              laboratories.  In some cases, secondary schools have more technology in their
              classroom than teachers have experienced using in their university preparation.
               This equipment will not only provide more opportunities for preservice
              teachers to use the equipment, but  will allow these students to develop
              lessons and integrate the equipment into their tracking.  In addition, they
              will be able to develop their teaching skills by presenting training workshops
              and demonstrations to other teachers.  By offering workshops to graduate 
              teaching assistants, the equipment may also be used in majors biology courses. 
              Inservice teachers will have the opportunity to learn how to use the equipment
              and to produce videotapes and computer files of images and laboratory exercises
              to use in their classrooms.  This equipment will provide learning opportunities
              in biology and in integrating technology into teaching.
