Title       : An Interdisciplinary Laboratory for Late Twentieth Century Physics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9750484

Award Number: 9750484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20127              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morton Tavel motavel@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew S. Trupin  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel G. Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Norman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designing and implementing a student laboratory to accompany a
              theme-oriented sophomore-level modern physics course.  The curriculum is based
              on topics associated with four major developments in modern physics:
              relativity, statistical physics, chaos and quantum mechanics.  These
              developments share two features that provide a conceptual and organizational
              theme for the course:  (1) they are characterized by the fact that they
              introduce fundamental limitations on people's ability to acquire knowledge of
              the physical world, and (2) these limitations have necessitated the development
              of new mathematical and conceptual tools for evaluating knowledge and
              describing observations.    While the laboratory emphasizes the use of
              measurement instrumentation, a variety of computers and software is also being
              used for simulations, data analysis, and problemsolving.  The experiments
              described herein are interdisciplinary and are intended to foster creativity as
              well as impart information and develop experimental technique.  The modern
              physics course serves the role as a bridge between the introductory courses and
              the more advanced physics courses.  The laboratory is intended to serve
              similarly as a link between the instruction-driven introductory laboratory and
              the less structured research laboratory.
