Title       : Beyond the Basics: Facilitation of Advanced Topics in Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9750698

Award Number: 9750698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37889              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Jewett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, eight computer-interfaced spectrophotometers are being
              purchased to facilitate the learning of advanced topics in biochemistry in
              undergraduate laboratories.  This type of instrumentation shortens time for
              data collection and thereby increases time for discussion of the significance
              and interpretation of data.  Furthermore, this instrumentation allows
              collection of additional data that facilitates the learning of important
              principles in biochemistry.  In addition, this project purchases a
              spectrophotometer equipped with gel scanning and six-cell compartment
              accessories for teaching gel analysis and advanced kinetics and spectroscopy to
              undergraduates involved in directed research programs.  Students benefitting
              from the new instrumentation are those taking biochemistry in the BS
              Biochemistry program; in the BA and BS Chemistry programs; in the Medical
              Technology, Microbiology, and Cellular and Molecular Biology Programs; and
              students in the Dietetics Program.    Standard methods are used to faciltitate
              learning of the advanced topics in undergraduate laboratories, with the
              advantage that the new instrumentation allows students to collect their own
              data rather than analyze data provided by the instructor.  Laboratory manuals
              can be revised to include these analyses.  Standard methods are currently in
              use to facilitate learning of research techniques for undergraduates involved
              in directed research projects.  The advantage of a new spectrophotometer for
              these students is that there is no software incompatibilities with the
              computers available in individual research laboratories as well as in the IBM
              laboratory where students carry out many of their data manipulations.    The
              significance of obtaining new spectrophotometers, which allows introduction of
              additional data collection for advanced analyses in undergraduate laboratories
              and greater ease of data manipulation for directed research students, is that
              students are exposed to state-of-the-art spectrophotometeric instrumen tation
              of the type that they can encounter in professional and academic research
              settings after graduation.  This exposure makes them more competitive for
              positions in industry and for advanced degree programs.    *
