Title       : Instructional Equipment for Fieldwork in Physical and Environmental Geography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9750871

Award Number: 9750871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18537              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy S. Brothers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine J. Souch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This institution  serves a nontraditional student population with high
              proportions of returning adults, part-time students, women, and minorities. 
              Many of these students have little experience with natural environments and
              little knowledge of science, particularly outside the traditional laboratory
              setting.  The focus of this project is the use of relatively simple
              instrumentation to introduce a wide spectrum of students to the aims and
              methods of field science, as practiced in physical and environmental geography.
                 The project is purchasing basic instrumentation sufficient to teach field
              methods in each of the major subfields of physical/environmental geography,
              including climatology, hydrology, geomorphology, soils, and biogeography. 
              Field instruction in existing courses, both introductory and advanced, is being
              expanded.  The expanded instruction makes it possible to teach a new course in
              field methods and to develop nontraditional avenues for geographic field
              instruction, including interdisciplinary courses with other departments on
              campus and workshops for teachers of geography in primary and secondary
              schools.    This field training is introducing a diverse array of urban
              undergraduates to the methods and benefits of field science in natural
              settings.  Moreover, it includes all facets of environment, encouraging
              students to consider environmental interdependencies and feedbacks.  Finally,
              it is providing applied training to geography majors interested in the
              environmental positions.  *
