Title       : Rapid Kinetic Experiments for the Advanced Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9750775

Award Number: 9750775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Breen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry B. Muhoberac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Kinetic experiments are often limited by the necessity of hand mixing, which
              produces atypically slow reactions.  These reactions are not representative of
              those encountered in real-world situations.  This limitation is being addressed
              by the purchase of a stopped-flow apparatus with fluorescence and absorbance
              detection equipment. Six kinetic experiments are being developed that
              illustrate fundamental chemical and biological processes and incorporate them
              into the physical, analytical, inorganic, and biological chemistry
              laboratories.  These new experiments are developing the chemical intuition of
              the students, giving them a sense of the time scales over which reactions
              occur.  Examples include the very fast proton transfer reactions and the much
              slower rates involved in protein folding.  The experiments being developed are:
                 Proton Transfer an experiment based on the CO2 carbonic acid bicarbonate
              equilibrium;  Electron Transfer the reduction of cobalt (III) pentamine
              complexes by Fe(CN)64-, which demonstrates the discrete nature of ion pair
              formation followed by electron transfer;  Ligand Substitution two proposed
              experiments, one that shows faster than expected rates for octahedral
              substitution, and the other that serves as an alternative to classic
              spectrophotometric multicomponent analysis by using time rather than wavelength
              as the discriminator;  Protein Folding the determination of the rates of
              refolding of several proteins separating the various stages of the process by
              using a fluorescent probe as a marker for conformational changes; and  Enzyme
              Kinetics chance's method applied to peroxidase, which demonstrates the
              formation of the enzyme substrate complex and its concurrent disappearance with
              the formation of product.     The instrument is having a significant impact on
              the laboratory curriculum because it allows teachers to give students a better
              sense of fundamental chemical processes and kinetics while exposing them to
              state-of-the-art instrumentation.  *
