Title       : A Project-Orientated Undergraduate Laboratory Course in CellBiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9750956

Award Number: 9750956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21309              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne K. McGrain amcgrain@carlow.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carlow College
	      3333 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133165    412/578-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In order to achieve success, newly trained biologists and health care
              professionals need broad-based skills in addition to a solid understanding of
              biology.  These skills include independent and creative thinking, excellent
              written and oral communication, computer proficiency and problem solving
              ability.  The goal of this project to design a cell biology course which will
              incorporate the development of these skills.  Students will first be introduced
              to current concepts and experimental approaches in cell biology and then be
              allowed to explore on their own.  This will best be accomplished if students
              culture and perform investigations on mammalian cells.  Students will culture
              mammalian cells and study various cell organelles and cell processes.  While
              learning in these areas, students will also acquire laboratory skills in
              microscopy, spectroscopy, biochemical assays and electrophoresis.  They will
              use this knowledge and their toolbox of skills to perform a several week
              project of their own design.  Equipment to fully support such a teaching
              approach, such as an inverted fluorescence microscope, a computer-linked UV/VIS
              spectrophotometer, a dedicated CO2 incubator, a laminar flow hood and a high
              resolution video system are either unavailable or inadequate.  During the
              project students will be expected to search the primary literature for
              background information, design experiments, analyze data and present results to
              classmates via oral or poster presentations.  The course will prepare students
              for senior research projects, the capstone course in molecular biology,
              graduate school, professional school and careers as laboratory technicians. 
              The course design and outcomes will be put on internet newsgroups, presented at
              meetings and/or published in science teaching journals.  *
