Title       : Integration of Scanning Electron Microscopy into Undergraduate, Biology,
               Chemistry and Geology Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9750667

Award Number: 9750667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley J. Wright WrightS@neelix.udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Sandy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard C. Knachel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to purchase a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to
              support, improve and enhance undergraduate education at the University of
              Dayton.  The SEM will be used by undergraduate students enrolled in seven
              interdisciplinary, seventeen upper level and six introductory courses in
              Biology, Chemistry and Geology, and for B.S. thesis research in each
              department.  The SEM will provide students hands-on experience in obtaining
              valuable three-dimensional information about the external features of specimens
              and to thereby increase understanding of microstructure.  A fully automated,
              user friendly SEM will permit the following changes to be incorporated into the
              Biology, Chemistry and Geology Department undergraduate curricula:  1) addition
              of a new, team-taught, interdisciplinary and innovative electron microscopy
              course with a student research component focusing of technique in
              microstructure, 2) enhanced hands-on experience for students in upper level
              laboratories in each department, 3) opportunity for all students in
              introductory science majors courses to gain first-hand operation of the SEM, 4)
              use of the SEM in exercises for students in introductory non-science majors
              laboratories in an effort to instill greater interest in and understanding of
              science, and 5) ability to use the SEM for undergraduate research in each
              department.  Students will acquire knowledge in data analysis, instrumental
              "know-how," and state-of-the-art training needed to enter the job market as
              competitive, productive scientists.
