Title       : Rapid Prototyping Supported Plastic Injection Molding Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9750961

Award Number: 9750961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Spaulding   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Buchwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is an increasing pressure for industry to minimize the time and cost of
              developing parts from design through production.  This is certainly true when a
              designer would like to get the low-piece-part cost of plastic but does not have
              the time, money, or volume to justify the process.  Since the bulk of this time
              and cost is generated in the design and fabrication of tooling, that is where
              industry is looking for higher efficiency.  Whereas with traditional
              fabrication techniques, it is as easy to cut a tool as it is to cut a part, a
              part fabricated using rapid prototyping technology can be used as a pattern for
              making epoxy tooling for injection molding.  The objective of this project is
              to improve mechanical engineering technology education by complementing plastic
              injection molding technology with three-dimensional solid modeling and rapid
              prototyping techniques.  This project provides state-of-the-art rapid
              prototyping and plastic injection molding systems, complementing them with our
              current three-dimensional solid modeling capabilities, developing laboratory
              exercises that fully take advantage of the equipment capabilities, and
              incorporating rapid prototyping and injection molding in design projects.  The
              new equipment is of sufficient quality so that it can also be used to support
              local industry needs through student projects that are incorporated directly
              into the laboratory component of manufacturing methods and mechanical design
              courses.  The potential impact of this project is very widespread and includes
              all companies involved in mechanical design and manufacturing considering
              plastic injection molding for their part requirements or rapid prototyping for
              design verification.    *
