Title       : Technology and Citizenship Skills in an Electronic Information Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9750574

Award Number: 9750574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44609              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Majeski majeski@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Gill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen T. Litfin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this age of declining trust in government, apathy toward participation in
              public affairs, and information overload, developing "citizenship skills" is a
              fundamental challenge to liberal arts education.  The traditional approach of
              undergraduate education in political science is no longer adequate because of
              rapid changes in the availability of electronic information.  Students are
              highly attuned to the information age but our classroom approach has not kept
              up.  We seek to address this gap through more effective use of computing
              technology with funding for equipment for a departmental computing laboratory
              that will focus on undergraduate education for citizenship.  Four departmental
              courses have been selected (Political Science 205 - Political Science as a
              Social Science, Political Science 303 - Public Policy Formation. Political
              Science 422 - Global Environmental Problems, and Political Science 407 -
              International Conflict) in which computer technology will be used to provide
              opportunities for political science undergraduates to obtain citizenship skills
              in the following areas; accessing information, acquiring information,,
              analyzing information, understanding the political and economic context, and
              making collective choices.  The Department is in the process of constructing
              the computer laboratory.  When equipped with 18 Pentium computers, a local area
              network, and an SVGA RGB projector, the computer laboratory will provide a
              flexible learning and teaching environment for the development of citizenship
              skills for political science undergraduates.  The department is developing
              methodologies to evaluate this project and will have support for evaluation and
              dissemination from other units on campus such as the Center for Instructional
              Development and Research.
