Title       : A Model of Biology Laboratory Enhancement Through Acquisition of
               Calculator-Based Laboratory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9750988

Award Number: 9750988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9792               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. Ward danw@wccb.wcc.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Waubonsee CC
	      Route 47 at Harter Road
	      Sugar Grove, IL  60554    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Problem to be addressed:  The Biology Department has realized a 50% increase in
              student enrollments in biology courses over a five-year period.  Increased
              enrollments have stretched the college's ability to provide students with
              hands-on use of technology.  The purchase of Calculator-Based Laboratory (CBL)
              Systems will enable us to offer educational experiences to students which
              improve instruction by using inexpensive, durable, modern equipment.   
              Objectives:  Improve the scientific competencies of students to monitor, record
              and analyze biological data.    Methods:  Each CBL System will allow an average
              class of 28 students to work in groups of two students per station.  Students
              will perform a multitude of hands-on experiences in 1) Ecology, 2)
              Environmental Biology, and 3) Physiology.    Audience:  Twelve hundred 
              students enrolled in undergraduate biology courses at Waubonsee Community
              College.  Additional students enrolled in distance learning courses at
              community colleges in northern Illinois.     Collaborations:  None in project
              year.  Fox Valley Education Alliance which includes five community college
              districts after the first project year.    Significance of Impact on
              Undergraduate Education:  The project offers hands-on laboratory experiences
              using inexpensive modern technology and equipment and would serve as a model to
              extend biology laboratory instruction via distance learning networks both
              regionally and nationally.
