Title       : Printed Circuit Board Design and Prototyping in Undergraduate Electronic Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9750941

Award Number: 9750941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9820               (Estimated)
Investigator: David Delker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With increased competition from the global market, electronic designers must
              move their products into production as quickly as possible.  Recent advances in
              numerically controlled machining make it possible to produce a
              production-quality printed circuit board prototype a few hours after the design
              has been modeled using printed circuit board computer-aided design (CAD)
              software.  This project provides a safe, modern, and efficient printed circuit
              board design and prototyping laboratory.  The project replaces current board
              fabrication methods composed of designs using self-adhesive pads and traces,
              photocopying to a thermal transfer film, and exposing to developer and etchant
              chemicals that are potentially hazardous to students and to the environment. 
              The modern printed circuit board CAD software and rapid prototyping engraving
              machine provided by this project are used to train our electronic engineering
              technology students in every aspect of electronic design, from conception
              through the prototype stage.  The design process is supplemented with the
              simulation and automated testing capabilities already implemented in
              laboratories.  The equipment is of sufficient quality so that it can also be
              used to support local industry needs through student projects that are
              incorporated directly into the laboratory component of electronic design and
              manufacturing courses.    The potential impact of this project is as widespread
              as is the development of electronic products for end use, or for use as
              components in a complex design.  Because of environmental and safety concerns,
              most manufacturers use one of the few existing board houses for production, and
              even prototyping of printed circuit boards.  Students in electronics must be
              able to produce the files required by board houses, or even their own
              companies' prototyping and simulation facilities.  This project, therefore,
              enables the school to foster every aspect of electronic design through to the
              prototyping stage; at the same time, students are able to  take advantage of
              the available tools used for verifying their designs, namely, simulation of
              their designs before prototyping and testing of their designs after
              prototyping.  This project provides reliable equipment used to reinforce
              electronic design and manufacturing theory through student projects that
              directly serve industry.
