Title       : A Full-Year Undergraduate Course Sequence in Cell and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9750533

Award Number: 9750533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29636              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Grew JGrew@NJCU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mulugeta Assefa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey City University
	      2039 Kennedy Boulevard
	      Jersey City, NJ  073051527    201/547-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Jersey City State College (JCSC) and its Biology Department are diverse,
              dynamic entities that are evolving into larger, more sophisticated institutions
              of higher education. New Jersey is home  to major pharmaceuticals,
              biotechnology, biomaterials and chemical corporations  which employ thousands
              of graduates of area  colleges and universities in technical and professional
              positions.  Several institution-wide initiatives  are currently in place or in
              the planning stages which are intended to provide JCSC students, many of whom
              are women, underrepresented minorities and teachers-in-training, with a
              learning environment which will allow them to be competitive in graduate
              education and  the regional job market.          A full-year course sequence in
              cell and molecular biology (Cell & Molecular Biology I&II) has been designed to
              cultivate the knowledge base and technical expertise necessary for success in
              technology-based positions.  Cell & Molecular Biology I , a course in molecular
              cell biology studies the form and function of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
               The organization, physiology and reproduction of cells are examined, and
              accompanying laboratory experiences introduce classical and contemporary
              methods of cell study. Cell & Molecular Biology II, a course in molecular
              genetics, examines physical and biological  properties of nucleic acids,
              including DNA replication, gene expression, recombination, mutation, and DNA
              repair.  The laboratory component introduces students to basic techniques of
              recombinant DNA technology.
