Title       : Environmental Impact Assesment, A Capstone Course for an Environmental Science
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9750681

Award Number: 9750681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12431              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Oetinger acantho@kwc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Kingsolver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kentucky Wesleyan College
	      3000 Frederica Street
	      Owensboro, KY  423016057    502/926-3111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Faculty of the Department of Biology are implementing a new capstone course in
              their Environmental Science Program Environmental Impact Assessment.  This
              upper-division course is available as a 3-semester-hour course for
              non-science-majors or a 4-semester-hour laboratory course for science majors. 
              Students, working in teams that include both science majors and nonmajors, are
              confronted with a simulated scenerio in which industry (e.g., a PCB removal
              facility, a battery recycling facility, a chicken-processing facility, etc.)
              seeks to locate its operation adjacent to Panther Creek, the major drainage
              system of Daviess County, Kentucky.  Laboratory students characterize
              information (hydrographic features, substrate composition, riparian/emergent
              vegetation, and cover) and collect data (stream velocity, loading capacity,
              temperature, pH, conductivity, heavy metal levels, invertebrate
              numbers/diversity, fish fauna numbers/diversity, and allozymic variation of
              select invertebrates and fishes) at the site(s) of potential impact, over 3
              months.  All students learn data management, data analysis, and data
              presentation.  Each team prepares a written document, an Environmental Impact
              Assessment.  Different students assume leadership roles according to the teams'
              activities (physical, chemical, biological, computer work, statistical
              analyses, research, and writing).  This project provides flowmeters, remote
              monitoring /sampling equipment, a computer system, and appropriate software,
              electroshocking equipment, and a glass-door refrigerator for electrophoretic
              separation of enzymes.  Results of the didactic aspects of this course and
              environmental data can be presented by faculty and students at the annual
              meetings of the Kentucky Academy of Sciences.  *
