Title       : Simulations Laboratory for Undergraduate Geography Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9750432

Award Number: 9750432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Wikle geogtaw@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale R. Lightfoot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Stadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is targeted at the development of an undergraduate laboratory for
              geographic and environmental simulations.  The equipment is being used by
              students enrolled in general education courses, by geography majors, and by
              students from other programs taking courses in cultural geography, physical
              geography, meteorology, climatology, urban planning, and field
              techniques/geodata collection.  The new equipment includes student computer
              stations, simulation software, and Internet resources that grant network
              accessibility to data.  Implementation of this program is greatly increasing
              the opportunities for undergraduates to conduct hands-on simulations of a wide
              variety of geographic and environmental processes including climate change; the
              effects of birth, death, and migration rates on population; mountain building
              and continental movement processes; and surface water movement.  Recently,
              collected environmental data is being used to make simulations as real as
              possible.  The project is emphasizing the use of simulations as a means of
              reinforcing connections across major disciplinary boundaries such as biology,
              geology, and planning.  In addition to providing a unique experience for both
              general education students and undergraduates enrolled in nontechnical
              geography courses, the equipment is being made available for undergraduate
              students to participate in supervised research activities.  *
