Title       : Integrating NMR Spectroscopy into the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9750847

Award Number: 9750847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly C. Gaede hgaede@acad.ursinus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor J. Tortorelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ursinus College
	      Office of the Treasurer
	      Collegeville, PA  19426    215/489-4111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The use of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to study molecular
              structure and dynamics is now an essential element of an effective
              undergraduate chemistry education.    Students without access to a modern NMR
              spectrometer cannot gain experience in multinuclear, Fourier transform, and
              multidimensional NMR.  Moreover, even with access to a modern instrument,
              students all too often learn only about structural elucidation with NMR
              spectroscopy in Organic Chemistry and never about NMR as a tool for studying
              dynamics.  In this project, NMR spectroscopy is implemented vertically
              throughout the curriculum.  The new spectrometer is incorporated into nearly
              every chemistry laboratory beginning in the first year with Organic Chemistry,
              where students familiarize themselves with the instrument and learn basic
              spectral interpretation.  As students progress to Analytical, Physical, and
              Advanced Inorganic courses, the sophistication of the experiments and the
              number of parameters the student controls are increased.  By the time a student
              participates in senior research, he or she has the skills to design a
              two-dimensional experiment without assistance.  The spectrometer is used to
              reinforce concepts taught in the classroom, including stereochemistry,
              fluxionality, Fourier transform, equilibria, thermodynamics, and kinetics.  An
              important aim of the project is to provide students with a perspective of the
              broad utility of NMR spectroscopy.  In addition, the research program benefits
              from the extended capabilities of the spectrometer, and more of it can result
              in publication.  The curriculum is also affected as new courses are added and
              multinuclear and solid-state experiments are developed and disseminated. 
              Finally, students are better prepared for graduate school and industry.  *
