Title       : Enhancing Student Learning in Molecular Biology through Computer Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9750450

Award Number: 9750450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28437              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Goodman mgoodman@wittenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wittenberg University
	      PO BOX 720
	      Springfield, OH  455010720    513/327-6231

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As knowledge at the molecular level is expanded, the understanding of processes
              at many other levels is enhanced.  This knowledge, and understanding of the
              tools provided by the techniques of molecular biology, is important for all
              students of biology.  However, there are three difficulties in teaching
              molecular biology effectively at undergraduate, liberal arts institutions.  (1)
              The techniques involved are time consuming and expensive and in many cases
              require specialized equipment.  (2) When students are conducting experiments in
              the laboratory, they are often so intent on learning unfamiliar manipulations
              and dealing with microquantities of reagents, that they lose the overall
              picture of the experiment.  This is even more of a problem when poor
              experimental technique results in ambiguous data.  (3) Many students have had
              little practice visualizing dynamic, three-dimensional interactions at the
              molecular level and find it challenging.  The objectives of this project are to
              provide students with the opportunity to learn a wide variety of experimental
              techniques and strategies, design their own experiments, and learn to visualize
              structure function relationships at a molecular level.  These objectives can be
              accomplished through the incorporation of computer facilities employing
              software for DNA and protein modeling, gene manipulation, and an exploration
              focusing on the relationship between DNA mutation and the forces of natural
              selection.  These resources are used for students to learn basic concepts of
              molecular biology and a wide variety of experimental techniques, many of which
              can also be performed in the laboratory.  With these tools, students can design
              new experiments in molecular biology.  *
