Title       : Predictive Maintenance Certificate Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9750999

Award Number: 9750999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Sprague-Williams sprague@cdnet.cod.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Branislav J. Rosul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Du Page
	      425 22nd Street
	      Glen Ellyn, IL  601376599    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Predictive maintenance is a subject of great interest to U.S. industry, to the
              academic community, and to employers in the region of suburban Chicago served
              by the college.  In response to the needs of the business and industrial
              communities it serves, the college has created an eight-course, 23-credit
              Predictive Maintenance (PDM) certificate program to provide basic education in
              this emerging field of work at the technician level.  The PDM certificate
              combines four newly developed courses with four existing courses in the
              college's Electro-Mechanical Technology curriculum.  The eight courses range
              from the basics in industrial electricity and technical mechanics to advanced
              techniques in signal analysis and statistical process control.  Collectively,
              the courses provide fundamental education in predicative, corrective, and
              preventive maintenance and a significant amount of hands-on experience using
              the data acquisition systems and industrial monitoring instrumentation.  The
              primary target population for the PDM program is composed of individuals who
              are already employed in the field and who are interested in improving their
              knowledge and skill levels in order move to higher level jobs in industrial
              maintenance.  Critical to the implementation of the PDM program is the addition
              of equipment for an integrated system that can provide hands-on experience in
              using state-of-the-art data acquisition systems and industrial monitoring
              instrumentation.    *
