Title       : Purchase of Infrared Thermography Equipment for Mechanical Engineering
               Laboratory Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9750740

Award Number: 9750740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell E. P. Hoy dhoy@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Idem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn T. Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Mechanical Engineering Department has not had any full-field temperature
              measuring capability.  Students graduate with theoretical and practical
              knowledge of traditional point-type temperature measurement methods, but do not
              encounter any full-field temperature measurement systems.  This project
              addresses these needs by purchasing a state-of-the-art infrared thermography
              system.     The four primary objectives of this proposal are (1) to integrate
              theoretical and experimental methods concerning infrared thermography systems
              into five existing undergraduate Mechanical Engineering courses (two of the
              five courses being designated as the primary users of the system); (2) to
              evaluate the impact and educational benefit of adding a state-of-the-art
              thermal measurement capability to an undergraduate engineering curriculum, a
              capability that is not available in most university environments because of its
              cost; (3) to make the infrared thermography system available for directed study
              courses in which work on selected projects under the guidance of a faculty
              member, with many of these projects often involving local industries; and (4)
              to introduce talented high school students to infrared thermography as part of
              a Young Scholars Program held every summer.  This successful program is now in
              its 18th year and includes a particular emphasis on the introduction of women
              and minorities to the fields of engineering and computer science.  This project
              directly affects about 350 undergraduate students per year.   *
