Title       : Developing Integrated Molecular Modeling, Dynthesis & Spectroscopy Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9750680

Award Number: 9750680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89557              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen J. Brewer kbrewer@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the problem of integrating molecular modeling into the
              undergraduate chemistry curriculum.  The objective is to develop a series of
              integrated molecular modeling, synthesis, and spectroscopy laboratories.  The
              integration of molecular modeling within a synthetic laboratory allows for a
              unique educational experience.  The students are able to use computer-based
              molecular modeling within a context that closely mimics its application in
              chemical research.  This allows the students to use molecular modeling as a
              molecular design tool to assist them in the choice of synthetic targets.  It
              also allows them to critically view the results of molecular modeling as they
              compare the results to physical properties of the complexes they prepare.  The
              experiments consist of a molecular modeling phase in which the students model a
              series of structurally similar complexes.  This modelling is followed by an
              analysis of the molecular modeling results.  The students then make some
              predictions about the physical properties of the complexes they modeled and
              select which complexes to prepare in the laboratory.  The students prepare the
              complexes in the laboratory, and they study their chemical properties.  The
              final phase of the experiment involves a comparison of the actual physical
              properties of the compounds they prepared with the predictions they made
              following the molecular modeling exercises.  World Wide Web based tutorials are
              used to assist the students in the use of the CAChe molecular modeling package
              to reduce the amount of hands-on time needed to teach the students the details
              of the molecular modeling computer interface.  The initial
              modeling/synthesis/spectroscopy experiments are being designed, tested, and
              implemented for the inorganic chemistry laboratory and can be expanded to other
              parts of the undergraduate curriculum.    *
