Title       : Instrumentation for Undergraduate Lab Instruction in Molecular Cell Biology
               Using Non-Radioactive Labels and Computer Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9750703

Award Number: 9750703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29899              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Chapman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U San Marcos Fdn
	      435 East Carmel Street
	      San Marcos, CA  920784362    760/750-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Preparing undergraduates for careers in the biological sciences requires a
              laboratory-rich curriculum, which includes hands-on experience with current
              technologies.  Many methods in cell and molecular biology involve exposure to
              toxic and radioactive chemicals.  The new instrumentation is part of an effort
              to redesign the bioscience curriculum around nonradioactive, nontoxic
              methodologies.  Exercises that teach quantitation of nucleic acids and proteins
              (including PCR products), DNA, RNA, and antibody blotting, analysis of
              SDS-PAGE, DNA sequencing, protease and nuclease assays, gel-shift assays for
              DNA-binding proteins, CAT reporter assays, and protein phosphorylation assays
              used in signal transduction studies can be performed with nonhazardous
              fluorescent labels instead of toxic or radioactive detection reagents.  The new
              instrumentation also provides for computer data analysis, designed to improve
              student understanding of computational tools in biology and help them to
              process and report their data.  Providing for direct, safer experiences with
              current technologies allows students to broaden and deepen their understanding
              of laboratory applications in biomedical science.  Concerns of students,
              especially women students, about potential reproductive hazards should be
              significantly reduced.  When fully implemented, the program can eliminate the
              need for radioisotopes and toxic dyes like ethidium bromide, along with their
              associated financial and environmental costs.  This approach to laboratory
              instruction in the molecular biosciences should be broadly applicable and is
              particularly important for the department's attempts to increase the number of
              students preparing to be teachers who opt to take biology as their science and
              who will be better prepared in this science..
