Title       : Computer Laboratory/Classroom for Instruction in Calculus, Linear Algebra &
               Differential Equations and for Teacher Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9750683

Award Number: 9750683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cherry C. Mauk Mauk@kutztown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Pirnot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Trafford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kutztown University
	      
	      Kutztown, PA  19530    215/683-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a computer laboratory to strengthen undergraduate
              mathematics education and teacher preparation. The computer laboratory is
              allwoign for a sgignificant change in active participation in learning.
              Problem-solving skills, situational strategies, and solid understanding of
              concepts are resulting from the laboratory format. The calculus sequence and
              linear algebra are using the laboratory format, as are other upper-level
              courses. The laboratory is also having a strong impact ont he preparation of
              secondary mathematics majors. An in-depth exposure to this format is developing
              an understanding o the inter dependence of analytical, numberical, and
              graphical mthods, which is carrying over to the way these potential instuctors
              will teach mathematics. A course is being developed emphasizing technology, in 
              which students  can create lessons (using Maple, Geometer's Sketch Pad, Cabri
              Geometry, spreadsheets, etc.), review software for their techig, create online
              exams and assessment activites, and sue the World Wide Web to obtain material
              involving mathematics education. Secondary education mathematics majors are
              participating in "Mentor to Mentor" workshops that use unversity students to
              "mentor" the high school techers in using Maple, while the in-service teachoers
              "mentor" the students in mathematical pedagogy.  *
