Title       : An Undergraduate Engineering GIS Spatial Analysis Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9750647

Award Number: 9750647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen L. Hancock hancock@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to educate undergraduate students in spatial
              analysis techniques through the development of an undergraduate spatial
              analysis computer laboratory that integrates remote sensing, geographic
              information systems (GIS), and computer-aided design (CAD).   Civil and
              environmental engineering students are exposed to a broad array of information
              that can be spatially referenced, including transportation, planning,
              environmental, and geotechnical data.   As undergraduates, they generally
              address issues around these data within specific disciplines.   The fundamental
              goal of this laboratory is to provide students with the ability to interrelate
              issues and data across disciplines and to explore the affects that different
              disciplines have on one another.   For example, a group of students might
              evaluate the effects that run off from highways and parking facilities have on
              surrounding wetlands given varying soil conditions.   Not only does this type
              of problem emphasize cross-disciplinary analyses, it also fosters group-based
              active learning and critical thinking.  Basic GIS skills are introduced to
              students through carefully designed project-based laboratory exercises within
              existing courses.   A new spatial analysis course specifically educates
              students in critical thinking across disciplines.   Advanced instruction is
              encouraged through independent study and undergraduate research opportunities. 
               With the maturing of desktop GIS, spatial analysis is becoming a standard tool
              for many engineering disciplines and entry-level engineers are expected to have
              a working knowledge of this technology.
