Title       : Geophysical Equipment for Hydrogeology, Environmental Geology and Geophysics
               Field Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9750526

Award Number: 9750526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie L. Brown lbrown@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Mabee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Geosciences Department recognizes the importance of hands-on, field-oriented
              experiences for undergraduates, especially in the high employment area of
              environmental consulting.  To this end, the university is increasing its
              capabilities in shallow field geophysics for undergraduate students in
              geophysics, hydrogeology, and environmental geology courses.  A field
              laboratory is being developed on campus complete with one pumping well, four
              observations wells, and numerous buried objects for geophysical targets. 
              Existing geophysical equipment allows for investigations of seismic refraction,
              gravity, and magnetism, but to ensure coverage and experience in the tools most
              commonly used in the environmental industry, the university is providing
              additional equipment for electromagnetic, very-low-frequency,
              ground-penetrating radar and seismic reflection techniques.  This equipment is
              used extensively in five undergraduate courses (two in geophysics, two in
              hydrogeology, and one in environmental geology) and as the backbone for a new
              course at the beginning level in Environmental Field Methods.  This new course
              provides field experience at an early level for geology students as well as
              students from other environmentally oriented programs on campus.  The
              geophysical data are combined with hydrogeologic and environmental data, using
              the common field site as a laboratory.  The extensive geophysical and
              hydrogeologic data collected from the site are archived on CD-ROM using the
              method of dynamic digital maps and are made available to the geologic
              community.  In addition, the site, a unique teaching tool for field geophysics
              and hydrogeology, and the entire range of field equipment, are made available
              to interested professors and students in the region.  *
