Title       : Modernization of the Purchase College Microbiology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9750965

Award Number: 9750965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20358              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Daly jdaly@purvid.purchase.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Purchase
	      P O Box 9
	      Albany, NY  122010009    914/251-6052

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The concept of this project grows out of curricular needs in Microbiology. 
              We will add 4 new exercises to our Microbiology laboratory which will focus on
              the major advances that have occurred in molecular techniques commonly used in
              modern Microbiology laboratories during the past 15 years.  The purpose of
              these new exercises is to demonstrate the common techniques that are now used
              in modern molecular Microbiology laboratories:  (1) fluorescence microscopy for
              identification of bacteria using either antibody of oligonucleotide probes
              labeled with fluorescent dyes, (2) electrophoresis of proteins and nucleic
              acids, (3) Western immunoblotting for protein identification, (4) ELISA for
              quick identification screening of specific antigens and (5) PCR for
              amplification of DNA for various identification purposes.  The laboratory model
              which will be used based upon the PI's extensive research experience using
              molecular Microbiology for the diagnosis of the fastidious, slow growing fish
              pathogen, Renibacterium salmoninarum.  This pathogen is excellent for use in
              the undergraduate Microbiology laboratory because it is a strict psychrophile,
              and is nonpathogenic to humans.         With the modernization of the
              Microbiology laboratory, we also have the opportunity to update our Cellular
              and Molecular Techniques course.  A new exercise will be introduced to the
              existing series of cloning procedures.  In particular, we plan to introduce
              students to PCR amplification in the context of the existing series of DNA
              exercises.          Purchase College undergraduates are required to do a two
              semester Senior Research Project.  The scope and conceptual sophistication of
              research projects available for student participation will also be considerably
              enhanced.  Several of our faculty have proposed use of the new equipment in new
              and ongoing projects designed for undergraduate student participation.        
              This project will enhance the conceptual as well as the technical training of
              students.  The use of direct f amiliarity with common techniques in modern
              Molecular Microbiology, Cell Biology, and Molecular Biology will greatly
              improve our student's preparedness for graduate programs, and/or for entering a
              highly technical, biotechnology workforce.  *
