Title       : Biotechnology Training Enhancement at Moorhead State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9750937

Award Number: 9750937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Wallert wallert@mnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shawn G. Dunkirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris J. Chastain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      11th Street South
	      Moorhead, MN  56560    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to enhance training in the fields of biology and
              chemistry related to the areas of biotechnology. The focus of the project is to
              establish an interdepartmental degree in biotechnology as a joint effort of the
              biology and chemistry departments. This degree will be designed as a laboratory
              intensive, research rich experience. The degree will culminate in all students
              being members of a research team performing a project under the supervision of
              a faculty member. Students will be encouraged to submit successful research
              projects to be presented at local and regional scientific meetings. This degree
              will prepare students to seek employment in research positions related to the
              growing agriculture based molecular genetics and pharmaceutical industries in
              this region of the country as well as providing training for students
              interested in application to graduate school. The introductory courses in the
              core of this new biotechnology degree will be comprised of courses currently
              offered as part of both the biology and chemistry majors at Moorhead State
              University. The majority of these courses have been converted to an
              investigative laboratory format to enhance student involvement and enthusiasm
              for science. The equipment purchased will allow additional exercises to be
              added to the laboratory portion of several of these large enrollment
              introductory courses in order to give students the background and experience
              required for upper division courses in biotechnology. The benefit of using
              courses which are already part of the biology and chemistry majors to initiate
              this new degree is that all students taking courses in the two departments will
              be exposed to new techniques and have the opportunity to learn more about
              molecular and cellular biology and biochemistry research.
