Title       : Restructuring Basic Electronic Circuits Education Around Integrated Circuit
               Technology of the 1990s
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9750925

Award Number: 9750925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Geiger rlgeiger@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward K. F. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Black  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marwan M. Hassoun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major change in how the required introductory electronics course is structured
              is provided by this project. From a content viewpoint, this change shifts the
              emphasis from modeling and applications of discrete electronic devices to
              designing, modeling, and applying integrated electronic devices.  This much
              needed change is driven by several factors: most material in existing
              introductory electronics courses is 25 years old and is obsolete from an
              industrial perspective; advanced courses cannot build on current integrated
              electronics concepts because they are lacking in the curriculum; and most
              industry is no longer hiring electronic circuit designers at the BS level but
              rather now requiring a graduate degree.  From a pedagogical viewpoint, a major
              change in the laboratory environment is needed to support integrated electronic
              topics.    In this laboratory, students design and test basic integrated
              circuits that are fabricated in industry. For this activity, diagnostic probe
              stations, workstations, and CAD tools become as important as oscilloscopes,
              multimeters, and signal generators.  An open laboratory environment with
              extended operating hours and with multimedia support is developed around a
              multiple-station work area that makes more effective use of the expanded
              laboratory equipment requirements.  In addition to the changes in equipment
              needed to support the integrated electronics concepts, the project focuses on
              making the laboratory environment learning oriented rather than teaching
              oriented in which teaching assistants are replaced with "coaches" that become
              resource persons to the students working in the laboratory.  The expectations
              in the laboratory are also changed to enhance teamwork skills and to stimulate
              innovation by the students.  In addition to a group of structured laboratory
              experiments, a set of four milestones has been established.  These milestones
              are open-ended design projects that stimulate integration of fundamental
              concepts discussed in the lecture part of the course  and in the structured
              part of the laboratory.  These milestones include an emphasis on integrating
              environmental transducers with basic electronic devices and with developing
              practical design skills.  *
