Title       : Undergraduate Photonics Design and Experimentation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9750742

Award Number: 9750742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley D. Duncan bduncan@engr.udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Brecha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent G. Dominic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tommy L. Williamson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In addition to its long-standing commitment to education in electro-optics (EO)
              demonstrated by its graduate degree programs, the university's Departments of
              Electrical & Computer Engineering (ECE) and Physics are now integrating EO
              fully into the undergraduate curriculum.  To this end the Physics Department
              and the ECE Undergraduate Studies Committee are developing an EO Concentration
              exclusively for ECE and Physics majors.  The concentration is in many ways
              similar to a minor degree program pursued within one's own major department and
              is indicated on a student's official transcript upon graduation.    The
              structure of the undergraduate EO Concentration requires students to take four
              EO-related technical electives.  These courses are in the areas of Fiber
              Optics, Linear Systems in Optics, Optoelectronics, and Physical Optics.  Though
              the Physical Optics course focuses on basic principles, the remaining courses
              are more practice oriented.  This project develops a dedicated Undergraduate
              Photonics Laboratory to support the design, demonstration, and experimentation
              components of the ECE technical electives composing the heart of the new
              undergraduate EO Concentration. The Undergraduate Photonics Laboratory
              stimulates strong interest in undergraduate research and furthers the efforts
              of the Women in Engineering Program.  Another program potentially to be
              benefited by the Undergraduate Photonics Laboratory is the Get Smart program. 
              Lastly, there are approximately 86 companies within Ohio that regularly hire
              employees with EO backgrounds.  The new undergraduate EO concentration makes
              students more attractive to these companies as both co-op and, upon graduation,
              full-time employees.  *
