Title       : Discovery-Based Labs for Calculus-Based Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9750830

Award Number: 9750830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27264              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn C. Meredith dawn.meredith@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is evidence that most students do not greatly increase their understanding
              of physical concepts through the traditional verification/recipe laboratories
              found in most introductory physics courses.   Thorton, Sokoloff, and Laws have
              created a series of discovery-based, microcomputer-based laboratories that have
              shown to increase conceptual understanding of students greatly:  Tools for
              Scientific Thinking (TST), RealTime Physics (RTP), and Workshop Physics (WP).  
              While these materials present a significant improvement over the traditional
              laboratories, none fits the needs of the university exactly.   WP is calculus
              based, but requires changes that can not be implemented (i.e., abandoning
              lecture altogether and working with students in a laboratory setting with a
              high teacher-to-student ratio).   TST and RTP allow the laboratory to change
              independently of the lecture, but are not calculus based, and are written for a
              wide audience (high school through college).    This project modifies the
              existing curricular materials in TST and RTP to make them more appropriate for
              this introductory calculus-based course for engineers and scientists.   The
              project adds calculus applications, increases the level of difficulty slightly,
              adds kinesthetic experiences and computer simulations, adds exercises that help
              students synthesize information and create logical arguments, and reorganizes
              the laboratory to provide better coordination with lectures.   These changes
              are made without changing the basic philosophy of the curricular materials:
              students must construct their own understanding by making predictions, by
              testing predictions, and by focusing on concepts instead of equations.
