Title       : Dynamic Systems and Controls Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9750757

Award Number: 9750757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52279              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill M. Diong   (Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash C. Bose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785392909    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is for equipment to establish a novel form of Dynamic Systems
              and Controls Laboratory at the University of Texas - Pan American to be used by
              undergraduates in its Electrical, Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering
              programs.       The main objectives of this Laboratory are to prepare students
              to be multidisciplinary in their thinking, to familiarize them with a
              model-based simulation-oriented approach to control systems design and
              development, to let them gain experience with the actual equipment needed for
              DSP-based controller implementation (typically not done at the undergraduate
              level in most Engineering programs) and to physically demonstrate their
              implemented controllers on educational and industrial hardware, such as
              inverted pendulums, mechanical linkages and simple robots. We plan to achieve
              these goals by using hardware and software that are not only educational but
              also realistic (when compared to pre-packaged and proprietary educational
              control systems), since most of the same equipment requested in this proposal
              are being widely used in the companies where these students can expect to be
              employed upon graduation.       The requested equipment will benefit this
              University's Engineering program in other ways. Firstly, it will help to
              increase the design component of several existing courses and make possible at
              least one new course. Secondly, via actual and videotape demonstrations of the
              more 'exciting' experiments as well as dissemination on the Web, it will assist
              in our efforts to motivate enrolled students as well as to recruit students
              from this region (the majority of whom are Hispanic and potential
              first-generation college students) by giving them a better idea of what
              engineers can help accomplish in an increasingly technology-driven society.    
                Finally, we also believe that this proposal can and will serve as an improved
              model for other schools of what a Dynamic Systems and Controls Laboratory
              should be.
