Title       : An Electronic Laboratory for Operating Systems and Computer Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9750953

Award Number: 9750953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Robbins srobbins@cs.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The geometric increase in computer power and the ubiquitous availability of
              network connectivity are revolutionizing computing. A computer science
              curriculum that is based on old teaching techniques may seem dull and
              irrelevant to the modern student. Instruction in the undergraduate curriculum
              for the most part does not make active use of new technology. A multimedia
              presentation during a lecture by an instructor is considered to be a passive
              use of technology. In contrast, a student who can control a multimedia
              visualization is making active use of such technology.  The difference between
              passive and active use of technology is similar to the difference between
              watching a laboratory demonstration and performing an experiment yourself.
              Aside from making the learning experience more interesting, a well designed
              experiment can challenge the student and encourage creativity. A well designed
              user-controlled animation can have a similar effect and provide the student
              with a virtual laboratory environment.      Half of the curriculum for an
              undergraduate operating systems course has been redesigned by constructing a
              series of programming projects that enable students to experiment with
              concurrency and communication.  Although the remainder of the curriculum in a
              traditional operating systems course does not easily lend itself to exploration
              using programming projects that can be completed by a student in a short period
              of time, this project designs a curriculum for this second part of operating
              systems and for computer networks that is based on having the students perform
              experiments in a virtual laboratory setting. The laboratory experiments use
              animated simulations written in the Java language, allowing them to be run on
              virtually any computer connected to the Internet. A framework for developing
              active animations is set up so that these animations can be efficiently
              produced.  *
