Title       : Proposal for Instruction in Computer-Based Instrumentation for Food Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9750815

Award Number: 9750815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anuradha Prakash prakash@chapman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Fahy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Andres Vasconcellos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chapman University
	      One University Drive
	      Orange, CA  928669809    714/628-7228

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes a program of instruction in computer-based
              instrumentation as a means of improving the quality of the undergraduate
              curriculum in Food Science.  The new equipment consists of a texture analyzer
              and a viscometer to provide undergraduate students with hands-on training in
              measuring rheology of food.  These instruments are standard in the food
              industry for quality control and for product development, and students use
              these instruments in both capacities.  The instruments are computer driven,
              giving students an opportunity to learn the principles of computer-operated
              instrumentation.  A bank of computer workstations allow demonstration of this
              technology to several students at a time.  The students analyze the texture of
              a food material, gather the data in a spreadsheet, graph the results, and
              evaluate the results individually, or at most, in pairs.    The aim of this
              project is to provide the students with an understanding of rheology and, more
              importantly, an understanding of computer-based instrumentation so that they
              can use this knowledge to operate other computer-based instruments.  This
              project improves the quality of undergraduate education by giving students
              experience on equipment used in the food industry, it helps them understand the
              principles of texture and texture measurement, and it increases the number of
              independent research projects performed by undergraduate food science students.
                 The new instruments are used in several food science courses.  Statistical
              and data analysis software is installed on the computers, along with specific
              software to teach biochemical proceqses, protein structure, diet analysis, and
              other food-science-related topics.  Other departments in the Science Division
              at this university and local colleges with Food Science programs will benefit
              by sharing this computer-based instrumentation laboratory.  Undergraduate
              research generated by this program can be disseminated by means of a Food
              Science and Nutrition Home Page on the World W ide Web, presentations at
              Institute of Food Technologists Meetings, and publications in Food Science
              journals.  *
