Title       : Discovery-Based Course Experiences: Technology and Equipment Integration in
               Organismic Biology Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9750658

Award Number: 9750658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19311              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leona C. Truchan leona.truchan@alverno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Ferris  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lauralee F. Guilbault  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alverno College
	      3401 S 39th Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  532154020    414/647-3999

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The college, a 4-year liberal-arts college for women with a 28-percent minority
              student population, is expanding and enhancing laboratory and field experiences
              in four middle- to upper-level biology courses (Ecology, Organismal Biology of
              Animals, Organismal Biology of Plants, and Animal Behavior) through the
              acquisition of scientific and computer equipment and through the creation of a
              field research site on the campus.  The project provides students from
              sophomore through senior level with a focused, hands-on, and realistic (in
              terms of needed scientific skills) continuum of undergraduate research
              experiences in organismic biology.      Through this project, a
              discovery-based, or constructivist, approach to laboratory experimentation and
              system observations is implemented.  Within a single laboratory period,
              students are able to test and retest their scientific hypotheses, discovering
              through active investigation which of their hypotheses are correct or
              incorrect.  The high-tech instrumentation is important because it allows
              students to discover both the capabilities and, just as important, the
              limitations of technology.    New equipment includes field sampling equipment
              for terrestrial, aquatic, and laboratory systems of study; data-logging devices
              for short- and long-term data acquisition; and four mixed-platform computers
              (two desktop and two portable) with associated hardware and software.  This
              equipment allows the incorporation of expanded and improved exploratory
              research experiences (field and laboratory), data-acquisition techniques (short
              and long term), data interpretation (mathematical and graphical), mathematical
              and simulation model construction, and validation of models using
              student-collected field data.  As part of its institutional commitment to this
              project, the college is establishing a field research site.  *
