Title       : Modern Electrochemistry in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9750973

Award Number: 9750973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudy Gostowski gostowskir@apsu01.apsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Austin Peay State Univ
	      College Street
	      Clarksville, TN  37040    615/648-7011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electrochemistry, particularly voltammetry, offers many advantages in
              determination of analytical concentrations and physical properties.  These
              advantages include high sensitivity, minimal sample preparation, and
              simultaneous observation of multiple analyses.  The method accomplishes a high
              level of performance yet has a modest cost compared to other instruments with
              similar abilities.  In addition, voltammetry has the unique ability to reduce
              or oxidize the sample, observe the fate of the electrochemically generated
              species, and return the incipient product to its initial state.  Because of
              these qualities, the ACS Committee on Professional Training has recommended
              that a multipurpose electrochemistry instrument be adopted in undergraduate
              courses.  The focus of this project is the integration of a modern
              electrochemistry instrument into the whole undergraduate chemistry program. 
              The three principal areas of this project include the design of instructional
              modules available from webpages, procurement of a mobile, computer-controlled
              instrument, and development of new inquiry-based experiments for the relevant
              courses.  In addition, the instrument is enhancing the effectiveness of student
              research projects.  The efforts of this project are extending beyond the
              immediate department to area high school students and teachers, area community
              colleges, and other universities.
