Title       : Symbolic Algebra in the Engineering Classroom: The Coming Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9152131

Award Number: 9152131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82817              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Yoder mark.a.yoder@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a curriculum innovation that promises to                 
              increase student understanding, productivity, and participation                
              in the classroom and shift the focus of the class to more open-                
              ended and design-oriented problems.  The equipment requested                   
              are 30 powerful workstations running Mathematica.  This                        
              classroom/laboratory is used to teach a year long, Sophomore                   
              level, Electrical Engineering, Circuits & Systems class                        
              sequence.Recent NSF-funded projects (both on our campus and                    
              others) have shown that students learning calculus and                         
              differential equations in computer algebra equipped classrooms                 
              have increased productivity, understanding, and participation.                 
              Installing workstations in an engineering classroom allows                     
              students to participate actively in the lectures.  The powerful                
              plotting routines allows them to visualize the relationships                   
              between voltages, currents, etc in a circuit.  The computer                    
              algebra system's ability to manipulate symbolic equations both                 
              increases the student's productivity and requires less time in                 
              the lecture for re-teaching manipulative mathematics skills.                   
              This extra lecture time is used to address design-oriented                     
              topics such as worst-case studies and sensitivity analysis.                    
              Finally, student retention in engineering is expected to                       
              increase since those students who have weaker manipulative                     
              mathematical skills will be at less of a disadvantage, and                     
              therefore less likely to drop out.
