Title       : Integrated Teaching in the Undergraduate Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1991     
File        : a9152022

Award Number: 9152022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Beltz bbeltz@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary D. Coyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Ann Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              There are several components of the scientific process that are                
              difficult to convey in the classroom. These include                            
              experimental design, testing of hypotheses, analysis and                       
              interpretation of data and the excitement of discovery. The                    
              department is preparing a model semester-long laboratory                       
              program in developmental biology which incorporates these                      
              components and in addition fulfills four specific teaching                     
              goals. That is, 1) to "demystify" science by allowing students                 
              to use state of the art technologies 2) to provide an                          
              opportunity for real discovery by addressing an actual research                
              question 3) to illustrate the interdisciplinary nature of                      
              science by using a variety of techniques to answer specific                    
              questions and 4) to learn to communicate ideas and to think                    
              critically by organizing results in a final research paper. The                
              department is requesting equipment to complete four                            
              workstations for investigation of cellular structure and                       
              function in neurons of leech ganglia by dye iontophoresis,                     
              immunocytochemical localization of neurotransmittors and                       
              electrophysiological characterization of neurons. Included in                  
              these workstations are dissecting stereomicroscopes,                           
              micromanipulators, audio speakers, oscilloscopes and MacLab A/D                
              - D/A hardware and software for data collection on Mac SE                      
              computers. Other pieces of the workstations are presently on                   
              hand - DC amplifiers, air tables and computers. The pieces of                  
              equipment also are for use by several other courses in the                     
              biology curriculum and will enhance the potential experiments                  
              possible for student independent research projects, honors                     
              research, and suffer research opportunities which include                      
              students from other institutions. This proposal will                           
              significantly enhance the advanced training of more than 100                   
              young women scientists per year, many of whom can be expected                  
              to continue study at the graduate level.
