Title       : Development Problem Solving Computer Literacy Laboratory at SUNY-Geneseo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9152029

Award Number: 9152029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35011              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg W. Scragg scragg@cs.geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a laboratory to support a "computer                      
              literacy" course based on the problem solving techniques used                  
              by computer scientists.  This course addresses some of the                     
              deficiencies in problem solving skills observed in the general                 
              student body.  Computer scientists want their courses to                       
              reflect the skills which computer scientists practice.  On the                 
              other hand, computer literacy courses must also serve the needs                
              as perceived by other departments.  Therefore, the course                      
              employs common forms of applications software as tools.                        
              Students develop sufficient skills in those tools while                        
              concentrating on the problem solving aspects of the course.                    
              The course is aimed primarily to those students who do not                     
              intend to pursue the field of computer science further, in                     
              particular education majors.  The  new service course addresses                
              serious problem solving or reasoning issues - in the context of                
              computer applications.  Formal problem solving techniques are                  
              presented in a manner understandable by non-technical students.                
              These are the same techniques used by computer scientists, and                 
              other members of the scientific and mathematical communities in                
              many aspects of their work.  Students also acquire a knowledge                 
              of spreadsheets and data bases in a manner analogous to the way                
              chemistry students learn about balances and Bunsen burners:                    
              both are tools used while addressing serious intellectual                      
              problems.
