Title       : Telecommunications and Signal Processing Laboratory Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1991        
File        : a9152703

Award Number: 9152703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank N. Cornett   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Austen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sung-Kwon Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Periasamy K. Rajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sundaram Natarajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The undergraduate electrical engineering education in the areas                
              of digital and analog signal processing, digital and analog                    
              telecommunications, fiber optics systems, and satellite                        
              communications systems is enhanced with the development of a                   
              comprehensive telecommunications and signal processing                         
              laboratory to provide students with hands-on test and design                   
              experience.  By sharing expensive equipment among these related                
              disciplines, maximum cost effectiveness is being achieved.  The                
              laboratory will comprise five stations consisting of equipment                 
              for signal generation (function, RF, optic), processing                        
              (filters, mixers, etc.), and analysis (oscilloscopes and                       
              spectrum analysis), together with a microcomputer for high-                    
              speed data acquisition and digital signal processing                           
              capabilities.  A total of nine interdisciplinary junior and                    
              senior courses benefit by way of demonstrations, experiments,                  
              and design projects. The knowledge which will be reinforced by                 
              this laboratory ranges from an understanding of fundamental                    
              frequency-domain concepts to more advanced concepts in digital                 
              filtering, signal modulation, fiber optics, and satellite                      
              communications.
