Title       : Development of an Undergraduate Laboratory for Presentation of Computer Science
               Learning Modules for Introductory Courses at Northeastern University.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9152211

Award Number: 9152211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia A. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harriet J. Fell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Viera K. Proulx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Rasala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop an exciting, attractive                 
              environment for learning computer science through hands-on                     
              exploration and experimentation.  The curriculum aspect                        
              consists of a series of related but reasonably independent                     
              learning modules covering the introductory courses through data                
              structures.  They are usable by a wide range of students, from                 
              high school to university.  The modules use graphics and                       
              visualization to provide direct exposure to the problems and                   
              processes which are important in computation, complementing                    
              what can be understood by logic with what can be learned by                    
              working with the hands and observing with the eyes.  The                       
              modules consist of manipulative materials, demonstration                       
              programs based on visual representations of important concepts,                
              hypercard-based learning materials, source code, and teaching                  
              guides.  This project equips a classroom with enough computers                 
              so that students can work on line during the class.  Such a                    
              laboratory enables students to work with the materials in class                
              as concepts are introduced, so that class time becomes a time                  
              for doing instead of just watching and listening.  It gives                    
              faculty a chance to evaluate student comprehension of new                      
              material as it is presented and to provide additional                          
              assistance where it is needed.  The experience in the classroom                
              also introduces students to a style of active learning which                   
              they can carry over into other contexts.
