Title       : Integrated Undergraduate Laboratories for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1991      
File        : a9152722

Award Number: 9152722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilbur H. Campbell wcampbel@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gopi K. Podila  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Lueking  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A key challenge in educating today's undergraduate students is                 
              to bring together understanding of biochemistry,                               
              immunochemistry, microbiology and molecular biology in a                       
              functional manner. The aim of this project is to develop a                     
              year-long laboratory course with 3 integrated modules for                      
              undergraduate majors in the Department of Biological Sciences'                 
              Bachelor of Science degree programs in Biochemistry and                        
              Microbiology which are now being expanded to include Molecular                 
              Biology. These laboratory modules are designed to provide up-                  
              to-date training for the students in fundamental methods used                  
              in biochemistry, immunochemistry, microbiology an molecular                    
              biology. This laboratory course sequence will complement the                   
              year-long lecture course in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,                
              which is a set of 3 one-term modules required for students                     
              studying Biochemistry and Microbiology. The current situation                  
              is that only a single one-term laboratory course is offered and                
              it covers only the basic methods used in biochemistry and a                    
              brief introduction to nucleic acids. The proposed project is a                 
              logical extension of our curriculum, which would bring together                
              contemporary methodology using modern instrumentation to                       
              enhance the learning environment for these students. To achieve                
              this program development, we will integrate our offerings in                   
              laboratory methods to link the student's understanding of                      
              biochemistry, immunochemistry and microbiology to molecular                    
              biology.  The major instruments to be purchased include: UV-Vis                
              spectrophotometers, PhastSystem gel electrophoresis system,                    
              FPLC chromatography system (including an IBM-type personal                     
              computer), preparative centrifuge, bench-top fermenter, DNA                    
              sequencing gel apparatus and DNA sequence analysis software.                   
              The significance of this project lies in the unique integration                
              around a central theme of biochemical and immunochemical                       
              methods for analysis of enzymes and recombinant gene products,                 
              the regulation of gene expression in bacteria, and the cloning                 
              and characterization of bacterial genes.
