Title       : Imaging Optics Laboratory for Undergraduate Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1991       
File        : a9152249

Award Number: 9152249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33321              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Leach   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Angione  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Presently two required laboratory courses are offered to                       
              undergraduate astronomy majors - a junior level astronomical                   
              techniques course and a senior levels projects course.  Both                   
              courses need The project is updating two required laboratory                   
              courses to include material beyond photoelectric techniques for                
              performing stellar photometry by expanding them to include a                   
              variety of topics in imaging, with a special emphasis on noise                 
              analysis.  The generation, manipulation, detection, and                        
              computer processing of images is covered.  An imaging lab has                  
              been set up to include a uniform light source with a pattern                   
              projector, a simple dispersive spectrograph on an optical                      
              bench, a high quality optical CCD imaging camera with a                        
              programmable readout and control circuit, noise analysis                       
              instrumentation, and an image acquisition and processing                       
              computer.  A variety of experiments are done, including                        
              spectroscopy of atomic lines and continuum sources, image                      
              acquisition and calibration, noise and signal-to-noise                         
              analysis, the statistics of photon detection and Poisson                       
              distributions, the concept of a digital image and its                          
              processing, image quality and its effect on point source                       
              detectability, the effect of electronic noise on image quality,                
              and the theory and practice of computer interfaces to modern                   
              instrumentation.  These are incorporated into the junior level                 
              lab as structured exercises performed in groups of two students                
              alternating with existing projects and classroom lectures.                     
              Seniors undertake special projects with one-on-one supervision                 
              to develop new experiments for incorporation into the junior                   
              level course.  The laboratory gives students a comprehensive                   
              exposure to imaging theory and techniques in a practical and                   
              involved environment.
