Title       : Computer-Assisted Undergraduate Laboratory Experiences In Nerve and Muscle
               Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1991      
File        : a9152922

Award Number: 9152922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31258              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Zamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Forest College
	      Sheridan & College Road
	      Lake Forest, IL  60045    312/234-3100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to initiate teaching of nerve,                     
              muscle and cardiac physiology in animal physiology and                         
              introductory biology laboratories.  Computers are used with                    
              modern physiological instrumentation to acquire and analyze                    
              data from physiological events in nerves and muscle.  Computer                 
              simulations will reinforce principles of nerve and muscle                      
              function.  Students in Biology of Organisms are introduced to                  
              data acquisition systems to teach them principles of muscle                    
              physiology in a hands-on setting.  Force transducers and                       
              amplifiers are interfaced with computers equipped with data                    
              acquisition software to record and store data from contraction                 
              of frog muscle.  The oscilloscope of the new software will                     
              permit analysis of nerve action potentials.  Students will use                 
              these physiological work stations extensively when conducting                  
              experiments in nerve, muscle and cardiac function during the                   
              research-projects portion of Animal Physiology.  This project                  
              will significantly extend the instructional capability of our                  
              department into areas of physiology that currently cannot be                   
              taught because of a lack of modern instrumentation.                            
              Computerized data acquisition is the most cost-effective means                 
              of initiating these kinds of laboratory experiences.
