Title       : Laboratory School for the Study of Human Development on the UCSD Campus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1991        
File        : a9152952

Award Number: 9152952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34722              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Stiles jstiles@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to establish a Laboratory School                  
              for the Study of Human Development on the UCSD campus. The                     
              Laboratory School is intended to fill the pressing need at UCSD                
              for laboratory training of students of Human Development. The                  
              need for an undergraduate developmental laboratory facility has                
              been recognized for many years by both the UCSD administration                 
              and by the members of the UCSD developmental community.                        
              However, establishment of a such a facility has been hampered                  
              by a number of factors, the most serious being the limited                     
              facilities and resources available at the existing campus day                  
              care center.  Last year funding was approved by the Chancellor                 
              for the construction of a new day care facility.  The                          
              construction of the day care center has provided the                           
              opportunity for us to build one essential component of the                     
              Laboratory School, that is, a first-rate observational and                     
              experimental testing facility.  The Psychology and                             
              Communication Departments have agreed to provide the additional                
              laboratory space needed for activities associated with                         
              experimental design and analyses.  The Laboratory School has                   
              been designed around a balanced, well-integrated core                          
              curriculum of undergraduate courses which will provide students                
              with direct exposure to a range of approaches for studying                     
              human development.  The curriculum offers both laboratory                      
              courses and opportunities for individual students to                           
              participate in independent research studies or honors thesis                   
              projects.  In the initial phase, the Laboratory School will                    
              focus on development in the preschool and early school-age                     
              period.  This is the logical starting point both because of                    
              UCSD faculty expertise in this age period, and because of the                  
              recent acquisition of resources which will make available an                   
              excellent facility for testing children in this age range.
