Title       : Development of Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Laboratory for Robotics, Machine
               Vision and System Integration at Indiana University, Purdue University at
               Indianapolis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9152727

Award Number: 9152727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48604              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaobin Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Y. Chien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Siva K. Chittajallu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Oner Yurtseven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary undergraduate laboratory for robotics,                    
              machine vision and system integration is being developed to                    
              serve senior-level undergraduate students in Electrical                        
              Engineering and Mechanical Engineering.  The laboratory                        
              provides the students with hands-on experience in the state-of-                
              the-art robotics and manufacturing technology for reinforcing                  
              the scientific and engineering principles learned in related                   
              lecture courses.  The laboratory consists of four experimental                 
              stations, including (1) desk-top CNC machine station, (2) robot                
              and CNC machine integration station, (3) computer vision                       
              station, and (4) robot and vision integration station.  In                     
              addition, a computer-controlled linear conveyor is used for                    
              simulating a flexible manufacturing workcell.  Each station                    
              contains a PC-type computer with appropriate software.  The                    
              equipment supplements existing equipment currently available in                
              the Robotics Laboratory of the Department of Electrical                        
              Engineering and is housed in a room of 900 sq.ft. located in                   
              the new Science, Engineering and Technology Building 11.  The                  
              experiments performed by students range from robot fundamentals                
              to vision-based automated manufacturing.  The students are be                  
              required to develop software to coordinatively command the                     
              robot, CNC machine and other components to perform various                     
              tasks with the aid of sensing devices.  In addition, all                       
              students in the Departments of Electrical Engineering and                      
              Mechanical Engineering benefit from the laboratory in related                  
              lecture courses and their senior engineering capstone design                   
              project courses.
