Title       : Development of Computer-Based Instrumentation Electronics Laboratory for the
               Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9152655

Award Number: 9152655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20887              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amin Karimpour karipour @ NEU-edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Nord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Farhad Shahrooz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph J. Masciulli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin Inst of Boston
	      41 Berkeley Street
	      Boston, MA  021166342    617/423-4630

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              An advanced electronics laboratory using computer-based data                   
              acquisition and analysis instrumentation is being developed at                 
              Franklin Institute of boston for its technology majors.  The                   
              instrumentation consists of six workstations, each with a 386-                 
              based AT personal computer with internal boards for use as: a                  
              digital logic analyzer (DLA); and, an analog instrumentation                   
              system (AIS) comprised of a digital oscilloscope, function                     
              generator and multimeter. The DLA will improve the timing                      
              analysis of a microprocessor-based system bus architecture. The                
              AIS will allow a further explanation of electronics and                        
              electrical circuits through its capability to extract data and                 
              its software manipulation in frequency and characteristic curve                
              analysis. The students using this laboratory are in the 2nd                    
              year of two-year engineering technology programs, and they will                
              have had one year of electrical and electronic circuits.  The                  
              project is significant because it implements an efficient,                     
              cost-effective system, of a type currently utilized in the                     
              private sector, that will improve our students' educational                    
              experience while preparing them for a career in industry.  By                  
              demonstrating the efficacy of this system and developing the                   
              accompanying instructional materials, the project plans to                     
              facilitate the implementation of computer-based electronic                     
              laboratories by other educational institutions.
