Title       : Support for the Tissue Collection of the Department of Herpetology, California
               Academy of Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9876766

Award Number: 9876766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19077              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Drewes kassina@cas.calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jens V. Vindum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will support the further development and continuing expansion of
              the frozen tissue collection of  the Department of Herpetology, California
              Academy of Sciences (CAS).  The Department of Herpetology will obtain one
              ultracold-temperature freezer with an auto-dialer alarm system and tissue
              storage supplies.  The Department will be able to continue their policy of
              routinely securing tissue samples from freshly acquired specimens.  As the
              Department's staff and field associates engaged in collecting efforts
              worldwide, with particular mention of remote localities in Africa and Asia, the
              Department is aware of the potential value that these tissue samples may have
              to the scientific community.  With that in mind, the Department is committed to
              making tissues available to the scientific community.  In fact, the majority of
              tissues collected are used by the extramural scientific community, not for the
              ongoing research programs of Department researchers.  The additional freezer
              will also greatly facilitate the integration of the herpetological tissues
              (over 5,000 stored in the Osher Molecular Laboratory (CAS) facilities with the
              Department's tissue collection.  Concurrent with the physical recuration of the
              Molecular Laboratory's tissue samples, the Department will incorporate the
              associated data, now kept in the Molecular Laboratory's unindexed hand-written
              log, with the main computer database.  This will enhance their ability to serve
              the scientific community by making specimen and data retrieval highly
              efficient.  Further, upon completing the integration and computerization of the
              Molecular Laboratory tissues, the Department will add a searchable tissue
              database to their website, allowing remote access for the scientific community.
