Title       : Thermodynamics of Nondilute Polymer Solutions in Confining Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2001   
File        : a9876360

Award Number: 9876360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iwao Teraoka teraoka@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yongmei Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9876360
Teraoka
This award will investigate thermodynamics and partitioning of
              nondilute polymer solutions in confining geometries such as those provided by
              porous materials, and, at the same time, invigorate educational programs at the
              PIs' institutions through collaborative training.  The confined polymer
              solution systems to be studied are:  (1) a nondilute solution of monodisperse
              polymer; (2) a nondilute solution of a mixture of two polymers different in
              length; (3) a nondilute ternary solution consisting of two homopolymers and a
              common solvent.  Computer simulation will be used to study the nature of
              reduced dimensionality of the confined solutions in the first system, to
              calculate the chemical potential and the partition coefficient in the second
              system, and to map the phase diagram and calculate the correlation length in
              the third system.  Partitioning experiments will be conducted to elucidate the
              partitioning behavior in the second and third systems.  Static and dynamic
              light scattering will be used to determine the phase diagram and the
              correlation length in the third system.  Experimental results will be compared
              with the simulation results.  The two PIs will set up a joint training program
              in which participating students will be exchanged during the summer to maximize
              students' exposure and participation in advanced education and research that
              one institution alone cannot offer.
%%%
This award will enhance undergraduate
              and graduate education at North Carolina A&T State University, a Historically
              Black Institution, and Polytechnic University through bi-directional training
              of the students at the two institutions.  The research project, thermodynamics
              and partitioning of nondilute polymer solutions in confining geometries, will
              be used to equip the students, especially Minority students, with knowledge and
              skills necessary for their future scientific carriers.  Results of the research
              will contribute to a better understanding of the mechanisms in large-scale
              chromatographic separation of polymers.
***  
  

