Title       : CAREER: Teacher Knowledge, Beliefs, & Technology: Constructing Models of Change
               in Systemic Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a9876150

Award Number: 9876150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry J. Fishman fishman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes a program of research to explore the
              relationship
between the knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes held by middle
              school science
teachers with respect to inquiry-based science with embedded
              learning
technologies and their classroom practices with those technologies. 
              At its
heart, this research is about the study of teacher change.  The
              teachers
who will participate in this work are part of a large-scale systemic
              change
initiative in the Detroit Public Schools, conducted jointly by
              the
NSF-sponsored Detroit Urban Systemic Initiative (DUSI) and the Center
              for
Learning Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS).  In that context,
              the
teachers are all learning how to teach with new curriculum materials
              and
technology, and they receive a broad range of professional development
              to
support them in this learning.

To become successful with inquiry-based
              and technology-enhanced curricula,
teachers will need to learn new science
              content (content knowledge); they
will need to learn new methods for
              organizing their classroom (pedagogical
knowledge); and they will need to
              learn new techniques for teaching
particular kinds of content, such as the use
              of modeling tools to help
students construct an understanding of how burning
              coal from factories
combines with air to create acid rain that impacts the
              environment
(pedagogical content knowledge).  Teachers' attitudes toward
              technology
need to change, and their beliefs in their own self-efficacy
              with
technology and new science material needs to improve.  DUSI and
              LeTUS
attempt to help teachers change along these dimensions through
              activities
that include cognitive (providing evidence for the feasibility and
              benefits
of using new approaches), social (learning and sharing with
              colleagues),
and contextual (providing evidence for the support of the
              system)
mechanisms for change.  There is little understanding at the present
              time
as to how these aspects of change work either separately or together
              to
foster the use of technology in science teaching.

The main questions
              that this research asks are:

1) What are teachers' knowledge, beliefs, and
              attitudes with respect to
teaching science with technology, and how do they
              change over time?

2) What are teachers' classroom practices with respect to
              technology, and
how do they change over time?

3) What is the relationship
              between teachers' knowledge, beliefs, and
attitudes and their classroom
              teaching practices with technology, and how
does this change over time?

4)
              How do professional development activities influence changes in
teachers'
              knowledge, beliefs, attitudes, and practice over time, and how
might those
              activities be re-designed to foster desired changes?

This research is
              designed to complement a program of instruction in the
Educational Technology
              program at the University of Michigan.  Students in
this program will approach
              the study of technology in K-12 settings from
the perspective of teachers'
              technology use and cognition.  The research
also serves and as a setting for
              graduate students to conduct their own
investigations.

There are immediate
              practical benefits of this work for teachers in
Detroit, where the results of
              the research will be used to re-shape
professional development activities to
              more directly address their needs in
reform.

