Title       : CAREER: Hybrid Locomotion Systems for Varying Terrains and Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9876301

Award Number: 9876301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234028             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Ostrowski jpo@grip.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This award addresses issues of hybrid robotic locomotion systems --- robotic
              systems that utilize multiple
locomotion modalities in order to achieve
              greater mobility. Examples of these systems include the use of arms or legs by
              a wheeled robot to walk or climb stairs, or the use of a tail by a legge&robot
              to provide swimming thrust or bracing forces in underground tunnels or pipes.
              Such systems can provide robotic platforms capable of operating in multiple
              environments, such as underwater, in pipes, or overland. Central to this
              research
is how to generate appropriate input patterns, or gaits, for hybrid
              robotic locomotion systems, and how to modify these gaits when moving between
              environments, such as land to water. Other issues include the development of
              measures of terrain difficulty and mobility for robotic systems. These would
              provide a characterization of the mobility of a given robot configuration in
              relation to the difficulty of the path it must follow through the environment.
              Issues of sensing, both of the environment and of contact forces acting
on the
              robot, will be addressed. The use of modular components will also be
              emphasized, in order to provide basic modules, such as legs, tails, and wheels,
              that can be rapidly configured into a complete robotic system. Using modular
              components, the experimental side of this research will, focus on the
              development of three basic robotic platforms: a salamander, a wheel-legged
              system, and an eel robot. Each of these systems will
potentially possess
              advanced locomotion and manipulation capabilities that greatly exceed those
              found in existing robotic systems.

The education plan includes building
              visualization tools and graphics animation to help graduate students
              understanding difficult concepts by illustration. A website will be established
              for sharing such tools with educators around the world. At the undergraduate
              level, research will be integrated into education through senior design
              projects and the newly formed Penn Robotics Club. At the middle and high school
              level, an existing robotics mentoring program will be strengthened by
              introducing an internet-based mobile robot, with associated short-course
              modules.

