Title       : Affective Processes in Judgment and Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9876587

Award Number: 9876587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Slovic   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald MacGregor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Affect and emotion have been actively studied in psychology for more than a
              century, yet the role of affective processes in judgment and decision making
              remains largely unexplored.  Building upon recent work in cognitive and social
              psychology, and in neurology, the research proposed here develops and tests an
              affect-based theory of judgment and decision making.  Within this theory, new
              concepts such as evaluability, proportion dominance, psychophysical numbing,
              and the affect heuristic are described and used to explain anomalies such as
              the increased attractiveness of inferior gambles and our inability to properly
              appreciate the significance of numerical representations of losses of human
              lives.  We argue that, without affective guidance derived from experience or
              problem context, we may fail to grasp the meaning or value of commonplace
              things such as ice cream or more profound things such as money and human
              lives.

	Building upon this theoretical framework and supporting research,
              five types of studies are proposed:
	1. Research on the affect heuristic tests
              the hypothesis that affect serves as a cue for judgments of risk and
              probability.
	2.  Research on evaluability tests the hypothesis that the
              meaning of a stimulus is reflected in the precision of a person's affective
              feelings toward that stimulus.  More precise affective impressions reflect more
              precise meanings, and they carry more weight in judgment and decision
              making.
	3. Research on affect integration investigates the manner in which
              multiple affective feelings are integrated into an impression, judgment, or
              decision.
	4. Studies of individual differences seek to develop measures to
              differentiate intuitive, experiential, and affective thinkers from persons
              whose thinking is less guided by affect.
	5. Prescriptive research attempts to
              demonstrate how an understanding of affective processes can lead to
              improvements in the quality of people's judgments and decisions.



