Title       : Coherent Surface X-ray Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9876610

Award Number: 9876610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian K. Robinson ikr@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9876610
Robinson

In this project a new technique called Coherent X-ray
              diffraction (CXD) will be further developed and applied to the study of
              surfaces and interfaces.   Potential applications of CXD as a probe of static
              structure on a very fine length scale will be pursued first.  The experiments
              will use the undulator radiation from the Advanced Photon Source (APS) at the
              Argonne National Laboratory.  The time dependent counterpart of CXD, called
              X-ray Photon Correlation Spectroscopy (XPCS) will be applied to the study of
              growth at surfaces of Si and Ge by molecular-beam and chemical-vapor deposition
              methods in order to understand how growth instabilities arise that lead to
              defects in the grown material.  The overall goals of the work are to advance
              the understanding of the coherent diffraction process by measuring static
              speckle from simple two dimensional systems, such as domain structures PMN and
              GeSi. A long term goal  is the investigation of thermal fluctuations of
              surfaces in equilibrium with the XPCS method in order to obtain a better
              quantitative understanding of the general thermodynamic principles that govern
              the behavior of surfaces.  
%%% 
A recently invented method called Coherent
              X-ray Diffraction was  found to have important applications to the study of
              surfaces and interfaces.  The method is very sensitive to the roughness of
              silicon wafers on an extremely fine scale.  A new mathematical method was
              developed to yield from the experimental data the image of the surface
              topography, or of a buried interface, with a resolution over a useful length
              scale.  This imaging method may supercede the current practice of imaging the
              surface topography by scanning stylus methods.  The exploratory research will
              be performed on the Advanced Light Source of the Argonne National Laboratory
              and will establish a new benchmark for the sensitivity for surface studies.  In
              addition to improving the understanding of the coherent X-ray diffraction
              method itself, the results of this research will have important bearings on the
              future technology of semiconductors and nano-structures.  This research will
              provide training to graduate students and postdoctoral research associates in
              an area of technology which will be of great importance during the next several
              decades of the 21st Century.
***

