Title       : Public Perception of Risk and Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9876581

Award Number: 9876581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121389             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Flynn jflynn@decisionresearch.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Slovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Contemporary science and technology are perceived by many as hazardous as well
              as beneficial.  This has led to public concerns about risk management of
              important policies and projects.  Differences between experts and the public
              have been central to numerous resulting risk controversies.  This research
              project studies the way attitudes toward risk issues and their management are
              formed and the implications for addressing risk controversies.  The primary
              empirical evidence for discussing the conceptual issues comes from an
              examination of five risk topics: (1) risk and decision making; (2) values and
              environmental risks, (3) intuitive toxicology, (4) biotechnology and cloning,
              and (5) product stigma.  Scientific articles are in preparation for each of
              these topics. 

The data for the study comes from archives at Decision
              Research and elsewhere, from ongoing research, and from the 1997 national risk
              survey, which was designed to produce new data on these topics.  In particular,
              this recent survey includes oversampling of minority populations that will
              allow examination of social, cultural, and political factors that prior
              evidence indicates are an important part of the context people use to form
              their perceptions of risk and their attitudes toward public decision processes.
               A primary focus of this work is to develop a conceptual framework to
              understand different approaches to risk and preferences for risk management
              options.  This research is expected to inform risk communication, risk
              management, and public policy in ways that will serve as the basis for
              recommending new approaches for public decision making. 

