Title       : Non-Convexities and Macroeconomic Complementarities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a9876522

Award Number: 9876522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell W. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Haltiwanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Russell W. Cooper
NBER
SBR-9876522

This project pursues two themes in
              macroeconomics. The first concerns the macroeconomic significance of
              non-convexities at the microeconomic level. In particular, the nature of
              adjustment costs for capital and labor as well as the implications of these
              adjustments for productivity are studied at the plant-level in joint work with
              John Haltiwanger. Further, the adjustment process for durables at the household
              level is investigated as well, in joint work with Jerome Adda. For both
              applications, optimization is modeled through the specification of a stochastic
              dynamic programming problem. Aggregation across heterogeneous households then
              generates macroeconomic implications. These models are structurally estimated
              using plant level data (for the capital and labor adjustment process) and both
              household and aggregate data for the durable goods purchases. Finally, in both
              of these projects, policy applications, such as investment tax credits, job
              creation measures and scrapping subsidies, are pursued.

The second part of
              the project continues ongoing research into the macroeconomic implications of
              strategic complementarities. Two paths are pursued. First, understanding the
              Great Depression continues to be a prime target within the coordination
              literature. Building on previous work with Dean Corbae on financial crises, the
              next stage of the research studies the dynamics of bank runs and the
              stabilizing role of monetary policy in an environment of financial fragility.
              Further, the project studies the interactions between exchange rate instability
              and financial fragility in an open economy. Finally, a continuation of research
              with Alok Johri on learning at the plant level is planned. In particular, the
              goal is to study the dynamic implications of learning by doing and learning
              from others. Again, this entails estimation of production functions at the
              plant level and the integration of the results into a dynamic macroeconomic
              model.

