Title       : CAREER: Photodetachment from Nanometer-Sized Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9876224

Award Number: 9876224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uwe R. Kortshagen uk@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses research on basic properties on nanoparticles and the
              measurement of current unexplored properties such as photodetachment and
              photoionization.  It is suggested that photodetachment of electrons due to UV
              radiation is an important, to date neglected effect which can lead to more
              positively charged particles and that it could explain the fast coagulation
              growth of particles observed experimentally.  An experiment to measure the
              particle photodetachment cross sections is proposed.  Negatively charged
              particles will be grown in, extracted from a pulsed plasma and sent through a
              UV photodetachment chamber.  An excimer lamp will be used to generate
              narrow-band UV radiation over a wide wavelength range.  An electrostatic
              analyzer will be used to determine the fraction of particles which have
              experienced photodetachment.  The results may lead to an understanding of
              particle growth in semiconductor plasmas and possibly may show a way to avoid
              coagulation growth of "killer particles."

The educational plan focuses on
              creating awareness and transmitting excitement about the research area of
              plasma processing and nanoparticle research.  High school students will get a
              first hand impression of research through short lectures and laboratory visits.
               High school teachers will be invited to participate in research activities
              during the summer and be advised in developing exciting "dusty plasma" related
              classroom experiments.  Undergraduate students will be addressed through course
              development and development of interactive, computer-based teaching materials. 
              Students will experience the excitement of research by working with a research
              grade plasma simulation code on "virtual plasmas" and by having the opportunity
              to compare their results to "real" plasmas in laboratory demonstrations.  They
              will also have the opportunity of direct research involvement through research
              assistantships, and honors thesis projects.  Graduate students will benefit
              from the program, in particular, through the opportunity of international
              exchange.

