Title       : CAREER: Optical and Infrared Spectroscopic Investigation of Complex Polymer
               Dynamics and Rheology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9876221

Award Number: 9876221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rangaramanujam M. Kannan rkannan@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9876221
Kannan
Recent advances in the synthesis and processing of polymeric
              materials have made it possible to engineer polymers for technologies that not
              only take advantage of their bulk properties, but also their unique properties
              at the molecular and nano-structural levels.  These advances have also brought
              a new class of exciting issues into the dynamics and processing of these
              materials, because engineering has to be done from the molecular, to the
              macroscopic level.  The ultimate goal of the CAREER research plan is to create
              advanced materials and novel processing methods for polymers, through
              nano-scale understanding.  To achieve this, novel combinations of experimental
              methods are being developed by taking advantage of the latest developments in
              rheology, polarimetry and FTIR spectroscopy.  In the research plan, three
              specific objectives are identified:  (1) obtain a fundamental understanding of
              the dynamics and rheology of model miscible polystyrene-poly(vinyl methyl
              ether)(PS/PVME) blends; (2) determine the molecular origin of substrate
              birefringence in magneto-optical materials; (3) investigate the rheology and
              elastic behavior in metallocene-catalyzed syndiotactic polypropylenes.  In
              blends, using the dichroism spectra, the individual component contribution to
              stress (  ) will be measured.  The temperature dependence of     will provide
              insights into the hypotheses of whether components of a miscible blend exhibit
              'blend-averaged' response, or maintain their individual identity.  In
              polycarbonate based magneto-optical materials, component contributions to
              flow-induced birefringence, and the subsequent relaxation are probed to
              identify the molecular origins of birefringence.  In semi-crystalline
              syndiotactic polypropylenes, the role of tacticity on the unique mechanical and
              rheological properties is investigated.  These materials exhibit unique elastic
              behavior in stretched films.  A study of this phenomenon will clarify whether
              this is due to crystal-crystal transformation, or physical crosslinking induced
              by residual entanglements.  This work has implications to the processing, and
              properties of metallocene-catalyzed polyolefin elastomers, in general.
%%%
In
              the CAREER education plan, a synergy between classroom, industrial exposure,
              and state-of-the-art research is proposed, to prepare chemical engineering
              students to apply basic knowledge in open-ended, real-life problems.  To
              achieve this, three specific educational activities are proposed,  which take
              advantage of Wayne State's proximity to a thriving industrial belt:  (1)
              develop an integrated unit operations course, which involves con-current,
              tailored, industrials visits, followed by case studies; (2) develop a
              'capstone-type' course in polymer science named, 'case studies in polymer
              science'; (3) provide sustained, productive research experience in
              nanostructured polymers to undergraduates, by developing research teams with
              faculty, graduate students, and the undergraduate students.  Plans (1) and (2)
              are already receiving enthusiastic support from industrial collaborators.  A
              key element for Plan (3) is that students will be recruited into the research
              group at the sophomore level, and will be part of multi-disciplinary research
              teams, composed of faculty-graduate students-undergraduate students.  Research
              exposure is a powerful way to introduce, and encourage the non-traditional
              undergraduate students at Wayne State to careers in research.
***  
     

