Title       : International Spillovers and Water Quality in Rivers: Do Countries Free Ride?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a9876498

Award Number: 9876498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilary A. Sigman hsigman@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      When pollution crosses national borders, polluting countries do not
              experience the full benefits of pollution control. These spillovers may result
              in environmental degradation, unless countries successfully negotiate to
              resolve the problem. Although a theoretical literature has developed on the
              conditions for international environmental agreements, there are few
              econometric studies of countries' behavior in practice. The proposed project
              addresses this deficit in two ways. First, it examines the success of
              negotiations in practice, by looking for evidence that pollution levels rise
              with the extent to which resources are shared by different countries. Second,
              it tests some predictions about the conditions under which countries can
              receive weight in each others' decisions. The analysis focuses on water quality
              in rivers, a resource that ranges from entirely domestic to international.
   
                  The project will estimate an empirical model of river water quality. Two
              data sets provide information on water quality at monitoring stations on many
              different rivers around the world for over two decades. The data sets are the
              Global Emissions Monitoring System Water Quality Monitoring Project
              (GEMS/Water), managed by the United Nations Environmental Program, and the OECD
              Environmental Data Compendium. Data on determinants of water quality at the
              monitoring stations in these data sets will be gathered from a variety of
              sources. A Geographic Information System (GIS) will be used to develop
              variables related to the river system, such as upstream and downstream
              population and land use.
        The research will take several approaches to
              assess the role of spillovers. Water quality at monitoring stations on domestic
              river systems will be compared with those on international river systems. The
              analysis will also explore the effects of continuous measures of crossborder
              effects, such as the proportion of the affected population in downstream
              countries. To consider the role of international negotiations, the analysis
              will examine whether factors that might facilitate agreements, such as the
              international trade relationship between the countries, determine observed
              pollution levels. In all these analyses, the estimated equations will include
              physical characteristics of the rivers and economic and political conditions.
              Some equations will also include country effects to address other
              heterogeneity.
        This study will provide empirical evidence on the
              extent of environmental degradation due to international spillovers and an
              assessment of relationships that help resolve these problems. In addition to
              its direct products, the project will create data on river attributes at
              monitoring stations in the GEMS/Water and OECD data sets that may be useful for
              future environmental research.	

