Title       : Career: Structural Dependence in Graphical-Temporal Data with Applications to
               Neuroscience and Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a9876147

Award Number: 9876147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Genovese genovese@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research component of this project will develop new statistical methods for
              making inferences from a class of data in which measurements over time are
              associated with several "experimental units" that have a complicated dependence
              in their structural and/or stochastic properties.  Such data arise frequently
              in diverse applications such as traffic flow, evolutionary biology, growth
              curve analysis, neuroimaging, and finance.  This research will focus on cases
              where there is a discrete (and often small) set of units whose relationships
              are scientifically meaningful.  Specifically, this project will develop models
              in three primary areas:  (i) spatial models to improve inferences from
              functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data, (ii) models of functional
              connectivity that allow fMRI data to provide information about how the
              components of brain systems interact, and (iii) new models for risk assessment
              and dependence analysis in computational finance.

The educational component
              of this project will focus on teaching statistical methods and reasoning to
              experimental psychologists.  This project will design a course that builds on
              case studies and new pedagogical approaches to provide such authentic learning
              for these students.  The emphasis will be on applying statistics in real
              scientific problems drawn from the psychological literature, effective
              communication and writing skills, and integrating the computer into the course
              at all levels.  The project will produce the following:  (i) A suite of
              interactive software modules written in Java for exploring the key concepts
              covered in the class, (ii) A complete set of homework projects and computer
              laboratory exercises based on issues in the psychological literature, (iii) A
              set of tools for developing interactive lectures, and (iv) An assessment of
              student performance both in the class and in downstream courses.  These
              products will be packaged to be easily distributable to and useable by other
              instructors.


