Title       : Monetary Policy, Credit Supply Shocks, and Investment-Output Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9876548

Award Number: 9876548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Gilchrist sgilchri@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Current economic events in Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe strongly
              suggest the possibility that deteriorating financial conditions at banks are
              important factors in either causing or prolonging severe disruptions in
              economic activity. Credit crunches attributable to weakness in the U.S. banking
              sector have been cited as a contributing if not causal factor in the 1990-91
              recession and in the various regional contractions that have occurred
              throughout the United States over the 1984-1993 period. Recent research
              suggests that the same economic forces at play in such obviously disruptive
              episodes also may be at play during the regular course of the business cycle.
              Thus, frictions in banking and financial markets that propagate large shocks
              leading to severe recessions may also be important contributing factors in
              other business cycle episodes, such as the Volcker disinflation and subsequent
              recession of 1982.
Despite the clear empirical links between bank health and
              bank lending, there are very few studies that document significant declines in
              economic activity that can be attributed directly to the observed contractions
              in bank lending. A key problem is identification. Simultaneous declines in bank
              health and lending may reflect declines in overall economic activity, rather
              than vice-versa. This lack of identification reflects a paucity of data linking
              borrowers to banks. Without such data, loan supply cannot be separated from
              loan demand. Broad indices of economic activity rather than data on specific
              borrowers that are most likely bank-dependent must be relied upon to assess the
              overall impact of credit supply disruptions originating at banks.
Two separate
              but related projects will be conducted. The first project studies the economic
              consequences of credit-supply shocks originating at banks. It uses unique data
              sources that directly match borrowers to their primary banks to analyze the
              effect of large disruptions in bank loan supply on the investment, inventory
              and employment behavior of bank-dependent firms. The use of matched
              borrower-bank data solves many of the identification problems that have plagued
              this literature. The sectoral transmission of loan supply shocks is studied by
              analyzing the response of geographically distant plants that share a common
              lending relationship.
The second project considers the macroeconomic
              consequences of credit market imperfections and investment frictions in a
              general equilibrium model. The goal of this exercise is to build an
              empirically-tractable general-equilibrium model that incorporates key
              interactions between monetary policy, financial markets and investment
              decisions. A flexible specification of the investment process that provides a
              realistic description of investment dynamics is used. By combining investment
              decision lags, adjustment costs and financial market imperfections, the model
              can rationalize a persistent hump-shaped response of output to monetary policy
              without relying on unrealistically large nominal rigidities.  The model will be
              estimated using minimum-distance techniques.



