Title       : Problems in Bioinorganic and Metal Cluster Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9876457

Award Number: 9876457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1340000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Holm holm@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research in bioinorganic chemistry and in metal clusters by Dr.
              Richard H. Holm of the Chemistry Department, Harvard University.  Four lines of
              investigation will be pursued.  In the first topical area, accurate minimal
              synthetic representations of the catalytic sites of the enzymes
              dimethylsulfoxide reductase, nitrate reductase, and formate dehydrogenase will
              be examined.  Pathways for enzymatic transformations and the factors
              contributing to the feasibility of these pathways will be explored.  The second
              area of research involves biologically related nickel and iron chemistry
              pertinent to the enzyme hydrogenase.  Tetracysteinyl cyclic peptides designed
              to stabilize the thiolate-bridged arrangement of the two metals will be
              prepared.  The kinetics of dihydrogen uptake and evolution will be studied in
              the resulting model compounds.  The third area includes synthesis of a
              peroxide-bridged heme-copper species and investigation of magnetic coupling
              between iron and copper, an imporant property of heme-copper oxidases.  
              Interactions of porphyrin-containing iron-copper complexes with peroxide and
              the enzyme inhibitor cyanide will also be studied.  Finally, mesoscale metal
              chalcogenide clusters will be synthesized and characterized.  The clusters will
              contain rhenium and sulfur or selenium and will be linked by bridging
              interactions.

Metals play important roles in the activity of a wide range of
              enzymes, but factors controlling their activity are not entirely understood. 
              Here compounds modeling a number of enzymes will be synthesized and the effect
              of structural and electronic changes on mode of action will be studied.  One
              potential outcome is a molecular level description of the basis of cyanide
              toxicity in aerobic organisms.  Graduate students involved in the investigation
              will learn a wide variety of advanced spectroscopic methods and will benefit
              from involvement in a program that includes collaborators at other
              institutions.



