Title       : CAREER: Ecology and Genetics of Male/Female-Ratio Polymorphism in Natural
               Populations of the Silene Latifolia Plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9876397

Award Number: 9876397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Taylor drt3b@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1045,9169,9178,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9876397 
Taylor

So-called 'selfish genetic elements' are genes that enhance
              their own transmission across generations at the expense of the organism in
              which they reside.  Often, there are other genes that suppress the effects of
              the selfish element.  This antagonistic interaction between genes is known as
              'intragenomic conflict'.  Intragenomic conflict is thought to be of fundamental
              importance, perhaps influencing the origin of reproductive isolation, sex
              chromosomes, sex-ratio bias, repetitive DNA, and sex-determination mechanisms,
              among others.  The perceived importance of these phenomena has grown recently
              as experimental studies have established their existence in a wide variety of
              taxa.  Nevertheless, very few studies have examined the dynamics of
              intragenomic conflict or its historical importance in natural
              populations.

Silene latifolia is a dioecious plant with a sex-ratio
              polymorphism that closely resembles classic examples of intragenomic conflict
              in animals, but is more amenable to research in natural populations.  This
              research focuses on two aspects of the sex-ratio polymorphism in Silene
              latifolia that are of general importance for understanding intragenomic
              conflict.  First, the rates of genetic transmission of alleles that control the
              sex ratio will be measured in experimental populations set up in the field. 
              Second, a phylogenetic analysis will evaluate the historical importance of
              intragenomic conflict in this system and the diversity of genetic mechanisms
              controlling the sex ratio.  

The proposed experiments will make important
              contributions to our understanding of sex-ratio variation in nature, and the
              biological significance of intragenomic conflict.  How often such conflicts
              arise and are resolved in nature is critical to our understanding of the
              origins of sex-determining mechanisms and the stability of Mendelian
              segregation itself.  The educational component of this project focuses on
              expanding the role of laboratory research in undergraduate course curricula,
              and outreach programs to introduce the experience of research in university
              labs to secondary school students with career ambitions in science.
              






