Title       : Improvements in the Curation of the University of Alaska Frozen Tissue
               Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9876837

Award Number: 9876837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Cook   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon H. Jarrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will further integrate the University of Alaska (UA) Museum Mammal
              Collection and Alaska
Frozen Tissue Collection into Federal and state
              monitoring and inventorying initiatives by developing a
permanent and more
              efficient personnel structure.  This project will increase the value and
              accessibility of these collections and further establish them as important
              components of the regional scientific infrastructure.  Presently there are many
              field studies and subsistence-monitoring projects on wild mammals underway
              throughout Alaska.  While the UA Museum has capitalized on several excellent
              opportunities to archive (e.g.), Exxon Valdez marine mammals), a substantial
              number of ongoing projects do not result in the preservation of material in
              natural history collections.

Specifically, the project will upgrade a
              half-time position to full-time status as Manager of the Alaska Frozen Tissue
              Collection.  The Museum has agreed to continue the new position with state
              funds and thus ensure a long-term effort to archive these important materials. 
              The new position will expand the Alaska Frozen Tissue Collection significantly
              by coordinating efforts to collect tissues and skeletal material with the
              Alaska Department of Fish and Game, National Marine Fisheries Service and the
              U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, USDA Forest Service,
              Bureau of Land Management, and North Slope Borough Division of Wildlife
              Management.

Additional staffing will allow the current Collection Manager to
              (1) oversee the verification the database, (2) migrate the database from x-base
              to Structured Query Language, (3) move the database onto its own dedicated
              server, and (4) assemble and archive related documentation (e.g., field notes,
              publications, reports).  Finally, this project will provide additional freezer
              space and more secure back-up procedures for this large cryogenic collection.
