Title       : REU: An Undergraduate Research Training Program in Geoscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9876909

Award Number: 9876909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance M. Bertka bertka@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven B. Shirey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9876909
Bertka

During a ten-week summer program, 11 undergraduate students
              will be given the opportunity to actively participate in the research program
              of a staff member at the Broad Branch Campus of the Carnegie Institute of
              Washington.  The Broad Branch Campus includes both the Geophysical Laboratory
              and the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism.  Recruitment efforts will
              especially target groups historically underrepresented in science and students
              from institutions that are unable to offer a research experience.  Scholarship,
              possible influence on career objectives, and the ability to match the student's
              scientific interests with available research projects will all be considered in
              the selection process.  While at the Geophysical Laboratory and the Department
              of Terrestrial magnetism, each student will be assigned an advisor and a
              research project.  Although varied, most of the students' projects will involve
              some aspect of earth or planetary geoscience research.  The students will be
              instructed by their advisors in the use of the experimental, and/or analytical
              and computational apparatus that are utilized in our research programs.  Each
              week the students will also meet in a group for a lunch seminar.  During this
              time Carnegie staff members will describe their own research interests and
              laboratory facilities.  The students will tour some  of the government research
              laboratories in the area.  The students will be expected to prepare a paper
              describing their summer research results and to participate in a special
              student symposium where they will present their work to their peers and our
              staff.  If a student completes significant research during the summer, then
              they will also be encouraged to submit their work for presentation at a
              professional scientific meeting, or to use their summer research as the basis
              for a senior thesis at their home institution.

