Title       : Large Volume Production of Hyperpolarized Noble Gas for Biological Magnetic
               Resonance Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a9876741

Award Number: 9876741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $639999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell Albert malbert@bwh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Selim Unlu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Lutchen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bennett B. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham & Womens Hosp Inc
	      75 Francis Street
	      Boston, MA  021156195    617/525-3160

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract 9876741
Mitch Albert

The objective of this project is to
              develop the instrumentation necessary to routinely apply the novel technique of
              hyperpolarized 129Xe (HypX) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy
              (MRS) to biological investigations conducted in vitro and in vivo.  No adequate
              instrumentation is readily available for producing the multi-liter quantities
              necessary for such investigations.
Hyperpolarized noble gas magnetic resonance
              studies may illuminate biological structures and functions that have proved
              difficult for conventional MR techniques.  Magnetic resonance imaging usually
              employs the strong signal from water protons, abundant in the organism, but the
              contrast is often low.  Moreover, proton-based techniques have shortcomings in
              some of the most interesting biological environments, notable the lungs and
              lipid parts of nerves and the brain. 129Xe is extremely soluble in lipids and
              has a spin-1/2 nucleus of moderate MR delectability, but is virtually
              undetectable at the concentrations attainable in living organisms. 
              Hyperpolarization of 129Xe ex vivo by spin exchange with optically bumped Rb
              vapor can enhance its delectability by about a hundred thousand times.  The
              long relaxation time of dissolved hyperpolarized xenon in circulating blood,
              comparable to the circuit time, suggests that inbreathed, hyperpolarized 129Xe
              can be used as a magnetic resonance probe of distal tissues.  Using
              hyperpolarized 129Xe, the first images of the gas space in excised mouse lungs
              have been obtained and the technique has been extended to images of the gas
              space in living animals.  Eventually, the solubility of 129Xe in lipids may
              permit direct imaging of the perfusion of lipid rich tissues such as the white
              matter of brain, currently inaccessible to any form of MRI.
To date, HypX-MRI
              experiments reported in the literature suffer from relatively small volumes and
              low polarizations.  The work funded by this award hopes to make HypX-MRI
              routine by developing a stable, high-power diode-laser driven optical pumping
              apparatus to produce liter quantities of hyperpolarized 129Xe.  The major
              components of this apparatus will include (a) an optical pumping chamber
              optimized for large HypX gas production rates, (b) a gas delivery system for
              administration of HypX to the subject, (c) a low temperature trap for removal
              of Rb vapor, and (d) a cryogenic storage system.  The system performance will
              be optimized by systematic studies of optical pumping through modeling and
              computer simulations, design of novel pumping cells and laser delivery systems,
              and monitoring and mapping the spatial distribution of the polarization.  The
              modular nature of the instrument will allow us to utilize improved light
              sources and new concepts.


