Title       : CAREER: Mathematical Foundations of Computer Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9876332

Award Number: 9876332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243744             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Arvo arvo@cs.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to strengthen the theoretical 
foundations of
              computer graphics by carefully formulating its 
mathematical underpinnings,
              applying formal methods of computer 
science, and exploring fundamental
              connections with other disciplines.  The work plan is organized into four
              categories: 1) mathematical underpinnings, 2) numerical methods, 3)
              
computational complexity, and 4) formal methods.  Within each category
              several specific projects are described.
Work done under this grant will
              depart from previous work in both the tools applied and in the areas
              investigated.  Among the novel tools to be applied are mathematical methods
              from functional analysis (e.g. measure theory), information-based complexity
              (e.g. radius of information), and formal 
methods of computer science (e.g.
              refinement calculus); these tools will be applied to fundamental problems of
              computer graphics, such as deriving and clarifying radiometric 
principles,
              placing a priori limits on the accuracy of image-based rendering, and
              differentiating images of non-Lambertian scenes.  These projects are firmly
              rooted in previous work performed by the author.

Among the novel areas to be
              investigated are proving the 
correctness of rendering algorithms, "inverting"
              rendering 
algorithms in response to user queries, and formalizing the use
              
of default assumptions, ambiguity, and contradiction in 
human-computer
              interaction.
 The fundamental educational objectives of this work are to
              infuse computer graphics with appropriate mathematical structure, to train
              future graphics researchers in the 
art of constructing rigorous proofs and
              formally verifiable 
algorithms, and to integrate the tools and fundamental
              
concepts of computer graphics into the core computer science curriculum. 
              These goals cannot be attained through the introduction of a single course, but
              will instead require exposing students to the necessary concepts at many
              levels.  Toward this end, elements of computer graphics will be 
introduced
              into an existing sophomore-level course on the theory of computation, and an
              advanced graduate-level course will be devised that explores the interplay of
              computer graphics, human-computer interaction, and artificial intelligence,
              
while emphasizing the role of mathematical abstraction and formal
              verification.

 


