Title       : A Novel Instrument for Studying Transient Enzyme Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9876677

Award Number: 9876677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen S. Anderson karen.anderson@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Key insights into protein structure-function studies and structure-based drug
              design can be provided by an understanding of how enzyme catalysis is occurring
              at the enzyme active site. The study of catalysis is at the very core of
              understanding enzyme function. An understanding of the chemistry, chemical
              species and the kinetic pathway that takes place within the active site of
              enzyme holds great promise for describing in detail how enzymes work and more
              importantly how small molecules might be designed to be more potent drugs i.e.
              transition state analogs. The major focus of this instrument and methodology we
              are developing will be in advancing studies of transient intermediates in
              biochemical reactions (both covalent and non-covalent). In addition, this
              instrument should find utility in monitoring chemical catalysis and reactions,
              aiding in protein folding structural and kinetic studies and further validating
              and characterizing the creation of engineered proteins with novel catalytic
              functions. This instrument will open up the possibility of studying chemically
              labile intermediates and new enzyme and protein Systems that otherwise could
              not be studied. 
This instrument will provide a major advance in methods to
              study transient enzyme intermediates and will continue the evolution of
              applying high-resolution mass spectrometry techniques into biology. This area
              continues to grow in importance as the methods become more powerful, as new
              enzymes with novel mechanisms become identified, as incorporation of transient
              kinetic information into drug design increases and as new areas of rapid
              kinetic investigations such as protein folding emerge. We are, just now,
              witnessing the power and impact that mass spectrometry will have in the
              biological sciences. This instrument, which interfaces classical rapid kinetics
              studies of enzymes with high powered analytical detection, has the possibility
              of propelling enzymology to a new level.

