Title       : CAREER: Cochlear Analogues for Engineering Acoustics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9876130

Award Number: 9876130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Grosh grosh@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Karl Grosh, University of Michigan
9876130
Cochlear Analogues for Engineering
              Acoustics

Cochlear mechanics, engineering acoustics and active structures 
              are fields of research where intense and exciting work is underway.   In this
              research proposal, the three seemingly disparate areas are brought together.
              The performance of  mammalian hearing combines remarkable transient capture and
              frequency filtering, with  a dynamic range that can encompass at least a
              million-fold change in energy.  The mechanical, fluid dynamical and electrical
              functions of the cochlea are largely responsible for these specifications,
              specifications which are unparalleled in man-made mechanical systems.  While
              the  current state of understanding of the  function of the cochlea is
              incomplete, this research seeks to take advantage of the known
              structure-function relations of this evolutionary design for engineering
              acoustics.  For applications ranging from sound quieting to sound sensing, the
              cochlear analogue design holds great potential for improving frequency
              selectivity and sensitivity.  One such application centers on  utilizing the 
              structural acoustic filtering of the cochlea for sound attenuation, i.e., as  a
              quieting mechanism, to augment and even replace widely used silencers (such as
              mufflers).   A cochlear-based microphone and hydrophone transducer  is also
              studied.  Advanced modeling of the unsteady fluid-structure interaction problem
              is undertaken to provide design tools and to understand phenomena.  Various
              realizations of designs for hydraulic and air borne acoustic systems are
              modeled, built and tested.   The success of this line of research will
              significantly change the sound quieting (e.g., muffler) and transducer (e.g.,
              microphone) industries.  In addition, better understanding of cochlear
              analogues will provide a better understanding of hearing processes
              themselves.

The educational portion of this grant seeks to (1) integrate
              modern software including computational, analytic and graphical packages into
              the classroom setting and (2)  increase  industrial relevance  by introducing
              case studies to classroom, stemming from both industry sponsored research
              projects and industry contributed case studies.


