Title       : CAREER: Channel Coding for Satellite and Mobile Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9876254

Award Number: 9876254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance C. Perez lperez@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rapid growth in voice and data communications services over satellite  and
              wireless communication networks has resulted in the rapid incorporation of the
              state of the art in digital communication techniques into current systems.  The
              next generation of these networks will demand even more sophisticated
              techniques at every point in the system.  It is evident that channel coding
              will be ubiquitous in order to combat channel transmission effects, to more
              efficiently utilize system resources and to facilitate multiuser access.  This
              project is concerned with the investigation of new classes of channel codes to
              meet these demands. In particular, new classes of time varying codes are being
              developed to reduce transmitter power requirements and to enable systems to
              operate close to theoretical limits with several levels of quality of service. 
              In addition, new iterative decoding algorithms and soft information exchange
              paradigms are being developed to provide robust integrated solutions to a
              variety of system functions such as timing and synchronization and multiuser
              detection.

This project involves the design, analysis and performance of
              time-varying channel codes in the context of the basic theorems of information
              theory and the demands of the next generation of satellite and wireless
              communication systems.  The classes of codes being studied include parallel and
              serial concatenation of block and trellis codes and new classes of periodically
              time varying convolutional codes.  The performance of these coding schemes is
              studied for both the additive white Gaussian noise channel and a variety of
              multipath fading channel models.  A particular effort is being made to develop
              codes, including asymmetric parallel concatenations, with short block lengths
              and near capacity performance at a variety of error rate for mobile wireless
              communications.  The principle of iterative decoding and soft information
              exchange is also being exploited to enhance other system functions.  This
              includes low signal to  noise ratio timing and synchronization algorithms that
              interact with soft output channel decoding algorithms and novel joint
              source/channel coding structures.  Iterative decoding of channel codes is also
              being investigated as a means of developing iterative multiuser detection
              algorithms that achieve near single user capacity on highly loaded multiuser
              systems.

