Title       : Project TEACH: Teacher Education Alliance of Colleges & High Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9876589

Award Number: 9876589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Kinholt skinholt@grcc.ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Clay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Rizzuti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Palmquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Kip Herren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Green River Cmty College
	      12401 South East 320
	      Auburn, WA  980923699    206/833-9111

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project TEACH (Teacher Education Alliance of Colleges and High Schools) is a new
              teacher preparation program centered at Green River Community College linking
              high schools, community colleges, and university undergraduate programs. 
              Beginning with significant recruitment programs which target underrepresented
              populations, and collaborating with Central Washington University, Project
              TEACH seeks to improve the preparation of future teachers, especially in
              mathematics and science. The project serves as a reproducible model
              demonstrating the role that community colleges can play in teacher preparation
              through the creation of a seamless transition into the teaching profession. The
              strategies are:

1.	To recruit more talented students into the teaching
              profession with
recruitment beginning at the high school level and focusing on
              underserved populations;
2.	To provide practical and diverse preservice field
              experiences with mentor
teachers utilizing interactive methods of science,
              math, and technology education;
3.	To strengthen mathematics & science in
              elementary schools through interdisciplinary courses for future teachers that
              model interactive teaching and active learning;
4.	To improve the preparation
              and retention of prospective teachers through a
new para-professional
              certificate and a pre-professional degree in education;
5.	To support mentor
              teachers and beginning teachers through shared inservice opportunities which
              will facilitate meaningful dialogues and interactions.


