Title       : CAREER: Object Identification in Intelligent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9876181

Award Number: 9876181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy T. Huang huang@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Object identification -- the task of deciding that two observed objects are in
              fact one and the same object -- is a fundamental requirement for any
              intelligent system or situated agent that reasons about individuals.  An
              approach to this problem has been developed in recent years based on a Bayesian
              framework that determines the probability for an object's expected appearance
              at subsequent observations, given its current appearance.  The theory has been
              successfully applied to the task of recognizing cars observed by cameras at
              widely separated sites in a freeway network. This research will build upon and
              extend theoretical results involving object identification and data
              association, and will show how to apply these results to real-world
              problems.

This research has three primary thrusts.  One aim is to integrate
              and generalize work from the data association community, which has focused on
              tracking independently moving objects whose state can be modeled by
              multivariate Gaussians, with work from the uncertainty in artificial
              intelligence community, which has produced a variety of compact state
              representations and associated inference algorithms.  The goal is to present a
              unified framework with broader applicability than current theory.  A second aim
              is to develop improved heuristic algorithms for approximating solutions to
              intractable problems that arise when the theory is applied to real-world
              domains.  The goal is  to develop new algorithms and demonstrate improved
              performance over existing ones. The third aim is to apply the theory to other
              real-world tasks, such as maintaining consistency and eliminating duplicate
              entries in databases.  The goal is to illustrate the patterns of reasoning
              involved in moving from domain-independent theory to domain-specific problems.
              These research activities form part of a more general effort within the AI
              community to develop models and algorithms for reasoning in uncertain
              environments with noisy and imprecise sensors. 

The PI's education plans
              will strengthen the computer science program at Middlebury College in
              particular, and at liberal arts institutions in general, in two ways:  through
              innovative,  inter-disciplinary approaches to presenting introductory computer
              science concepts so as to increase the interest among first and second year
              college students in this field at a time when many of them might otherwise stop
              taking courses in mathematics or science;  and through early involvement of
              students in undergraduate research projects.  The project's ultimate goal is to
              provide a model for others to follow in ways to integrate research and
              education activities at undergraduate liberal arts institutions.




