Title       : PECASE: The Economics of Gangs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a9876098

Award Number: 9876098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2009      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Levitt slevitt@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This proposal outlines a research agenda for analyzing the economics of
              gangs and illegal drug selling. The subject of gangs is one that has
              historically been studied by sociologists and ethnographers, but has received
              little attention from economists. This research is likely to have important
              public policy implications as well as being a useful teaching tool. Studying
              economic issues in non-standard applications such as drug selling is a
              convenient means of introducing noneconomists to basic economic principles. In
              conjunction with this research, a graduate law and economics course is
              developed that stresses the empirical contributions of law and economics. This
              new course will be quite different from the standard law and economics offering
              which heavily emphasizes theory.
The project described has three primary
              components. The first is an economic analysis of a drugselling gang's finances.
              A gang has provided four years of detailed financial data to myself and
              co-author Sudhir Venkatesh. This data records the price and quantity of drugs
              sold, a wide range of expenses, and wage information on a monthly basis. This
              financial data is supplemented with information on the number of deaths and
              arrests of gang members, as well as information on the timing of gang wars.
              These data allow a test of a number of economic theories and the determination
              of the economic returns to drug distribution. During the time period examined,
              the gang succeeds in expanding its territory, allowing for an analysis of a
              number of industrial organization hypotheses.
The second component of the
              project is an analysis of the link between opportunities for illegal drug
              distribution and the academic performance and attainment of African American
              males. Drug selling both provides an opportunity for immediate earnings by
              teenagers, and is less likely to reward the skills/signal value of formal
              education. Both of these factors will tend to reduce investment in educational
              human capital by African American males. Using a unique data set made available
              by the Chicago Public Schools and linking this data to a number of measures of
              gang activity, it will be possible to address these issues. Preliminary
              analysis demonstrates a large gender gap in educational attainment for African
              American males, and suggests that this gender gap is greatest in those schools
              with the highest degree of gang activity.
The final component of the project
              is an analysis of the organizational structure of gangs. Because gangs operate
              outside the sphere of civil law, both property rights and contracts must be
              enforced through means other than formal contracts. By analyzing the
              organizational forms adopted by gangs, insights will be gained into a range of
              issues related to the internal workings of firms, both illegal and legal.
              Exploratory research reveals that some gangs have adopted organizational forms
              mirroring that of a franchised corporation, whereas other gangs have decidedly
              non-corporate structures. The reasons for these differences, the advantages and
              disadvantages of the various organizational structures (e.g. with respect to
              incentives, raising capital, information flow, etc.), and the degree to which
              gangs with more efficient organizational structures tend to expand at the
              expense of less efficient organizations are explored.


The second component
              of the project is an analysis of the link between opportunities for illegal
              drug distribution and the academic performance and attainment of African
              American males. Drug selling both provides an opportunity for immediate
              earnings by teenagers, and is less likely to reward the skills/signal value of
              formal education. Both of these factors will tend to reduce investment in
              educational human capital by African American males. Using a unique data set
              made available by the Chicago Public Schools and linking this data to a number
              of measures of gang activity, it will be possible to address these issues.
              Preliminary analysis demonstrates a large gender gap in educational attainment
              for African American males, and suggests that this gender gap is greatest in
              those schools with the highest degree of gang activity.
The final component of
              the project is an analysis of the organizational structure of gangs. Because
              gangs operate outside the sphere of civil law, both property rights and
              contracts must be enforced through means other than formal contracts. By
              analyzing the organizational forms adopted by gangs, we hope to gain insight
              into a range of issues related to the internal workings of firms, both illegal
              and legal. Exploratory research reveals that some gangs have adopted
              organizational forms mirroring that of a franchised corporation, whereas other
              gangs have decidedly non-corporate structures. We hope to explore the reasons
              for these differences, the advantages and disadvantages of the various
              organizational structures (e.g. with respect to incentives, raising capital,
              information flow, etc.), and the degree to which gangs with more efficient
              organizational structures tend to expand at the expense of less efficient
              organizations.

