Title       : Computerization of the Oregon State University Mycological Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9876824

Award Number: 9876824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Spatafora spatafoj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron I. Liston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade, the distribution and use of biological data has assumed a
              position of great importance.  More than ever scientists are required to draw
              upon autonomous and disparate sources of data to address biological questions
              that fall under the umbrella of systematics and ecology. Two of the limiting
              factors affecting the scientist's ability to use such data are the electronic
              availability and format accessibility of the requisite data.  The Oregon State
              University Herbarium (OSC)is actively involved in developing databases that
              address these issues with respect to the OSC's holdings.  The short-term goal
              at OSC is to have the entire mycological collection electronically databased in
              a format that is easily integrated with other databases and accessible via the
              World Wide Web (WWW).

This project will computerize the biological
              information associated with approximately 60,000 fungal specimens housed in the
              OSC mycological collection.  The computerization of the collection will allow
              all interested users access  to the collection's holdings which includes
              numerous invaluable collections (e.g. world's most comprehensive collection of
              truffles and false-truffles, types of VAM fungi from around the world as well
              as removal ascomycetes and lichens).  OSU has long been recognized as a center
              for the study of systematics and ecology of fungi.  The vast majority of
              voucher specimens from eight decades of mycological research at OSU are housed
              at OSC and computerization of the collection will make this information more
              readily available to fungal ecologists and systematists around the world. 
              Also, OSC holds a large collection of vouchered, recent specimens from the H.J.
              Andrews Experimental Forest/LTER.  Computerization of this data will allow
              ecologists and other researchers at HJA and throughout the LTER network access
              to critical biological information regarding the organisms responsible for much
              of nutrient cycling in forest ecosystems.
