Title       : CAREER: Dialogue Context in Graphical User Interfaces: Representation,
               Portability and Uses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9876167

Award Number: 9876167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel A. Perez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes the Career Development Plan for Dr. Manuel A.
              Pdrez-Quifiones. The goal is to further develop the Human-Computer Interaction
              research and education at the University of Puerto Rico Mayagilez Campus
              (UPRM), and to foster the development of a software industry in Puerto Rico for
              the creation of K-12 educational software. The proposed research will create
              algorithms, tools, and methodologies to capture and use dialogue-context in
              graphical user interfaces, and to allow for portability of this context across
              desktop and PDAs. The educational career plans include the development of K-12
              educational software for schools in Puerto Rico.

The research plan
              includes:

   Definition of a taxonomy of factors that affect
              dialogue-context. The taxonomy will include examples on how these factors can
              be used in the design of context-based interaction.

  Design and
              implementation of algorithms to track dialogue-context in a graphical user
              interface. These algorithms will be based on existing algorithms on natural
              language interfaces, but will be modified as appropriate to allow dialogue
              context to be portable between different interface styles.

  Design and
              evaluation of new interaction methods that use dialogue-context. Usability
              studies will be used to assess the effectiveness of dialogue-context in
              educational programs.

The educational plan includes a project to help
              develop educational software for K-12, as well as other related activities:


               Participate with the industrial sector to help stimulate the development of a
              local software industry for K-12 software. Partnership with Oracle Caribbean
              and Quantum Business Engineering, Inc. is already in place to help develop
              educational software for Puerto Rico schools. Results from the research effort
              will be incorporated into the software developed for the educational
              initiative.

   Increase collaboration with other educators in Puerto Rico
              through the organization of local symposiums to discuss the specific needs for
              our students as related with educational software.

  Revision and creation
              of new courses for undergraduate and graduate students in the area of user
              interfaces, mobile computing and educational software. Continued collaboration
              in PreEngineering Program, and Industrial Affiliates Program at UPRM, and in
              other professional organizations.

The Career Plan herein proposed is an
              extension and integration of previous experiences Dr. Pdrez-Quifiones has had
              as researcher in national laboratories, professor and instructor at several
              academic institutions, and developer of several shareware software titles for
              educational uses.

