Title       : Modeling of Adsorption in Templated Porous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9876599

Award Number: 9876599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Van Tassel pvt@wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1414,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9876599
VanTassel, P. R
Wayne State U.

Materials with
              controllable pore structures are extremely useful as adsorbents catalysts, and
              sensors. A challenge is to engineer a pore architecture tailored to a specific
              application. A promising new approach is to form the material via a gelation of
              monomer units in the presence of a removable template.  Once the gelation is
              complete, the template is removed and, in theory, the final pore structure will
              mimic the structure of the template.  By selecting the right template, one can
              in principle create a material with a pore architecture specific for a given
              purpose. Templated materials have tremendous potential as adsorbents, sensors,
              gas separation membranes, and molecular recognition agents.

A current
              limitation to developing template approaches is the lack of a universal,
              quantitative understanding of the influence of template morphology and
              concentration on the material's pore structure and, subsequently, on the
              behavior of molecules adsorbed in the material. What is needed is a theoretical
              description sufficiently general so that template strategies may be
              intelligently formulated for novel materials of diverse chemical compositions.
              Currently available models of porous materials are suboptimal because they do
              not account
explicitly for the influence of the template.  It is proposed to
              establish a theoretical framework through which the structure of templated
              porous materials and the behavior of their adsorbed
molecules may be
              modeled.

Templated porous materials are usually formed by gelation in the
              presence of template molecules.  Following aging and drying, the templates are
              removed from the solid by thermal or other treatment, leaving behind their
              molecular scale imprints. This process inspires the model that we propose. Our
              model begins with a binary system of particles representing matrix and template
              components. Following equilibration, the particles are quenched, that is,
              frozen in space. This mimics the experimental gelation step. Next, the template
              particles are removed. The remaining matrix particles are the model porous
              material. To these immobile matrix particles mobile (model) adsorbate molecules
              are added and their properties are investigated.  The project begins by
              establishing molecular computer simulation and integral equation techniques to
              investigate this model system. Matrix, template, and adsorbate are considered
              to be simply shaped particles (spheres, spherocylinders, and/or linked chains
              of spheres) that interact via potential functions such as hard particle,
              Lennard-Jones, and continuum Lennard- Jones.  Grand canonical Monte Carlo and
              Ornstein-Zernike integral equation techniques will be used to calculate the
              adsorption isotherm, phase diagram, and heat of adsorption. Grand canonical
              molecular dynamics will be used to calculate the rate of permeation through a
              templated material. The principal goal is to understand the effect that
              template size, shape, and concentration have on the behavior of adsorbed
              phase.

Next, efforts are to be directed toward modeling specific systems for
              which experimental data are available: small molecules adsorbed in organic
              templated silica gels [2,3]. The density of matrix particles will serve as a
              single adjustable parameter; we intend to relate this parameter to the
              synthesis conditions (drying rate, temperature of template removal, etc.). The
              principal goal here is to establish a connection between our model and
              experiment. 	

	
Finally, a web page is to be established where our computer
              programs, written specifically to apply the models developed here to
              experimental data, can be obtained by other researchers. The significance of
              this work is in establishing and disseminating a universal theoretical
              framework - capturing the essential features of disorder, pore space
              connectivity, and template removal - for modeling adsorption phenomena in
              templated porous materials.

