Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Infrastructure for Research in Mobile Computing:
               Bandwith Conservation Schemes and Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1999   
File        : a9876441

Award Number: 9876441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Imadeldin O. Mahgoub imad@cse.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sam C. Hsu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Ilyas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bassem A. Alhalabi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9876441
Mahgoub, Imadeldin O.
Hsu, Sam
Florida Atlantic
              University

Infrastructure for Research in Mobile Computing:
Bandwidth
              Conservation Schemes and Protocols

This research instrumentation enables
              research projects in:

- Implementation and Measurement of Delta Service in a
              Mobile File System Client Cache,
- Two-Layer Protocol Infrastructure for
              Wireless Local Area Network Applications, and
- Graduate Courses in Mobile
              Computing.

This award contributes to the support of a research facility at
              the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of Florida Atlantic
              University enabling experimental research in mobile computing.  The
              experimental facility requested includes a wireless network consisting of one
              primary server, one backup server, and ten mobile clients.  The research topics
              to be explored include bandwidth conservation schemes and wireless
              communications protocols.  The following major research projects, among others,
              will benefit from the real-world mobile computing environment that will be
              provided by the proposed instrumentation: 1) Design, implementations, and
              evaluation of delta service extension to a mobile file system cache proposed to
              enhance bandwidth conservation by minimizing the amount of data transferred
              over wireless communications links.  Bandwidth conservation is an important
              research direction, since network bandwidth stands as one of the resource
              limitations impacting the design of mobile computer applications; 2) Design,
              implementations, and evaluation of communication protocols for Ad Hoc Wireless
              Local Area Networks.  Applications of such networks include mobile classroom,
              corporate meetings, press conferences, disaster avoidance and disaster recovery
              situations.  Such networks will pave the way for enhanced communications
              capabilities in situations where the cost of having fixed wired networks is not
              justifiable.

