Title       : CAREER: Genetic Analysis of NMDA Receptor Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9876262

Award Number: 9876262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andres V. Maricq maricq@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,9107,9178,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The research supported by this NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
              award examines the molecular basis of neuronal diversity. The nervous system
              contains tremendous numbers of specialized  neurons that communicate with one
              another at distinct points of contact called synapses. Synaptic function
              underlies learning and memory and dysfunction of the synapse underlies many
              neurological disorders. As a neuron develops, it must express the molecules
              needed for synaptic communication. Amongst these molecules are the
              neurotransmitter receptors that receive the signal transmitted at the synapse.
              One important class of neurotransmitter receptors are those that bind to the
              neurotransmitter glutamate. If these receptors are improperly expressed, the
              function of the nervous system is disrupted.

The experiments supported by
              this NSF award will identify genes required for the expression of the NMDA
              subtypes of glutamate receptors. An experimental strategy that utilizes the
              tools of molecular biology and genetics  will be used to discover genes that
              regulate the expression of these receptors in the simple model organism
              Caenorhabditis elegans. The NMDA receptors are most recognized as being
              involved in simple forms of associative learning and also play important roles
              in many neurological disorders.

This proposal integrates research into the
              fundamental mechanisms of neuronal function with the early training of
              undergraduates in the practice and theory of scientific inquiry. The studies
              will provide a detailed molecular-based understanding of the gene products
              required for the expression, assembly and localization of NMDA receptors in C.
              elegans. The strategy takes advantage of the powerful genetic techniques that
              enable rapid identification of gene products in this model organism. Almost all
              gene products required for synaptic function are conserved between simple
              organisms and humans. Therefore, the results of this research can be applicable
              to the study of the human nervous system.

