Title       : Evanescent Wave Polarized Fluorescence Microscopy of Biomolecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9876770

Award Number: 9876770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahid M. Khan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mariano A. Garcia-Blanco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

9876770

Abstract

	This project involves the design and construction of
              a polarized evanescent wave fluorescence microscope.  This microscope will be
              used to probe rotational mobilities of protein machines that move within
              membranes or on DNA.  Energy known as evanescent wave radiation penetrates
              about 100 nanometers from the surface into the rarer medium when light
              undergoes total internal reflection.  Thus, evanescent wave fluorescence
              microscopy provides a means for excitation of fluorophores from a thin layer,
              thereby greatly reducing background fluorescence.  It has been used to
              visualize the processivity and nucleotide binding reactions of single motor
              molecules as they translocate along cytoskeletal polymers.  Membrane motors and
              DNA transcription complexes that translocate more than an order of magnitude
              slower than cytoskeletal motor proteins provide examples of macromolecular
              assemblies where measurement of rotational, rather than translational
              mobilities might be more informative.  Measurement of these rotations will be
              carried our using plane polarized light to excite fluorophores in a defined
              orientation.  Green fluorescent protein fusions and incorporation of synthetic
              peptides that bind bidentate arsenical fluoresceins with high affinity into the
              protein sequence of choice provide two technologies that allow specific
              labeling of proteins in intact cells by rigid fluorescent markers.  Fluorophore
              exited state lifetimes are typically 10 nanoseconds, a time sufficient to allow
              significant rotational diffusion of single protein molecules and for
              attenuation of the energy of the excited state by various processes leading to
              quenching or wavelength shifts of the emitted fluorescence.  Polarization will
              be coupled to evanescent wave illumination to enable selective excitation of
              membrane bound flagellar motor and chemoreceptor complexes in intact bacteria
              and of bound T7 polymerase complexes in vitro.  Depolarization of fluorescence
              will be measured by monitoring emission polarized parallel and perpendicular to
              the exciting light.  

	A modular system utilizing a single laser source
              coupled to appropriate filters and detection devices will be constructed to
              enable execution of these diverse experimental protocols.  Time will be devoted
              to evaluation of the depolarizing effects of the microscope optics, mechanical
              stability of the instrument and development of software for data analysis.  In
              addition, toxicity, photobleaching and perturbational effects of the designed
              fluorophores will be assessed as well as strategies for immobilization of the
              samples on the critically illuminated slide surface.

