Title       : Collections Improvement for Genetic Resources at the Burke Museum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9876809

Award Number: 9876809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott V. Edwards sedwards@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon M. Birks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With about 14,000 vertebrate individuals represented in its holdings (mostly
              birds), the Burke Museum Genetic Resources Collection at the University of
              Washington (UW)is among the top five such collections for birds in the United
              States and is actively growing at a rate of about 1,500 individual vertebrate
              representatives per year.  The Collection is surprisingly broad for its size,
              with recent major acquisitions of frozen tissue specimens from northern Asia,
              Nicaragua, South Africa, Argentina, Australia, the Solomon Islands and the
              North Pacific Ocean.  Two of the most valuable attributes of the collection are
              its focus on general, as opposed to research-driven, collecting, and its near
              complete representation of individual tissue specimens as voucher and extended
              wing specimens in the Ornithology and Mammalogy Collections.  The increasing
              momentum of the Genetic Resources Collection is evident in several recent
              appointments, including a Curator of Genetic Resources, a Curator of Mammals,
              and a Manager of Genetic Resources.

In the last five years, the Collection
              has distributed over 1,700 samples to systematists, evolutionary biologists and
              biomedical scientists in 8 countries at a rate that continues to grow.  The
              Genetic Resources Collection has provided samples that have contributed to over
              35 publications in the last five years, and in several cases has provided the
              core materials for doctoral dissertations both at the University of Washington
              and elsewhere.  The Collection is curated by a Curator of Genetic Resources and
              a full-time Manager of Genetic Resources.  Nonetheless, increasing demands on
              specimen storage and Curation of the collection, due both to increased specimen
              acquisition from University and privately funded field expeditions and to
              increased demand for specimens from inside and outside the UW, necessitate
              funding for further storage equipment, computers and labor to reduce the
              backlog of specimens not yet integrated into the Collection and database.

To
              meet this increase in demand, this project will assist in the (1) purchase two
              additional upright -80C freezers and associated CO 2 backup systems, racks,
              storage boxes, specimen tubes and electrical modifications; (2) purchase an
              improved database backup system; (3) employ a graduate student to transfer a
              backlog of 1,500 tissues stored in large vials of lysis buffer and alcohol to 2
              ml tubes for freezing; to inventory, transfer to 2 ml vials, install and enter
              data for 550 heterogeneous frozen tissues not yet inventoried; and to print and
              affix computer generated labels to all tubes in the collection; (4) purchase
              an
ice maker and dry ice storage vessel for superior storage of tissues in the
              field and for streamlining the tissue loan protocol; (5) purchase a computer
              and monitor dedicated to the Genetic Resources Database.  The availability of
              extra freezers, dry ice storage, and an ice maker will increase the quality of
              tissues when transferred from local field sites and the ease with which tissues
              from recently returned expeditions can be organized and accessioned.  The
              computer will increase self-sufficiency of the Curator and Manager in curation
              and management of its database.
