Title       : Computing in Networks: Active System Area Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9876573

Award Number: 9876573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $939421             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudhakar Yalamanchili sudha@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esther A. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Schimmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karsten Schwan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcel-Catalin Rosu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4095,9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The confluence of computing and communication has produced an explosion of
              network-based applications. Numerous examples can be drawn from web-based
              applications, interactive simulations, gaming,
visualization, and
              collaborative environments. Current approaches to the development of
              network-based applications are still based on a CPU-centric model using node
              architectures optimized for uniprocessor
or small-scale multiprocessor
              applications. This can lead to significant inefficiencies for distributed
              applications.

This project explores an architecture for the support of
              emerging network-based applications whereby selected application-level
              computations are executed within network interfaces (NIs). The focus is
              on
networks of workstations (NOW) that have emerged as a viable high
              performance computational vehicle. Within this context the project will support
              applications with substantial computation and data manipulation
requirements.
              Such high performance programs are drawn from three different application
              domains: scientific simulation, computer vision and image processing, and
              computer graphics. The unique aspect of the
approach to supporting these
              classes of programs is the use of extensible network interfaces, where
              extension concerns programs executed both on the low cost microprocessors
              resident on NIs and on additional, programmable and NI-associated hardware in
              the form of field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). Specifically, the project
              will demonstrate (1) the use of FPGAs to implement data-intensive
computations
              and (2) the use of the NIs' microprocessors to handle associated
              meta-information and perform computationally non-intensive operations best
              performed "close" to the network. Extensibility for NIs will be attained by
              development of a flexible and extensible virtual communication machine. The
              project  refers to such enhanced networks as Active System Area Networks
              (ASANs).

The key research issues are (1) to understand and demonstrate an
              ASAN's ability to perform selected computations and services more efficiently
              than host CPUs and to explore the effects and trade-offs of off-loading certain
              functionality from host CPUs to the ASAN, (2) to develop the programming model
              that enables the efficient and application-specific use of the ASAN's
              computational resources, and (3) to create an ASAN software architecture that
              is low overhead and easily extensible.

The approach to the proposed research
              is experimental. It includes construction of a testbed, implementation of
              selected NI extensions for use by the three classes of parallel/distributed
              applications investigated in this work and performance evaluation of the
              resulting system/application performance. Successful demonstration of
              the>approach will have a major impact the way future multimedia network
              applications are designed, optimized, and supported.


