Title       : A Mobile Storage System for the Vascular Herbarium of the University of Arizona
               (ARIZ)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9876659

Award Number: 9876659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136587             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucinda A. McDade   (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip D. Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristen J. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The vascular herbarium at the University of Arizona (ARIZ), with about 345,000
              sheets at the present time, is the largest herbarium in the region.  It holds
              the largest collection of plants from Arizona and from the state of Sonora,
              Mexico, and significant holdings from all other parts of the arid southwest and
              northwestern Mexico.  It is an extremely active herbarium, whether measured in
              terms of active research projects that are based here, loans and interactions
              with researchers at other institutions, use by the students of all levels, or
              out-reach activities.

Because of its very active program of collecting in
              support of research, the herbarium is beginning to experience a space crisis. 
              This is the case despite a rigorous policy regarding acquisitions which demands
              that newly accessioned specimens have research value, build on areas of
              strength, and not represent excessive duplication.  Without increasing storage
              capacity, the collection will soon be in the position of rejecting specimens or
              of storing them in a fashion that renders them inaccessible to researchers and
              students, neither of which is tenable for a herbarium as active as ARIZ.  At
              the same time, there is little additional physical space readily that is both
              suitable and available.

To alleviate this crisis, this project will provide
              for the installation a mobile of the storage system (compactors).  Compactors
              substantially increase storage capacity within the same physical space by
              reducing the number of permanently open aisles between rows of herbarium cases
              (or of bookshelves, medical records, etc., in the case of other applications). 
              The total impact of the project will enable the herbarium to increase its
              current capacity by 50% and to continue its present growth trajectory for
              nearly 25 years.
