Title       : Compact Mobile Equipment for Relocation and Consolidation of the Benthic
               Invertebrate Collection of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9876696

Award Number: 9876696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97628              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Newman wnewman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Benthic Invertebrate Collection dates back to the institution's inception in
              1903 and therfore contains samples made by its founding director, Wm. E.
              Ritter, and other charter biologists.  Thus, together with other collections
              such as those of the San Diego Society of Natural History and the Los Angeles
              County Natural History Museum, this collection forms a base line against which
              local change can be judged.  On the other hand, the collection has geographic
              and bathymetric strengths unequaled elsewhere in this region, if in the world. 
              The collection includes over three quarters of a million invertebrate
              specimens, including marine mites and insects,from most oceans, especially the
              Pacific, and it regularly supports a variety of research projects of
              investigators in the US and abroad as well as locally.  Information concerning
              its holdings have been available in the form of card catalogs dating back to
              the turn of the century, published catalogs and floppy disks beginning in 1977
              and 1985 respectively, and on the Internet since early 1996, and these data
              bases continue to expand.

The Benthic Invertebrate Collection is presently
              divided between three buildings.  A new building (New Ritter Hall), to replace
              a seismically unsafe portion of Old Ritter Hall, is presently being constructed
              with funds provided the University of California by the State Legislature.  The
              Scripps administration has allocated space in this new facility to house the
              collection.  However, while the new space is adequate to house the principal
              part of the collection now in Vaughan Hall, it is not quite large enough to
              house all of the existing collection, such as the barnacle collection in Hubbs
              Hall and some recent acquisitions, under one roof and still provide for future
              growth.  Therefore, this project will provide for the installation of compact
              mobile storage equipment.
