Title       : CAREER: Neural Representations Based on Temporal Structure: A Computational
               Neuroscience Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9876271

Award Number: 9876271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernst Niebur null  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Niebur
9876721
Abstract

How is the external world represented in the brain?
              At the lowest level, we know that the basic computational units of the brain
              are nerve cells, or neurons. We also know that neurons use electrical impulses
              called "action potentials" to communicate with each other. What we do not know
              is how these impulses code information, for instance, the representation of the
              organism's environment.  A common view is that properties of perceived objects
              are coded as the average firing rates of neurons ("rate code") but this is not
              only an inefficient procedure, it also creates problems when the brain has to
              deal with more than one object simultaneously, as is usually the case. One of
              the problems is that, if a certain property is coded by a corresponding spike
              rate, and if several objects have this property, how does one decide to which
              of those objects the property belongs?

The brain does more than just map out
              the external world; the behavior of an organism also depends on its internal
              states. One of the problems the brain has to solve is information overload,
              resulting from the multitude of stimuli impinging on the sensors at all times.
              Therefore, one of the brain's most important functions is to carefully select
              those stimuli that are important, and to consider only these in detail. For
              instance, while you are reading this text, you are focusing on the written
              words and you are probably not thinking about how your left foot feels in your
              left shoe. However, now that you try to "feel" it, you can "pay attention" to
              it. We know that the tactile sensors in your foot behave the same way whether
              you are paying attention to it or not, but for the brain the two situations are
              clearly different. What, precisely, changes in the activity of the brain when
              you direct your attention from one stimulus to another?

Theoretical models
              have predicted that the code used by the brain not only uses the average rate
              but also more fine-grained temporal structures of the sequences of action
              impulses. For instance, it has been predicted that paying attention does not
              necessarily change the average firing rate, but the relations between the
              firing in different neurons, for instance, make it more likely that neurons
              fire together. Dr. Niebur and his students will compare the activity of neurons
              in monkeys performing a task that requires them to attend to a stimulus with
              the activity when they receive the same stimulation but are NOT attending to
              it. Preliminary results, as well as mathematical modeling, have indicated that
              there is indeed, such a difference in the relative firing of neurons. In
              addition to analyzing the neural activity of the monkey working on the task,
              they will also develop mathematical models of attentional processing.

