Title       : CAREER: Soft Architectures: A Billion Transistors and a High Clock Rate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9876180

Award Number: 9876180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Mackenzie kenmac@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Future billion-transistor processor chips will require innovations in
              architecture to overcome the fact that although gate delays scale with
              transistor sizes, wire delays do not.  A SOFT ARCHITECTURE is a
              high-performance computer built by integrating dynamic compiler software with
              simple, fast processing hardware.  The dynamic compiler replaces the large,
              complex, instruction-scheduling logic that is used successfully to extract
              instruction-level parallelism in contemporary superscalar processors but that
              is likely to limit the clock rates of future designs due to long wires.  The
              research objective is to determine whether and how a soft architecture can
              exceed the performance of an architecture using dynamic instruction scheduling
              in hardware.  While the dynamic compiler must make decisions less frequently
              than hardware, it can make potentially better decisions than hardware by
              exploiting additional information and by employing adaptivity.  The research
              method is to construct a sequence of soft processor prototypes, dynamic
              compilers atop both conventional and custom (simulated) hardware, and to
              evaluate the performance of those prototypes by comparing to equivalent
              all-hardware solutions using standard benchmarks.  The project provides a set
              of workbench tools for simulation and analysis that will also be used in
              architecture classes at the graduate and undergraduate level.
