Title       : CAREER: Integrated Antennas and Circuits for Mixed-Technology Single-Chip
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9876056

Award Number: 9876056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay Raman sraman@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876056
Raman
The primary objective of this research plan is to investigate
              methods for the direct integration of PCS band antennas on mixed-technology
              ICs. The PI has extensive experience with the development of integrated
              antennas at millimeter-wave frequencies, where the short wavelengths result in
              small physical dimensions allowing relatively straightforward on-chip antenna
              integration. However, it is a different matter to integrate an antenna on-chip
              at the lower PCS frequencies since antenna size cannot be arbitrarily reduced;
              physical laws rather than technological limits govern the performance of the
              antenna. Still, if some degradation of antenna performance can be accepted,
              very small antennas with respect to the wavelength of interest (electrically
              small antennas) can be realized. The proposed research effort will focus on
              three basic problem areas: (1) technology/material issues for integration of
              electrically small antennas on mixed-signal ICs; (2) interconnections,
              transitions and baluns; and (3) electromagnetic radiation coupling from the
              antenna into mixed-signal circuitry. Full-wave electromagnetic simulations will
              be used to analyze various antenna geometries prior to fabrication. Fabricated
              antennas will be characterized using a combination of on-wafer (input
              impedance) and anechoic chamber (patterns, gain, polarization purity)
              measurements. Sacrifices made in antenna performance to achieve on-chip
              integration will be evaluated.
The major thrusts of the educational efforts
              over the next several years will include: (1) a revitalization of the existing
              microwave engineering curriculum; and (2) the development of a graduate level
              course sequence in modern
RFIC design. With these curriculum improvements, the
              ECE department at Virginia Tech will offer one of the most comprehensive
              programs in communications engineering in the country. These courses will also
              benefit the PI's research efforts in mixed-signal and mixed-technology
              integrated circuits, exposing students to the implementation of RF/microwave
              functions on a semiconductor chip, and complementing the digital VLSI design
              curriculum. In the long term, the PI is interested in developing an integrated
              design experience in single-chip systems for senior ECE students, in lieu of
              the traditional elective and capstone design coursework. The principal
              investigator will also endeavor to actively involve undergraduates in
              meaningful research experiences, and to contribute to the retention of  women
              and underrepresented minorities in science and engineering.

