Title       : Risky Choices in Social and Cultural Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9876527

Award Number: 9876527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117679             (Estimated)
Investigator: XT Wang xtwang@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Decisions on alternative options often involve risks and uncertainties. 
              
Should we buy flood insurance or would we rather save the money?  
Do we
              prefer a high-risk or a low-risk stock market investment?
When do we choose
              surgery rather than chemotherapy for cancer treatment?
Should we take a risky
              option and try to save all the people with a one-third 
chance of success or
              should we avoid the risk and save one-third of them for certain?

	This
              research project examines how people automatically search,
select, and use
              social and communicational cues under real world constraints 
to determine
              their risk behavior. Our previous findings have shown that people 
are
              sensitive to cues of kinship, anonymity, group size, group constitution, and
              
hedonic verbal framing/phrasing of choice options and place different
              priorities 
upon these decision cues. These pieces of information embedded in
              a decision problem 
determine the minimally acceptable outcome, which is
              called the "minimum requirement" 
(MR) for a particular task. According to the
              proposed mean-variance model of risky choice,
 a decision maker tries to
              maximize the chance of reaching the MR. Suppose there are two 
choice options:
              a sure gain of $100 vs. a gamble with a 50% chance of wining $300 and a 
50%
              chance of losing $100. That is, the two options have the same mean outcome but
              different
variances.

	The mean-variance model takes into account the
              relationship between the
MR, the expected mean values of choice options, and
              the variances in those choices.
When the expected mean value of the options is
              below the MR, a decision maker is expected 
to favor a high variance (gamble)
              option over its sure-thing equivalent, because higher 
variance increases the
              chance of reaching the MR. In contrast, when the mean value is above 
the MR,
              the participants are expected to be risk averse and favor the sure thing
              over
the gamble to avoid possible harms (i.e., falling below the MR).

	The
              model also predicts that the mean-variance heuristic will
be reversed either
              when MR is higher than the mean plus variance or when MR
is extremely low. The
              predictions will be tested in different task domains (e.g., life
vs. money),
              with different expected values (e.g., 600 lives vs. 6 lives; $6000 vs. $600),

              different payoffs (e.g., the number of lives vs. life-span expectancy) and
              different samples of the participants (e.g., students, local residents,
              professionals), in different task conditions (e.g.,
feedback by computer
              displays, lottery games), under both positive and negative framing conditions,
              and cross-culturally.



