Title       : Workshop on the Quality and Process in Engineering of Complex Network Systems,
               Tempe, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a9876557

Award Number: 9876557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Capone jcapone@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sourav Bhattacharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The organizers, Sourav Bhattacharya (sourav@asu.edu), Jeffrey M. Capone
              (jcapone@asu.edu), and  Kevin Dooley (kevin.dooley@asu.edu) will hold an
              exploratory workshop to investigate the research issues in quality and process
              aspects in the engineering and operation of complex network systems. The focus
              and motivation for this workshop stems from recognizing the immense practical
              utility and impact that software process and quality research has made to the
              development of software - leading to the subject area of "software
              engineering".  The objective of this research is to create similar impact in
              the network engineering and operations area. In Network Engineering &
              Operations (NEO), design process and quality-oriented research is largely
              missing.  The state-of-the-art in NEO process is similar to the unstructured
              approach of software development that is clearly outdated now, and often
              considered harmful.  A good NEO process should allow a network developer or
              engineer to commence with a set of requirements, specify them, analyze them,
              consider high level design alternatives, adopt an implementation, operate the
              network efficiently, and test them in a cost effective, controlled and
              evolutionary manner.

The focus of this workshop would be to discuss the
              research issues in NEO. The researchers will address research issues both along
              the lines of "Underlying Network Technology" and "Network System Engineering"
              area.  Examples of such research issues will include, but are not limited to,
              the following: QoS and QoS testing; end-to-end integration;
              commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) components compatibility and interface; traffic
              moderation and large-scale flow control; tools for life-cycle management,
              configuration control and network resource management; management of network
              scalability and growth; design and testing for availability, assurance, and
              cost-effective maintenance.  The workshop will foster active participation from
              academia, industry and government. It will include invited key researchers from
              core network technologies area, as well as systems engineering, network
              operations and process & quality areas. The basic nature of this research is
              highly interdisciplinary, calling upon experts in the area of computer science,
              electrical engineering and process & quality (manufacturing).  Participation in
              this workshop is open to all interested parties and contributors. Outcome of
              this workshop will include identification of some of the research issues in NE,
              and a roadmap to carry forward to the next step.  


