Title       : CAREER: Instruction in Neuroscience and Research Toward Characterization of a
               Novel Family of Potassium Channel Related Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a9876321

Award Number: 9876321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa M. Perney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              T. Perney
9876321

Potassium channels are pore-like structures, which allow
              the flux of potassium ions across a cell's membrane in a regulated manner. They
              are important for all cells, but have a particularly critical role in heart,
              muscle, and nerve cells where they control the pattern of electrical signaling.
              The channels are formed by the assembly of four pore domain containing
              subunits. This assembly is mediated by a region of the channel, which has been
              termed the NAB or Ti domain. We have identified a new class of proteins, termed
              Nabs, which contain a Ti-like domain, but no pore domain. A molecular
              biological approach called the two hybrid interaction trap coupled with classic
              biochemical techniques will be used to determine whether the Ti domain in the
              Nab proteins mediate protein-protein assembly and if so, to identify the
              binding partners. The expression levels of one of the Nab proteins has been
              shown to be increased by cytokines, molecules involved in mediating both normal
              development and the inflammation response after injury. Gene expression
              profiles for the different Nabs will be examined by in situ hybridization and
              immunological techniques during normal brain development, after brain injury,
              and in response to cytokines. Taken together, these studies should increase our
              understanding of the structure function relationships of Ti domains and may
              also provide insight into the functional role of Nab proteins including any
              potential involvement in the cellular response to injury. High school,
              undergraduate and graduate students will actively participate in development
              and performance of the project. In addition, strategies to promote critical
              thinking will be incorporated into three redesigned courses to enhance the
              understanding of Molecular and Neurosciences and their impact on society. An
              outreach program to local elementary schools will also be expanded to promote
              the inclusion of the scientific discovery process in the science curriculum.

