Title       : CAREER: Interaction and Disorder Effects in Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9876208

Award Number: 9876208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudio Chamon chamon@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9876208
Chamon
This is a CAREER grant to a starting faculty member for a
              program which integrates research and education.  The research is concentrated
              on strong correlation and disorder effects in condensed matter systems.  The
              goal is to advance the understanding of strongly correlated and disordered
              systems by developing new theoretical and computational methods which can be
              applied to explain experimental data and suggest new directions for condensed
              matter physics.  More specifically, the research is focused on the transport
              and noise properties of low dimensional electronic systems (such as quantum
              wires, fractional quantum Hall liquids, quantum dots, and carbon nanotubes), on
              critical phenomena that result from both quenched disorder and interaction in
              electronic systems (such as the recently observed metal-insulator transitions
              in Si-MOSFET's), and on complex scaling phenomena in electronic systems (such
              as multifractal scaling).  The research is reflected in the educational
              component of the project in areas which range from development of new courses
              and textbooks in solid state physics and disordered systems, to individual
              training and supervision of graduate students in condensed matter physics, to
              the attraction of traditionally underrepresented students into
              science.
%%%
This is a CAREER grant to a starting faculty member for a
              program which integrates research and education.  The research is concentrated
              on strong correlation and disorder effects in condensed matter systems.  The
              goal is to advance the understanding of strongly correlated and disordered
              systems by developing new theoretical and computational methods which can be
              applied to explain experimental data and suggest new directions for condensed
              matter physics. The research is reflected in the educational component of the
              project in areas which range from development of new courses and textbooks in
              solid state physics and disordered systems, to individual training and
              supervision of graduate students in condensed matter physics, to the attraction
              of traditionally underrepresented students into science.
***

