Title       : MENTORS: Mathematical Engineering Networking with Teachers of Real Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9876706

Award Number: 9876706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $907554             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren W. Zachary zach@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet M. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Obrycki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Rudolph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The target population for this project is undergraduate students at Iowa State
              University pursuing a degree leading to a teaching license (K-6 or 7-12) with
              an emphasis in either mathematics or one of the sciences. As teachers, these
              students in the teacher preparation program will one-day teach as they have
              been taught. The problem to be addressed with this project is based on typical
              college students' experiences in their study of mathematics and science
              content. Typically, these courses are delivered in large-lecture courses,
              designed to meet the needs of any liberal arts student, and without appropriate
              application opportunities to the teacher education discipline (K-12
              classrooms). The objectives of this project include (1) providing courses
              delivered with appropriate teaching strategies (2) developing new undergraduate
              courses in engineering, entomology, and botany with a focus on school
              classrooms (3) modifying existing education courses to reflect the students'
              experiences in these new courses and (4) establishing learning communities of
              undergraduate students to provide both an academic and a social support system.
              Other goals supporting these objectives include (5) developing meaningful
              faculty collaborations across departments and colleges, (6) supporting master
              teachers from K-12 classrooms in which the collegiate learning can be applied,
              (7) assigning a different faculty mentor from a K-12 classroom and the
              university campus to each of the learning communities in an effort to provide
              guidance and support to the undergraduate students and (8) developing graduate
              courses to provide continuing education of Iowa's teachers. The practicing
              teachers, who choose to be mentors, collaborate with the ISU faculty member to
              guide the undergraduate students through their practicum experience. Groups of
              three to four undergraduate students complete all pre-student teaching
              experiences with several of the teachers at the school associated with their
              school mentor.
