Title       : Molecular Genetics of Amino Acid Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1999   
File        : a9876367

Award Number: 9876367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald R. Fink fink@wi.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitehead Inst Biomed Res
	      Nine Cambridge Center
	      Cambridge, MA  021421479    617/258-5215

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1136,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Analysis of the agravitropic mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana, eir1 and the EIR1
              gene, suggests that it is the pump predicted by the polar transport model. The
              EIR1 protein, expressed only in the root of the plant has similarities to some
              bacterial efflux pumps. Experiments to provide direct evidence for the function
              of EIR1 in polar transport will be done. Mutants of the EIR1 gene that enhance
              and inhibit efflux will be generated in yeast, a system which provides a unique
              tool to probe this pathway in plants. Transport experiments will measure the
              efflux of indolic compounds directly in yeast. The role of EIR1 in asymmetric
              transport of  indol acetic acid (IAA) from the root tip to the elongation zone
              will be tested by determining whether there is asymmetric localization of EIR1
              in the plasma membrane of root cells. Genetic screens for suppressors and
              enhancers of eir1 should identify the upstream and downstream genes that
              transduce the signal for gravitropism. Molecular analysis of the other family
              members of EIR paralogs will determine whether these are the IAA pumps
              responsible for the effects of auxin on tropisms in other tissues. These genes
              will be cloned and transgenic plants containing dominant negative mutations in
              these EIR1 paralogs (validated in a yeast assay), will be used to construct
              transgenic plants, which will then be analyzed for tropism defects. A genetic
              pathway for cell expansion will be constructed using mutants obtained from a
              screen, which has been developed. Other experiments designed to delineate the
              pathway of lateral root formation involve cloning the gene encoding ALF4. af1
              mutants block lateral root formation both by endogenous and exogenous IAA. In
              addition, a novel approach is described to engineer transgenic plants resistant
              to high salt.

The goal of this work is to identify the signal transduction
              pathway(s) by which the plant hormone auxin (or IAA) promote plant tropisms. In
              gravitropism, the root bends towards the center of the earth. The polar
              transport hypothesis posits an efflux transporter that pumps IAA up from the
              root tip to the side of the root closest to the center of the earth. There the
              IAA inhibits the elongation of the cells, whereas those on the opposite side
              elongate, with the result that the root bends down and grows in that direction.
              

