Title       : Operation of the Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC) and
               Investigations of Multi-Scale Current Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9876473

Award Number: 9876473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442587             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Robert Clauer rclauer@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9876473
Clauer

This project is directed toward the operation of a new,
              updated magnetometer array on the Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC-II) and the analysis
              of the data from these stations together with data from other ground based and
              satellite instruments. This project is a cooperative effort between the
              University of Michigan and the Danish Meteorological Institute. The project is
              a continuation of a collaboration, which began, with the installation of an
              array of magnetometer stations on the Greenland ice cap in 1991. The autonomous
              magnetometer systems in central Greenland provided valuable intermediate
              variometer measurements of magnetic perturbations between the Greenland west
              and east coast stations. The original 4-station MAGIC array was closed and
              removed during the 1996 and 1997 field seasons. The decision to close the
              stations was based upon the accumulation of snow (approximately 1 meter/year),
              the lifetime of the electrical power systems which rely on gel-cell batteries
              for winter operations, and the planned closure of the Omega navigation system
              which was used to obtain an accurate time base. The present MAGIC II array was
              deployed during the 1997 field season to continue these critical measurements
              using improved equipment, and a reduced number of stations. One station was
              placed at the central Greenland GISP drilling site to provide continuity
              between the west and east coast stations, and one station was placed at the Air
              National Guard LC130 Raven skiway (the Polar Ice Training Site - PITS) to
              provide a dense two-dimensional array for detailed current calculations. The
              MAGIC data in combination with data from the Greenland coastal stations and
              Sondrstrom incoherent scatter radar has been crucial in resolving the spatial
              and evolutionary characteristics of various dynamic ionospheric current
              systems, including traveling convection vortices, poleward propagating DPY
              currents, and the transition of large scale convection systems from one state
              to another. Using data from the MAGIC II stations in combination with other
              Greenland, Canadian, Scandinavian, and Antarctic magnetic data, and coordinated
              with other ancillary ground based and satellite data, this project will
              investigate high latitude magnetic pulsations and interhemispheric auroral oval
              and polar cap relationships. The focus of this project is on understanding the
              various electrodynamic current systems, which couple energy and momentum from
              the solar wind to the magnetosphere and ionosphere

