Title       : Improvement of the Museum of Southwestern Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9876826

Award Number: 9876826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72187              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Gosz jgosz@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates  (Principal Investigator former)
              Luis A. Ruedas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Gannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This collection of frozen tissues developed during the past several years has
              become the largest of its kind in the world.  It is a collection that, although
              primarily composed of mammalian samples, houses frozen tissue and other
              ancillary materials from all divisions within the Museum of Southwestern
              Biology.  Several large, active research projects make use of this extensive
              collection.  National and international user-based requests for information and
              samples have increased dramatically with the advent of new analytical
              techniques and the increasing global rarity of novel genetic material. 
              Refining this resource would make it much more useful to science.  

The
              Museum of Southwestern Biology (MSB) is a research and teaching facility in the
              Department of Biology,
University of Mexico, housing important collections of
              vertebrates, arthropods, and plants from around the world.  The Division of
              Biological Materials of the MSB houses collections of cryogenically preserved
              samples ranging from frozen tissues to cell suspensions of plants, arthropods,
              fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.  The mammalian portion of the
              collection is the largest in the world.  The rapid growth of these collections,
              in parallel with an extreme increase in user demands fueled by the emergence of
              molecular 
biology and its broadening use in systematics have created some
              interesting curatorial demands for the division.  This project will support the
              resolution of some of the most pressing of these problems.  Specifically, the
              project will complete the electronic data capture for all samples stored in the
              division (including maintenance and data capture for currently incoming samples
              as well as samples whose vouchers are held off-site in other natural history
              collections); II) Complete verification of data captured samples on the
              database resulting from voucher specimens; III) Verify species identifications
              in the Biological Materials collection against voucher specimen catalogues;
              and, IV) Upgrade the database management program to be accessible via
              World-Wide Web.

All the foregoing objective will greatly enhance the ability
              to serve the user community at large, to allow the division to catch up on its
              backlog of data capture, and facilitate networking activities among this and
              other MSB databases, especially those containing the primary voucher
              information.












biologybiology and its  
