Title       : The Location of Hubs in Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2001    
File        : a9876455

Award Number: 9876455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84498              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morton E. O'Kelly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will integrate and generalize conflicting views of the role of
              inter-facility flow in location problems. An over-riding question is 'why is it
              so difficult to construct a model to represent a phenomenon that occurs so
              frequently in reality?'  Much research effort has been devoted to developing
              models for the location of interdependent hub facilities. In these problems,
              for reasons that are not understood, non-integer solutions are sometimes
              encountered. Some procedures have produced highly fractional solutions,
              although others have fared better.  It is important to answer this question
              because, for theoretical and practical purposes, interdependence between
              facilities is a crucial source of clustering/agglomeration in the space
              economy. The research will refine mathematical models of hub systems, thereby
              integrating a wide range of recent literature in an effort to enhance
              scientific understanding of a fundamental problem in economic geography, namely
              the optimal location of interactive facilities.

Methods to be employed
              include optimization, mathematical programming, and network analysis. The
              potential impact on advancing knowledge is as follows. The failure of location
              models for the case of interdependent activities is a major puzzle for
              theorists: this may in fact be repaired as a result of a careful, creative
              examination of the way in which these issues play out in the case of hub and
              spoke networks. Hubs serve as conduits for interactions between geographically
              dispersed nodes. Within the capacity limits of aircraft, trucks, pipelines, or
              network links, the marginal cost of an extra unit of flow is small (perhaps
              close to zero). Furthermore, there are lower variable costs where greater flows
              are handled by higher capacity infrastructure. Thus, providers of
              transportation services reduce their average unit costs by bundling flows.

