Title       : Heuristics for Resource Allocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1999     
File        : a9876469

Award Number: 9876469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45330              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Baron baron@cattell.psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Heuristics in resource allocation

Problems of resource allocation arise in
              decisions by governments and other institutions.  Examples are allocation of
              medical research funds to diseases, allocation of funds for risk reduction to
              sources of risk, allocation of development funds to projects within a company,
              and allocation of university funds to departments.  Some allocations have been
              criticized for inefficiency, e.g., risk reduction, where it has been argued
              that too much money is spent reducing some risks and too little money on
              others.

Allocations arise in part from human judgments about how resources
              should be allocated.  The judgments may be made by officials responsible for
              the allocations, by those affected, or by some other group.  This research
              explores the principles of reasoning, or heuristics, that people use when they
              make such judgments.  Research subjects make judgments about hypothetical and
              real cases.  These judgments reveal the subjects' heuristics.  We compare the
              results of these judgments to allocations prescribed by cost-effectiveness
              analysis of the same cases.

For example, when the optimal allocation is to
              put all the resources in one category, because they are always more effective
              there, people still allocate in proportion to their effectiveness, thus giving
              some to the less effective category.  Similarly, when allocation should be
              based on marginal effectiveness (effectiveness of additional resources), people
              may allocate on the basis of average effectiveness, or on the basis of the size
              of the category or just giving equal allocation to all categories (completely
              ignoring effectiveness).  When it is most effective to put some resources in
              each category, people may think in terms of absolute priorities, not wanting to
              sacrifice one category for a smaller investment in another.

Many of these
              heuristics can lead to inconsistent judgments.  For example, equal allocation
              to categories can change depending on how the categories are defined.  (Should
              "cancer" count as a category, or should there be one category for each type?) 
              

On the basis of the understanding of how people make allocation judgments,
              we challenge people with their own inconsistencies and ask how they would
              resolve these inconsistencies.  These challenges, plus instruction in basic
              principles of cost-effectiveness, can lead to judgments that result in greater
              effectiveness, even in the absence of precise calculation.

The research
              involves a novel methodology.  Research subjects read hypothetical and real
              scenarios and respond to them on the World Wide Web.  Use of JavaScript, a
              programming language understood by web browsers, allows programming of
              interactive experiments, in which questions are based on subjects' earlier
              answers.

***

