Title       : Research Experiences in Physiology, Cell and Molecular Biology of Marine
               Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a9876926

Award Number: 9876926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis E. Burnett burnettl@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate students with a background in physiology, cellular biology,
              molecular biology and chemistry will work side-by-side with faculty mentors in
              an intense program of summer research and training on problems of topical
              concern in experimental marine biology.

Students will be recruited
              nationally and selected for this program based on their established (although
              not necessarily extensive) formal course work in physiology, cell biology and
              molecular biology as well as their own articulation of the importance of a
              research experience at a marine laboratory and how such an experience will
              affect their career planning.

Eight undergraduate students will live in the
              dormitories at the Grice Marine Laboratory of the College of Charleston.
              Located at Fort Johnson on the Charleston Harbor, the Grice Marine Lab
              co-exists with the marine laboratories of a medical university, a state natural
              resources agency and two federal agencies. These Fort Johnson institutions form
              the South Carolina Marine Resources Center (SCMRC) at Fort Johnson. These
              entities form a true partnership in all the important ways, sharing scientific
              expertise, instrumentation and space. Educational concerns rank high among the
              priorities at the SCM RC. As an outgrowth of its concern for undergraduate
              education and research, the College of Charleston established a summer research
              program in Marine Biology in 1992 to give undergraduates a quality research
              experience in a unique setting where institutions with different missions work
              closely together. It is this undergraduate research program that forms the
              basis of this REU proposal.

Marine biologists in the Department of Biology
              at the College of Charleston will form the core of the program faculty
              supported by individuals from the SCMRC institutions. These faculties will
              provide students with mentors and support in highly experimental areas of
              marine biology using modern techniques in cellular biology, molecular biology
              and organismal physiology. The specific project themes will vary from year to
              year, but the themes will focus on the understanding of basic biological
              principles as they relate to practical problems. Through formal course work
              designed specifically for this program (Biology 421, Topics in the Physiology,
              Cell and Molecular Biology of Marine Organisms), a well-defined research
              project, field trips, a journal club, and a final research colloquium in which
              students present the results of their work, students will gain first-hand
              knowledge of how to do research and discover career options in research that
              include more than traditional academic research tracks.




