Title       : CAREER: Hydraulic Fractures at Shallow Depths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9876124

Award Number: 9876124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Murdoch lmurdoch@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1325,9150,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876124
Murdoch

Hydraulic fractures provide an opportunity to reduce the
              great expense of remediating fine-grained deposits.  The purpose of this
              proposal is to use the mechanics and effects of induced fractures on
              hydrological systems as a basis for teaching and research in hydrogeology.  The
              program will consist of a series of courses and a research effort into the
              application of hydraulic fractures.  An important theme will be to improve the
              basic math skills and the ability of students to use those skills to solve
              problems related to mechanics and hydrogeology.  The course sequence will begin
              with an introduction to the mathematical methods for analyzing geological
              processes in an approach intended to motivate students to learn mathematical
              methods as a means to improve their understanding of geology.  A second course
              will cover the mechanics of fracturing and the hydrology of natural and induced
              fractures in sediment or rock based on finding from the research outlined
              below, and related material.

The research will have two primary goals; one
              is to understand processes that control the form of a hydraulic fracture, the
              other is to understand how the flow of fluid is affected by creating
              sand-filled hydraulic fractures in low permeability materials.  Both issues
              will be investigated by controlled field experiments and using theoretical
              models.  Methods for measuring state-of-stress and fracture toughness
              (parameters critical to understanding fracture propagation) in shallow soils
              are limited, so the early stages of this research will identify and, if
              necessary, develop field methods for site characterization.  Field observations
              will be analyzed by adapting a 3-D simulator of hydraulic fracture growth
              (HYFRANC-3D).  The ultimate objective is to develop the capability to predict
              fracture form based on in-situ conditions.  Conclusions derived from the
              detailed field and modeling studies will be tested by comparing predictions to
              observations from more than a dozen sites where hydraulic fractures were
              created during previous investigations. The program will advance our
              understanding of the formation and subsurface effects of induced fractures
              while training students to combine field investigations with mathematical
              analysis to investigate fractured hydrological systems.

