Title       : A Wireless Scleral Search Coil Device for Measuring Eye Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2001   
File        : a9876635

Award Number: 9876635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175066             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Shelhamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will develop a new device for the precise and convenient
              measurement of eye movements.  The device is based on the existing and
              widely-used wired scleral search coil technique, in which an annular contact
              lens with a small coil of wire is placed on the eye, and its orientation
              determined from the magnitude of the current induced in the coil by external
              magnetic fields.  The new device uses a similar scleral contact lens on the
              eye, but the new lens contains three resonant coils, and has no wires leading
              from these coils to the associated electronics.  A small set of
              transmitter/receiver coils placed near the eye generates magnetic fields that
              induce current in the eye-mounted coils, and in turn detect re-radiated energy
              from the resonant eye coils.  The orientation of the lens and coils is
              determined from the magnitudes of the received signals.  Development of the new
              device involves the fabrication of three coils on a single lens, resonant at
              three different frequencies, and implementation of associated signal processing
              algorithms for measuring the signals radiated by the coils and computing coil
              (eye) orientation.

This new method retains the conventional wired coil's
              benefits of high resolution and accuracy, large range of movement, and complete
              three-dimensional measurement of orientation.  The largest drawback of the
              conventional system is the wires that lead from the eye coils to the signal
              processing electronics.  By eliminating these wires, several very significant
              advantages result.  Subject comfort is greatly increased, as the external
              wiring leading from the eye often irritates the eyelid and causes annoying
              stimulation of the eyelashes.  A greater range of experiments can be performed,
              since the placement of the head within the external magnetic fields becomes
              less restrictive; head-free experiments, such as those involving locomotion and
              self-generated movements become much more practical.  Perhaps most importantly,
              breakage of the external wiring (the most common source of failure in current
              systems) is avoided.  The "wireless" measurement system will be of tremendous
              benefit to both the research and the clinical communities.  In particular,
              vestibular and oculomotor patients should tolerate the new coils much better
              than existing ones, allowing easier and more convenient recording of precise
              eye movements in a larger segment of this population, for whom the conventional
              coils are often intimidating and uncomfortable.


