Title       : An Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera, and Trichoptera (EPT) Database: Internet Access
               and Geographic Information System Linking of Collections at the INHS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9876756

Award Number: 9876756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171180             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Edward DeWalt edewalt@mail.inhs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas N. Kompare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jocelyn L. Aycrigg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen R. Zeiders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              

The Illinois Natural History Survey (INHS), a National Systematics Research
              Resource Center, maintains some of the largest and most historically
              significant North American collections of the aquatic insect orders
              Ephemeroptera (mayflies), Plecoptera (stoneflies), and Trichoptera
              (caddisflies), collectively referred to as EPT.  These groups are recognized as
              containing some of the most sensitive biotic indicators of stream
              health.

Considerable holdings of EPT type specimens, and other historically
              important material, results in a heavy demand for loans of specimens and
              requests for information on species distributions.  Recognizing that the INHS
              is an important repository for EPT specimens and information needed by
              systematists, biogeographers, ecologists, and conservationists, the INHS
              initiated efforts to computerize the specimen label data and serve it to the
              Internet.  Stonefly specimen label data (18,486) are now available on the
              Internet.  Computerization of the mayfly and caddisfly holdings is underway. 
              Completion of these two databases would result in the most comprehensive
              specimen level EPT database available anywhere.  This project will support the
              computerization of the large and historically significant EPT collection housed
              at the INHS.  Specific goals of this project are to: (1) enter the collection
              label data for the remaining mayflies and caddisflies; (2) georeference
              locality data for all EPT records at the INHS; (3) serve the tabular database
              to the Internet; (4) serve the georeference locality data to the Internet as
              high quality maps of species distributions at appropriate scales; (5)
              restructure existing flat file format to an expanded relational one; (6) update
              nomenclature; and (7) obtain the computer equipment and software necessary to
              construct the databases and serve them to the Internet as envisioned in this
              proposal.  

Compilation of EPT specimen records into a coordinated,
              GIS-linked, Internet-accessible database will provide  a valuable tool for
              ecological, biogeographical, and systematic research on EPT species and will
              also provide a unique opportunity to assess historical changes in species
              richness and stream health.  Using an advanced search engine, researchers world
              wide will be able to search the database using combinations of taxonomic and
              geographic descriptors, generate species lists for localities or drainages,
              access distribution maps, and match immature and adult specimens based on their
              presence or absence at specific localities.
pletion of these two databases
              would result in the most comprehensive specimen level EPT database available
              anywhere.  This project will support the computerization of the large and
              historically significant EPT collection housed at the INHS.  Specific goals of
              this project are to: (1) enter the collection label data for the remaining
              mayflies and caddisflies; (2) georeference locality data for all EPT records at
              the INHS; (3) serve the tabular database to the Internet; (4) serve the
              georeference locality data to the Internet as high quality maps of species
              distributions at appropriate scales; (5) restructure existing flat file format
              to an expanded relational one; (6) update nomenclature; and (7) obtain the
              computer equipment and software necessary to construct the databases and serve
              them to the Internet as envisioned in this proposal.  

Compilation of EPT
              specimen records into a coordinated, GIS-linked, Internet-accessible database 
              provide will a valuable tool for ecological, biogeographical, and systematic
              research on EPT species and will also provide a unique opportunity to assess
              historical changes in species richness and stream health.  Using an advanced
              search engine, researchers world wide will be able to search the database using
              combinations of taxonomic and geographic descriptors, generate species lists
              for localities or drainages, access distribution maps, and match immature and
              adult specimens based on their presence or absence at specific localities.


