Title       : CAREER: Cyclic Plasticity and Fatigue Life of Small-Scale Metal Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a9876261

Award Number: 9876261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Vinci vinci@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9876261
Vinci

Two objectives of this program on small-scale metallic
              structures are to understand plastic behavior related to cyclic loading and to
              identify mechanisms that determine fatigue lifetimes for low-and high-cycle
              regimes.  Both cyclic plasticity and fatigue are evaluated in terms of sample
              state, particularly thickness and microstructure.  The effects of testing
              conditions, including strain rate, ambient atmosphere and temperature, are
              evaluated.  Emphasis is placed on identifying the key parameters that
              differentiate the behavior of freestanding metal thin films from that of bulk
              metals and that of thin metal films adhered to substrates.  Unique apparatus
              under development fits into the specimen chamber of an Environmental Scanning
              Electron Microscope equipped with an Orientation Imaging Microscopy unit.  This
              arrangement allows in-situ monitoring of surface morphology and microstructure
              during testing.  Uniaxial tensile samples are used for simplicity of testing
              and analysis.  Metal specimens are patterned at the Stanford Nanofabrication
              Facility using fabrication techniques developed in a preliminary study. 
              Materials systems include aluminum (a FCC low melting point metal), iridium (a
              high melting point FCC metal), and molybdenum (a high melting point BCC metal).
               Improved understanding of thin film mechanical behavior will be transmitted to
              students through three paths: training of graduate and undergraduate research
              assistants, development of a specialized graduate mechanical behavior course,
              and integration of thin film mechanical behavior into the undergraduate
              curriculum.
%%%
Physics-based mechanical behavior models will allow dynamic
              modeling of device behavior and reliability for performance optimization. 
              Technologies that will benefit include MEMS products such as high frequency RF
              switches and resonators for precision electronics.  Relevant mesoscale
              applications include devices such as miniature aircraft and gas turbines for
              power generation.  The target audience for this work includes university
              researchers, developers of design software, small-scale device manufacturers,
              and endusers of this technology.
***


