Title       : CAREER: Distributed Cooperative Digital Archives for Scientific and Geospatial
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9876037

Award Number: 9876037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bongki Moon bkmoon@cs.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              During the past few years, many data-intensive applications have posed new
              challenges concerning storing, searching, querying, and retrieving large-scale
              complex data such as medical or satellite imagery, geographical and scientific
              data. With the increasing popularity of the Internet and the World Wide Web
              (WWW), there is a fast growing need to make such data accessible through the
              Internet. The Distributed Cooperative Digital Archives (DCDA) research builds a
              framework to make such scientific and geospatial data discoverable and
              retrievable on the Internet. This approach is to enable a collection of
              independent data archives to share the load in order to enhance their
              collective system performance, while allowing individual archives to remain
              under the control of the corresponding data producers. This approach also
              integrates database support and web servers to provide scalable data retrieval
              and indexability. The issues being addressed in this research include: dynamic
              migration and replication of web documents, automated processing of web
              documents for database support, fast web-database connection, and web-enabled
              declustering of large-scale scientific and geospatial data. The results of this
              research include new algorithms, software tools and prototype system
              implementations for significant performance improvements in data delivery,
              searchability and scalability of servers. The educational goal of this research
              is to integrate the research tasks into a curriculum for teaching Web/Internet
              information processing to support meaningful research training for students.
              Additional effort is to develop and strengthen project-driven learning and
              web-enabled teaching environment to stimulate students' motivation for
              self-learning and problem solving skills. 


