Title       : CAREER: Three-Dimensional Volume Visualization of Multi-Variate Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a9876022

Award Number: 9876022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Crawfis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computer simulations and even experimental devices generate more than a
single
              variable.  These variables typically exhibit complex
interdependencies which
              must be thoroughly understood to improve the
simulation codes and understand
              the complex systems being studied.
Unfortunately, cluttering prevents this
              from being achieved in current
visualization systems. Users are thus left with
              generating several
different representations and mentally merging them
              together, a nearly
impossible feat. The goal of this project is to provide new
              methods that
will let scientists browse through their terabytes of data
              searching for
interesting patterns or irregularities. A secondary component of
              this
project is to illustrate the utility of the new technique to the rest
              of
the computer graphics industry, including efficient volume rendering
              for
objects such as fire, clouds and water. These solutions will
              bring
computational scientists one step closer to a seamless environment
              for
studying both multiple simulations and complex interactions within
              a
simulation.


Technically, the project will investigate new methods for
              representing
complex vector fields and multi-dimensional scalar fields defined
              over a
three-dimensional mesh topology. A particular emphasis will be on
              extending
a direct volume rendering technique known as "splatting" to
              provide
integrated representations of multiple data variables. (The name comes
              from
a step in the method that constructs a footprint or "splat" used to
              project
3D basis functions onto surface textures.) In particular, this
              research
will extend the state-of-the-art in direct volume rendering by
              developing
techniques to depict non-homogenous or isotropic volumes.  These
              volume
textures will be developed along with efficient rendering techniques
              to
allow them to reinforce or segregate different regions of a
              volume,
control representations of time-varying data, and apply the
              representations
to virtual reality settings.



