Title       : CAREER:Direct Synthesis of Polymer Brushes using Organometallic Catalysts with
               Tethered Initiators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9876244

Award Number: 9876244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Seery seery@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This career award presents a new synthetic approach to creating new polymer
              brush compositions and architectures using the unique potential that
              organometallic catalysts have recently offered for generating wide varieties of
              brushes from tethered initiators.  The primary object of this effort is to
              synthesize well-defined stiff brushes in spherical and planar geometries with a
              priori determination of grafting density and chain length and to exploit these
              controlled brush structures to establish, experimentally, the scaling relations
              for wormlike brushes.  The PI will further capitalize on the versatility
              afforded by living organometallic polymerizations catalysts to design and
              synthesize block co-polymer brushes that combine polyelectrolyte blocks with
              hydrophobic and uncharged hydrophillic blocks.  The use of polyisocyanates as
              model semiflexible polymers will also lead to the synthesis of chiral
              isocyanate brushes that will be studied to ascertain the importance of chain
              packing on chiral induction.  The PI will also prepare brushes on complex
              geometries to probe the utility of this methodology in preparing polymeric
              nanostructures.  For example, polymers will be grown on the interior surfaces
              of hollow cylinders in predetermined patters on external surfaces.

Teaching
              activities will focus on mentoring undergraduates in the context of a research
              group.  A new course is also proposed, "The Art of Teaching Science" an
              interdisciplinary course designed to serve two constituencies, those of the
              scientist and the citizen.  The scientists are those who desire careers in
              technical fields and need thorough grounding in technical knowledge and skills:
               scientists are learning in order to do science.  The citizen, on the other
              hand, studies to learn about science.  The course will have two goals: 
              development of a series of lecture demonstrations in the areas of elementary
              chemistry and materials science; and the development of a curriculum for a
              second new lecture course called "Paper or Plastic?  Materials Choices in
              Everyday Life".  This course will serve as a springboard for several outreach
              activities.  Students will be encouraged to present the demonstrations in
              visits to high schools. The materials developed by the class will also form the
              basis for a short course to be offered to teachers at the high school and
              college level.
