Title       : Collaborative Project: 'Minorities at Risk' Database and Explaining Ethnic
               Violence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9876530

Award Number: 9876530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102066             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Laitin dlaitin@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted R. Gurr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The "Minorities at Risk" database produced by Ted R. Gurr has been widely cited
              in the scientific community.  It has great potential to serve as the
              evidentiary arbiter of competing theories of ethnic violence.  Large-scale
              ethnic violence is an interesting and important topic both because of the human
              suffering it causes and because it could be an important piece of evidence in
              the larger puzzle of how world politics are now evolving.  Furthermore, civil
              and especially ethnic violence is more common now than is interstate violence
              of the classical sort, and it tends to be more protracted that interstate wars
              as well.  Because of the trend of greater degrees of ethnic violence, and
              because of its importance for policy and for theories of world politics, the
              investigators of this collaborative research project foresee that the MAR
              database will play an increasingly important role in the search for
              explanations of this violence.

Despite its great potential, the
              investigators point to some major flaws and limitations in the database.  The
              first purpose of this project is to work with the Gurr team to improve
              substantially the scientific quality of the MAR data base, such that the social
              science community will have a much better resource for the study of ethnic
              violence than is currently available.  The second objective of this project is
              to exploit the newly created database in order to make cross-sectional and
              time-series comparisons of violent and non-violent cases of relations between
              ethnic groups and states.  This work is a precondition for more theoretical
              work on the mechanisms that move ethnic groups and states from conflict into
              violence.

The investigators improve substantially on the extant data base by
              correcting errors in coding, use of vague and almost un-codable independent
              variables, absence of key variables leading theories of ethnic conflict, and a
              nearly intractable selection bias problem in the choice of cases.  Empirically
              the project supports research assistants to improve the old variables and to
              add new ones.  Theoretically, the investigators argue for an application of an
              econometric technique to address the selection bias.  The final task offers
              preliminary results of the investigators' cross-sectional analysis of the MAR
              data and performs additional work to improve the database.

This is a
              database that will have wide use in the social science community.


