Title       : CAREER: A Relational Database Interface to the World-Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9876309

Award Number: 9876309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Spertus spertus@mills.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mills College
	      5000 Macarthur Ave
	      Oakland, CA  946131301    415/430-2255

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
The World-Wide Web has the potential of being the world's largest knowledge
              base if its unique characteristics are properly utilized. While superficially
              similar to early hypertext and other information retrieval domains, the Web has
              important quantitative and qualitative differences that necessitate new tools
              and techniques. The quantitative differences are obvious: The tremendous size
              of the Web precludes storing a complete and up-to-date copy in a conventional
              database. The qualitative differences between the Web and earlier information
              retrieval domains are more subtle but no less important, including the various
              types of semi-structured information on the Web. Unifying the Web with
              relational databases, so it can be accessed through Structured Query Language
              (SQL) and other database tools, would apply one of the most popular data
              management tools to this challenging and important domain. A prototype
              implementation of just-in-time databases and the Squeal query environrnent
              appeared in the investigator's dissertation, proving that the Web could be
              queried as though it were in a local relational database. This was achieved by
              automatically retrieving information from the Web only when needed, allowing
              the construction of several simple but powerful structure-based information
              retrieval applications.

This proposal is to build a powerful and efficient
              relational database interface to the Web that will be a valuable tool for the
              information retrieval community, supporting uniform access to many types of
              structural and other information on the Web, including inter-document
              structure, intra-document structure, forms, cookies, and new features as they
              arise. Efficient performance will require developing query optimization
              techniques, pre-fetch and refresh strategies, and techniques for sharing data
              among multiple users. As the system progresses, novel information retrieval
              applications will be developed and evaluated, to gain a better understanding of
              the benefits and limitations of using different types of available information
              toward various information retrieval problems. Throughout the process, the
              system itself will be evaluated, to better understand the powers and limits of
              providing a relational database interface to the Web.

The primary
              educational goal is to increase computer science opportunities for women, an
              area in which the investigator has extensive experience and is well-positioned
              as a faculty member at a women's college with a strong undergraduate program
              and two graduate programs: a certificate program for people with college
              degrees who wish to change fields and an interdisciplinary master's program for
              combining computing with another area of experience. The investigator's plans
              (already in progress) include:

 Supervising undergraduate research, with the
              goal of preparing and motivating students for graduate education.


              Completely revising the architecture and operating systems sequence, including
              the creation of a hardware laboratory.

 Taking advantage of the school. Bay
              Area location to forge ties with industry leading to speakers, internships,
              permanent employment, and possible donations.

 Running a mentoring program
              for Mills students to prepare them for graduate school and employment. 


              Recruiting transfer students from nearby community colleges, which has the
              added benefit of reaching economically underprivileged women.

 Improving the
              interdisciplinary master's program to more fully integrate students' other
              areas of interest with computer science.



