Title       : CAREER: Understanding the Structural Basis for Ligand Recognition by RNA
               Aptamers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a9876350

Award Number: 9876350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Wilson wilson@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wilson
MCB 9876350

1. Technical:  This study explores the folded structures
              of RNAs and their
interactions with other molecules.  Aptamers isolated from
              random sequence
pools, including RNAs that specifically bind the enzymatic
              cofactors
cyanocobalamin and biotin and the chromophore malachite green, will
              serve
as model systems.  Focus is placed on biochemical characterization of
              these
molecules and on the preparation of crystals and solution samples that
              will
enable their analysis by x-ray diffraction and NMR spectroscopy.
              The
structures of cyanocobalamin and biotin aptamer crystals will be
              determined
by X-ray crystallography and the isotopically-labeled malachite
              green
aptamer RNA by solution NMR spectroscopy. This is to understand
              the
specific atomic interactions that stabilize RNA folding, the variety
              of
structural folds available to RNA, the involvement of metals and waters
              in
RNA function, and the nature of conformational changes in RNA that
              result
from its interaction with other molecules. The educational component
              of
this project aims to use structural biology for introducing students to
              the
physical sciences through a combination of both classroom and
              laboratory
instruction.   New and modified curricula in eukaryotic molecular
              biology
and structural biology, supplemented by the development of
              computer-based
educational materials, will be developed to establish the
              relationship
between macromolecular structure and function.  Selected number
              of
students will be encouraged to engage in the research.

2. 
              Non-technical: The capacity for ribonucleic acids (RNAs) to fold into
specific
              conformations and thereby obtain functional properties (e.g. the
ability to
              bind molecules or to catalyze reactions) has been increasingly
appreciated, in
              part through experiments in which RNAs have been evolved de
novo from pools of
              random sequence molecules.  This recognition has fueled
speculation about the
              involvement of RNAs in many biological processes
(e.g. ribosome-directed
              protein synthesis) and supported theories favoring
an RNA-based biology as a
              precursor to modern life.  Our understanding of
the structural basis for RNA
              function, critical for addressing these
issues, remains poor in part because
              few RNA structures have been
determined at atomic resolution. In vitro-evolved
              ligand-binding RNAs will
serve as model systems for understanding RNA
              structure and its relationship
to RNA function.  X-ray crystallography and NMR
              spectroscopy will be used
in this study to determine high resolution models
              for three different
RNA-ligand complexes.  Analysis of these structures will
              reveal the
mechanisms by which specific RNA sequences adopt unique structures
              and how
these structures enable specific interactions with other
              molecules.
Integrating these studies with teaching, this study provides
              undergraduate
students with basic skills in structural biology. Enhancements
              to existing
eukaryotic molecular biology curricula will emphasize the concept
              that
biological processes are driven by molecular interactions specified by
              the
folded conformations of macromolecules.  A new course in structural
              biology
will expand upon this theme with the additional goal of
              providing
interdisciplinary training in applied physical and computational
              sciences.


