Title       : High-throughput Biological-assays Via Single Molecule Labeling and Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a9876651

Award Number: 9876651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61450              (Estimated)
Investigator: david a. schultz dschultz@sdss.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9876651
David A. Schultz
University of California, San
              Diego
High-throughput Biological -assays Via Single Molecule Labeling and
              Detection

This grant supports the development of a new ultrasensitive
              optical assay for biological macromolecules.  Either protein or nucleic acid
              target molecules will be detected at the level of 1 femtogram.  This level of
              sensitivity will allow the identification and quantification of the chosen
              macromolecule in a single cell.  The sensitivity, speed, and accuracy of these
              assays will be optimized using a real-time in-vitro studies.

The reporter
              molecule for such an assay must be robust and nano-sized yet still have a very
              large light-scattering cross-section.  Immmunolabelled plasmon resonant
              particles (PRPs) are ideal for this purpose.  PRPs are small (40-80 nanometer)
              metal particles that scatter visible light elastically with extraordinary
              efficiency when excited at their plasmon resonance frequency.  They are
              inexpensive, non-toxic, and are available in a variety of colors.  The light
              scattered from PRPs under typical white light illumination is so large that
              each PRP is individually visible.  At appropriate concentration, the actual
              number of PRPs in a field of view is simply the number of particles bound to
              the target macromolecule plus any particles that are non-specifically bound. 
              An image of such a field of PRPs can be recorded using a CCD camera within
              milliseconds.  This will allow for the rapid and ultrasensitive detection of
              the target macromolecules in the cell.  

It is anticipated that
              commercialized versions of the PRP immunoassay will allow for low cost
              detection of a wide range of important molecules in the cell.  Such an
              immunoassay should complement or replace standard ELISA or radio-immunoassays
              for cases where the concentration of the target molecules if very low and
              target amplification is not beneficial or practical.


