Title       : CAREER: The Dynamical Evolution of Galaxies and Galaxy Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9876143

Award Number: 9876143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456324             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Mihos hos@burro.astr.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


AST 98-76143
Mihos

Recent advances in observational facilities
              have lead to an explosion of information on the evolution of galaxies and
              galaxy clusters in the distant past (at high redshifts) to the present day. 
              This evolution is manifested through the changing morphology of cluster
              members, the increasing fraction of blue star-bursting galaxies at high
              redshift, and evidence of substructure in cluster galaxies and X-ray emitting
              gas.  A research project, which synthesizes dynamical simulations of galaxy
              evolution with observational studies of galaxy clusters to study these
              evolutionary processes in detail, will be carried out.

Numerical simulations
              will be used to explore the process by which type SO galaxies form in clusters.
               Different dynamical scenarios will be explored, including galaxy mergers,
              interactions within the cluster environment, and the effects of cluster
              ram-pressure stripping on galaxies. Numerical modeling techniques will also be
              developed to study the onset and evolution of starburst winds in galaxies,
              following the subsequent evolution of the host galaxies and the formation of
              the hot X-ray halos around elliptical galaxies and throughout galaxy
              clusters.

Extremely deep imaging of the Virgo cluster of galaxies and other
              nearby galaxy clusters will be obtained to study the diffuse intracluster light
              (ICL). The ICL material is stripped from galaxies as they move through the
              cluster potential and the ICL acts as a fossil record of the dynamical history
              of the cluster.  The central area, 7 degrees by 7 degrees, of the Virgo cluster
              will be mapped to correlate the structure of the ICL with the properties of the
              Virgo galaxy population. The dynamical evolution of galaxy clusters in general
              will be investigated by studying the ICL across a variety of different
              environments from small groups to rich clusters of galaxies.

On the
              educational front, electronic lecturing techniques will be used to bring the
              most up-to-date scientific results into the classroom.  The creation of
              web-based curricula will allow students to review class lectures on demand and
              foster better interaction with, and comprehension of, class material.  The
              dynamical simulations of galaxy and cluster evolution will be used in
              multimedia computer presentations to bring material to students in a more
              engaging manner than simple text based lectures.  Laboratory courses in
              astrodynamics will be developed, centered around numerical simulation
              techniques applied on local computer platforms.  Student participation in
              observational laboratories will be fostered through the use of Case Western
              Reserve University's robotic telescope.   Undergraduate research assistants
              will be employed in all phases of the computational and observational research
              programs.  Students will have a hands-on experience in modern astrophysics and
              the scientific method.

