Title       : CAREER: Frameworks for RNA Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9876246

Award Number: 9876246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Roberts rroberts@cco.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Roberts
9876246
RNA-protein interactions are of central biological importance
              as they provide the means to connect genetic information to cellular
              biochemistry.  Work over the last decade has elucidated a number of protein
              motifs that are capable of sequence and/or structure specific RNA recognition. 
              However, it is neither possible to design a protein sequence that will bind a
              chosen RNA target nor predict which motif would be most appropriate for a given
              recognition problem.  The investigator has therefore chosen to pursue an in
              vitro genetic strategy to isolate RNA binding proteins.  The in vitro strategy
              will be pursued using RNA-protein fusions, protein molecules covalently
              attached to the mRNA which encodes them.  The investigator proposes to explore
              and compare random sequence protein libraries to two protein motifs that have
              the potential to act as general frameworks for RNA recognition:  1) the
              arginine rich (ARM) motif, and 2) a structural analog of the RNP domain, the B1
              domain of protein G.  The selection experiments will provide a wealth of
              examples that will either support or challenge the current ability to predict
              protein structure. Biochemical and physical analysis of these examples should
              provide insight into which scaffolds are the most general.  In addition, the
              information from the selection experiments will be fed back into the design
              process in an iterative fashion to improve the overall design of the frameworks
              and selections.

The design of new proteins is one of the fundamental
              challenges facing biochemists.  This is because it is not currently possible to
              design a protein with a set of rational steps analogous to the construction of
              a building.  An alternative approach is to construct many different proteins
              (millions to trillions) and select the few that have desired functional
              properties.  The immune system uses precisely this strategy for our defense,
              making billions of proteins based on a common framework--an antibody.  The
              investigator proposes to examine new frameworks for their ability to recognize
              RNA molecules.  Using newly developed techniques, the investigator's lab will
              examine trillions of sequences in an effort to develop general reagents to
              improve our understanding of protein function.




