Title       : Curation and Rehousing of the Orphaned USGS Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plain
               Tertiary Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9876772

Award Number: 9876772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauck W. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Museum of Natural Hist
	      1001 Douglas Avenue
	      Martinsville, VA  24112    804/329-4028

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In June, 1996, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)transferred a large collection
              of Tertiary coastal plain invertebrate fossils to the Virginia Museum of
              Natural History (VMNH).  This collection (hereafter referred to as the USGS
              Collection) is vastly important, not only because of its large size, but
              because it contains samples and specimens from many localities that are no
              longer available.  The USGS Collection provides doucementation of the richly
              fossiliferous mid-Atlantic states where construction and urban development have
              obliterated critical fossil localities.  The biostratigraphy of this area has
              been the key to understanding the less well-exposed regions to the south and
              north and has become a national and international standard.

The USGS
              Collection is contained in 114 museum cases, usually termed "Smithsonian, or
              S.I., cases."
These cases vary in age from 30 to 60 years old, have wooden
              frames covered with steel sheeting and all-wood drawers.  The collections
              consist primarily of Tertiary mollusks, but being stratigraphic sets, they also
              contain representatives of most other invertebrate taxa (i.e., crustaceans,
              echinoids, corals, bryozoans, microfossils) and some vertebrate material.  The
              fossils are housed in chipboard trays and are in varying stages of curation,
              from unprocessed lithologic samples to cleaned, sorted, and identified sets. 
              Information as to locality, stratum, age, and other pertinent data is available
              in a variety of forms such as field notebooks, guadrangle maps, slide and
              photograph archives, and an extensive set of lithologic, micropaleontologic,
              ecologic, and voucher samples.  The USGS Collection covers the Tertiary Coastal
              Plain portions of most of the states from Massachusetts to Mississippi, with
              Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina being the most completely collected
              areas.  These latter areas are the most important to the VMNH.  The Collection
              has been documented in numerous professional papers, memoirs, bulletins, and
              journals by curators, geologists, and graduate students.

This project will
              support the rehousing of the USGS Collection in state-of-the-art all-metal
              cabinets.  The contents will be entirely inventoried, the original
              stratigraphic order will be reestablished and a working biologic set will be
              extracted from the available large collections.  The project will make over a
              million fossil specimens from 13 different states available to schools and
              universites in an area where there are no large museum collections.  It will
              provide a series of collections that preserve their biodiversity, and hence,
              are critical to ecologic, extinction, and climate studies.
