Title       : Experimental Studies of Desirability Bias in Predictive Judgment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9876585

Award Number: 9876585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Price   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno Fdn
	      4910 N. Chestnut Ave
	      Fresno, CA  93726    559/278-0840

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Most important decisions involve making predictions about the future.  The
              decision whether or not to buy a particular house, for example, might involve
              predicting changes in the size of one's family, the composition of the
              prospective neighborhood, and one's future employment and income.  The same is
              true of most other important personal decisions and also professional decisions
              in fields like medicine, law, business, and public policy.  The question
              addressed by this research is whether these kinds of predictions are influenced
              by "wishful thinking."  Are people's predictions about what will happen in the
              future influenced by what they want to happen?  For example, does the fact that
              a couple wants a particular house--and therefore wants to be able to make the
              payments--cause them to make overly optimistic predictions about their future
              employment and income?  This is clearly an important question because this kind
              of wishful thinking could lead to poor decisions.  For example, it could cause
              the aforementioned couple to fail to anticipate a job layoff that results in
              foreclosure on their mortgage.

     The results of past research on wishful
              thinking are inconsistent,
with some researchers finding strong effects of
              people's desires on their
predictions and others finding weak or null effects.
               The goal of the
present research is test a newly developed framework for
              integrating these
inconsistent results.  This framework specifies six
              conditions under which
wishful thinking is especially likely to occur.  A
              review of the
literature suggests that these conditions were largely met in
              previous
studies that demonstrated wishful thinking, but not in research
              that
failed to demonstrate it.  The six conditions are 1) the desire that
              the
event occur is strong, 2) whether or not the event is going to occur
              is
highly uncertain, 3) there is no strong incentive for the prediction to
              be
accurate, 4) the prediction task is complex, requiring the search for
              and
integration of many pieces of information, 5) the event is perceived
              as
being at least partly under the control of the person making
              the
prediction, and 6) the prediction takes a deterministic "yes-no"
              form
rather than a probabilistic form.
     The research will consist of
              several experiments in which college
students and others make predictions
              about a broad range of future events
including sporting contests, political
              elections, and games of chance like
roulette.  By manipulating both the
              desirability of the alternative
outcomes of these events and whether or not
              each of the six conditions of
the framework are met, it will be determined
              whether wishful thinking is
in fact more likely when those conditions are
              satisfied.
     As a result of this research, scientific understanding of
              wishful
thinking, its causes, and the conditions under which it is most likely
              to
occur will be greatly expanded.  This will allow researchers to
              develop
methods for avoiding wishful thinking to help people make
              better
decisions.

