Title       : Neuronal Specialization and Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9876032

Award Number: 9876032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nelson Spruston spruston@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Nelson Spruston
IBN-9876032

The central nervous system (CNS) is made up of
              approximately 100 billion nerve cells. Most of these neurons communicate with
              one another at contact points called synapses. On one side of the synapse, the
              speaker (the presynaptic neuron) communicates via action potentials -
              electrical signals about 100 mV in amplitude and 1-2 ms in duration. On the
              other side, the listener (the postsynaptic neuron) interprets these signals
              arriving simultaneously from thousands of presynaptic neurons. This
              conversation is complicated by the fact that not all neurons speak the same
              language. Some neurons fire as few as a few action potentials per second;
              others fire as many as a thousand action potentials per second.  Differences
              are also observed in the patterns of action potential firing.  The biological
              underpinnings of action potential firing patterns are largely determined by
              pore-forming molecules called ion channels. A new avenue of research into the
              mechanisms responsible for variations in action potential firing patterns is to
              study the properties of ion channels located in different parts of the neuron.
              For example the axon, which generally forms the presynaptic side of the
              synapse, expresses different ion channels than the dendrites, which forms the
              postsynaptic side of the synapse. Here I propose to use new technology to study
              the properties of ion channels in the dendrites of neurons in an area of the
              brain called subiculum. This area is part of the hippocampus, which is involved
              in learning and memory. Neurons in the subiculum are known to generate clusters
              of action potentials called bursts. This pattern is very different than that of
              their nearest neighbors in the CA1 region of the hippocampus, which are
              morphologically similar, but cannot generate bursts of action potentials.  I
              propose to perform experiments that will test the hypothesis that the bursting
              observed in subicular neurons is caused by specialized properties of sodium
              and/or potassium channels in the dendrites of these neurons. Using recently
              developed technology, the properties of channels in the dendrites of subicular
              neurons will be compared to those in CA1 neurons determined in previous and
              ongoing studies in my lab. Together with action potential recordings from
              dendrites, pharmacological manipulations, and computer modeling studies, I aim
              to elucidate the differences between subicular and CA1 neurons that are
              responsible for the very different action potential firing patterns in these
              two cell types. The proposal also contains an educational component designed to
              teach undergraduate students about the importance of neuronal specialization in
              the central nervous system, and the
biological mechanisms underlying neuronal
              diversity. 

