Title       : The IOA Language and Toolset: Support for Designing, Analyzing, and Building
               Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2001     
File        : a9876931

Award Number: 9876931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Lynch lynch@theory.lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Garland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Distributed and parallel computer systems are becoming increasingly common and
              complicated. New applications such as computer-supported cooperative work
              systems are appearing on these platforms, and parallel scientific and
              engineering computations have long used parallelism for high performance.  Many
              of these systems have important correctness, performance, and fault-tolerance
              requirements. However, they often use intertwined and complicated protocols
              that make them difficult to build and reason about. This project studies
              structured approaches to managing this complexity, which view the system at
              different levels of abstraction and as parallel compositions of interacting
              components. The particular approach used to do this is the I/O automaton model,
              which has previously been used to describe and verify distributed algorithms
              and distributed system designs. The model has a simple notion of external
              behavior based on linear traces of external actions of the components, and
              allows the components (automata) to be composed and related using simulation
              relations. The new research here will develop parts of the IOA programming
              language and toolset to support distributed and parallel programming using I/O
              automata. Extensions for timed and hybrid I/O automata will also be attempted.
              The new tools and techniques will allow a variety of systems to be modeled and
              analyzed at a high level of abstraction.


