Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Metallaradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9876426

Award Number: 9876426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus H. Theopold theopold@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award, the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              Program supports the research work of Dr. Klaus Theopold of the University of
              Delaware. The project will explore the synthetic routes and reaction chemistry
              of a paramagnetic class of organometallic compounds, specifically high
              oxidation state paramagnetic chromium-oxo alkyls and alkylidenes. These
              compounds are unstable and difficult to characterize, but have great potential
              and relevance as commercial catalysts. The alkylidines have been postulated as
              reactive intermediates in organometallic transformations. The synthetic
              chemistry is expected to result in new compounds relevant to catalysis in
              polymerizations and oxidations. Early metal alkylidene compounds will be used
              as catalysts for the preparation of previously inaccessible polymeric materials
              with unusual properties.

This project is fundamental in nature but has the
              potential to have practical impact on commercial catalyst development. The work
              will examine how the oxygen atom transfers to and hydrogen abstraction from
              hydrocarbons takes place with the presently employed toxic hexavalent chromium
              catalysts, and develop alternative catalysts that will be environmentally
              beneficial. The work will have a significant impact in other material sciences
              disciplines. Undergraduate and graduate students will experience a varied
              research culture and will gain a strong background in synthetic chemistry which
              is in high demand in chemical and pharmaceutical companies.



