Title       : CAREER: Methanopterin Biosynthesis in Archaea and Methylotrophic Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9876212

Award Number: 9876212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $491963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Madeline E. Rasche mrasche@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rasche

The Archaea are procaryotes that are phylogenetically distinct from
              microorganisms of the Bacteria domain.  The most well characterized
              representatives of the Archaca are the methane-producing microorganisms
              (methanogens), which play critical roles in the global cycling of carbon the
              degradation of complex biomass, and the production of methane as both a
              greenhouse gas and energy source. Seven novel coenzymes, including the modified
              folate methanopterin, have been discovered in these strict anaerobes. Until
              recently it was generally accepted that methanopterin and other modified
              folates were restricted to the archaea. However, the discovery of
              methanopterin-utilizing enzymes and a modified folate in the methylotrophic
              bacteriumMethylobactenum extorquens (L. Chistoserdova, J. A. Vorholt, R. K.
              Thauer, and M. E. Lidstrom, 1998; Science 281:99-102) has raised provocative
              questions about the evolutionary origin of modified folates and the mechanisms
              by which genes can be transferred from one domain to another.
The proposed
              pathway of methanopterin biosynthesis in methanogens consists of at least eight
              steps. None of the enzymes involved in methanopterin biosynthesis have been
              purified to homogeneity, and despite the availability of complete genome
              sequences for two methanogenic archaea, none of the genes encoding the
              biosynthetic enzymes have been identified. The overall goal of the proposed
              research is to utilize a combined biochemical and genetic approach to
              investigate the molecular basis of modified folate biosynthesis in archeea and
              methylotrophic bacteria. The specific objectives of the research project are
	
                      1.	To purify and characterize B-ribofuranosylaminobenzene 5'-phosphate
              synthase (B-RFA-P                                                              
                                                                                     
              synthase), the first unique enzyme of methanopterin biosynthesis in the
              archaeon Methanosarcina thermophila;

2.	To identify the gene(s) encoding
              B-RFA-P synthase in the genomes of the hyperthermophilic methanogen
              Methanococcus jannaschii and the sulfate-reducing archaeon Archaeoglobus
              fulgidus, and to characterize the enzymes produced heterologously in
              Escherichia coli; and

3.	To investigate the biosynthesis of modified folates
              in the Bacteria domain by determining if methanopterin biosynthetic genes are
              part of a Methylobacterium extorquens gene cluster that encodes proteins with
              similarity to unidentified archaeal gene products.

These results will serve
              as a foundation for elucidating the enzymological and genetic basis of modified
              folate biosynthesis in methanogens and archaea. Comparisons of methanopterin
              biosynthesis in archaea and methylotrophic bacteria will contribute to
              identifying the functions of unknown archaeal-like proteins in methylotrophic
              bacteria. Conversely, the availability of a genetics system in M extorquens
              could facilitate the identification of genes and enzymes involved in
              methanopterin biosynthesis in archaca. Characterization of these genes will
              contribute to the broader goal of discovering the functions of unidentified
              archaeal proteins that exhibit no similarity to known bacterial and eucaryal
              proteins (functional genomics). A deeper understanding of methanopterin
              biosynthesis will provide insight into the unusual biochemistry of methanogenic
              archaea, the fundamental nature of coenzymes that carry C1 compounds, and the
              evolutionary relationships that exist between the Bacteria and Archaea
              domains.
In addition to providing research training opportunities for
              undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars, the proposed
              research will be the foundation for an educational program that will enable one
              high school student and one pre-college teacher per year to participate in a
              six-week summer research program. Connecting pre-college students with the
              process of scientific discovery either directly, through active participation
              in the proposed research, or indirectly, through the influence of pre-college
              teachers, is one means of increasing scientific literacy in the general public
              and facilitating an awareness of research as a means of discovering principles
              taught later in the classroom. A technological innovation called the World Wide
              Web Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer will be utilized in the
              undergraduate lecture course taught by the principal investigator to initiate
              real-time NMR experiments from a remote location via the internet and
              demonstrate fundamental principles of microbiology and scientific research in a
              dynamic way.

