Title       : Computed Tomography Imaging Spectrometer Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a9876717

Award Number: 9876717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Descour michael.descour@optics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald M. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a computed-tomography imaging
              spectrometer (CTIS) microscope that will allow for the rapid and simultaneous
              acquisition of images over a wide color (spectral) range.  With this technique,
              simultaneous analysis of multiple cell functions within living tissues will be
              possible.  Current devices which attempt to provide similar information are
              relatively slow or can provide image data only over a limited spectral range. 
              The scope of the project includes development of the CTIS microscope, the
              associated data-acquisition and analysis software, and biological-imaging
              experiments.
In the CTIS microscope, a computer-generated hologram (CGH)
              disperser is used to map the signal from each location within an object (cells)
              to a distinct pattern on a camera array.  The sum of patterns due to all
              locations within an object contains both the shape and color information about
              the object.  This information can be mathematically reconstructed to yield
              individual two-dimensional images of the object associated with many unique
              colors.  This is how the CTIS microscope is capable of acquiring spatial and
              spectral data simultaneously.
  Using the CTIS microscope, light emitting
              probes of different colors that report on unique cellular functions can be
              visualized with respect to their response to drug or chemicals throughout a
              tissue sample. This capability provides information about the physiological
              changes in function from a population of cells which respond in a heterogeneous
              manner.  Future applications are many but in particular include use of the CTIS
              microscope for analysis of tissue toxicology and cancer-cell growth and
              infiltration.

