Title       : Recruitment of Marine Fish Larvae to Estuarine Nursery Systems: Insights from
               High Resolution Analysis of Otolith Chemistry and Hydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9876565

Award Number: 9876565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $679782             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Jones cjones@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon R. Thorrold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnoldo Valle-Levinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jones
9876565

A fundamental question in ocean ecology is the role that
              biological and physical processes play in the abundance and persistence of
              marine populations. Although some understanding has been gained about benthic
              and intertidal organisms, the relative importance of these factors has yet to
              be determined in estuarine-dependent fishes. In part, estuarine-dependent
              fishes are more difficult to study because of the ontogenic habitat shifts that
              they experience. During their early lives they are transported across the
              continental shelf by onshore currents before arriving at the comparatively
              narrow entrances to estuary nursery areas. Larvae must then travel through the
              mouth and into the estuary until settling into meso and oligohaline habitats
              suitable for juvenile growth and survival. Further complicating the picture are
              the length of the spawning season and the geographic breadth of the spawning
              range inherent to many of these economically valuable fishes.

For
              estuarine-dependent fishes, the difficulty in attributing importance to any one
              factor has, in part, been logistic. For instance, larval entry into estuaries
              is typically episodic. Consequently, scientists have only been able to examine
              larval entry when it was possible to monitor larval supply daily over long
              periods. Even so, larval source was unknown when spawning was broadly
              distributed. However, improvement in instruments and techniques permit a
              different approach that is logistically more feasible for fish with broad
              spawning periods. These investigators have developed techniques to quantify
              chemical signatures encoded in the fish's otolith (earbone), a signature that
              allows us to determine a young fish's spawning location and time. Moreover, the
              investigators can determine date of entry into the estuary and source location
              by randomly sampling newly-settledjuveniles and chemically analyzing their
              sectioned otoliths. This approach provides the spawning source and timing of
              ingress to the estuary for the few young fish that survive and reach the
              nursery grounds. By combining these data throughout the recruitment season, a
              time series of daily larval ingress can also be generated. When these time
              series are correlated with daily measurements of the physical processes at an
              estuary mouth, the investigators can estimate the relative importance of the
              time and place of spawning on subsequent passage through the estuary and
              arrival at the nursery grounds. The timing of this study is particularly
              opportune, as significant leverage for this proposal will be provided by a
              study recently funded by the Physical Oceanography program within National
              Science Foundation.

This collaborative research is designed to answer the
              question "How is the magnitude and timing of recruitment to Chesapeake Bay
              dependent on spawning source and nearshore physical processes?" An immediate
              result of the research will be a better understanding of the linkage between
              nearshore physical processes at an estuary mouth to larval supply and
              settlement. The results will point the way to identifying pattems of spawning
              that result in successful recruitment and therefore the sources of fish that
              comprise local populations. Finally, modern approaches to fisheries management
              increasingly rely on knowledge of spatial processes on recruitment for defining
              and preserving essential fish habitat to protect declining populations. This
              study will significantly enhance the understanding of larval connectivity among
              local and metapopulations by tracking larval dispersal paths via otolith
              chemistry and will provide critical information for the management of marine
              populations and reserves.

