Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9876948

Award Number: 9876948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Maki maki@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan L. Edmonds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to provide ten undergraduate mathematics majors, recruited
              nationwide, with a research topic and a research environment which is as close
              to that of a working mathematician as possible, given the sudent's background. 
              Each student will work with a single faculty member.  Sample topics are: 
              Continuous Logic, The implicit Programming Problem, Bruhat Ordering On the
              Symmetric Group, The Alternating Group, and Applications to Certain Puzzles,
              Representations of Symmetric Bilinear Forms, Spaces of Triangulations, Random
              Walks and Electrical Networks in the Plane, Affine Diffeomorphisms of Surfaces,
              Wavelets and/or Hidden Markov Models, The Dynamics of Piecewise-Linear Maps,
              Peano Functions and Descriptive Set Theory, The Mathematics of Finance,
              Algebraic Codes, and Bifurcation of Planar Conservative Systems.  The students
              will meet privately with their faculty advisors two to three times a week. 
              Throughout the eight weeks the students will give frequent progress reports to
              the group.  One of the most important aspects of the program is the interaction
              among the students themselves.  For some this will be their first opportunity
              to get to know other students of comparable mathematical interest and ability. 
              We will encourage this interaction in a number of ways:  The students will be
              living together in a single dormitory and eating in the same cafeteria.  There
              will be a room in Rawles Hall (the Mathematics Department) in which students
              can gather to work.  During the last week the students will give lectures on
              the work they have done.  They will also prepare written reports on their work.
               These will be collected into a single bound volume.
