Title       : The Vanderbilt-Northwestern-Texas-Harvard/MIT (VaNTH) Engineering Research
               Center for Bioengineering Educational Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a9876363

Award Number: 9876363
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4199795            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Harris trh@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9181,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award initiates "The Vanderbilt-Northwestern-Texas-Harvard/Mit (VaNTH)
              Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Bioengineering Educational Technologies."
               The lead institution is Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee; with
              Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois; The University of Texas, Austin,
              Texas; and the joint Division of Health Sciences and Technology at Harvard
              Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts and the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology, Cambridge, Masachusetts as core partner institutions.  This award
              funds the first five years of effort under a cooperative agreement, with a
              potential duration of eight years.  Bioengineering continues to emerge at a
              rapid rate as one of the key industries of the 21st century.  This ERC focuses
              teams of academic researchers and industrial personnel on the most effective
              pedagogy and educational technology needed to advance education in the complex,
              interdisciplinary field of bioengineering.  This ERC's vision for
              next-generation educational technology in bioengineering education integrates
              knowledge in bioengineering and other engineering fields, cognitive science,
              computer science/engineering, education, psychology, and the life and physical
              sciences.  The research program will advance asynchronous learning networks
              (ALN), visualization, simulation, and web-based learning as the major
              educational technology tools in bioengineering education.  Overarching the
              research is a template for the development of modular, computer-based
              courseware designed to fit into a National/Digital Library database for
              Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education.  Bioengineering
              will also be explored as a context to teach core science and mathematics skills
              to pre-college students.  This ERC builds upon well-established expertise and
              facilities in bioengineering, learning science, and education technology at the
              participating institutions.  Industrial partners include companies involved in
              computers and educational technology, scientific and engineering
              instrumentation, and bioengineering research and practice as well as Lawrence
              Livermore National Laboratory and Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  This ERC will
              outreach to Fisk University, Meharry Medical College, and The University of
              Texas System institutions in the border regions for research and education
              collaborations.  The expected outcomes of this ERC's research include:  (1) a
              taxonomy of the knowledge and skills that constitute the field of
              bioengineering; (2) research advances on learning, learners, educational
              technology, and pedagogy in bioengineering education; (3) tested modular,
              computer-based courseware forming adaptable core and specialized options for
              undergraduate and graduate bioengineering curricula; (4) a suite of tested
              pedagogical methods and faculty support for this courseware; (5) functioning
              technology for the delivery of learning/teaching materials through ALN; (6) a
              group of students better prepared for bioengineering practice and teaching and
              lifelong learning through educational technology; (7) national bioengineering
              curriculum committees; (8) broad dissemination of courseware and curricula to
              engineering educators; and (9) a standardized examination for use in
              bioengineering accreditation and licensure.  This award is the outcome of the
              entry of this ERC's proposal in the FY 1998-1999 Engineering Research Centers
              competition under the ERC Program Announcement, NSF 98-68.
