Title       : REU Program in Mathematical Biology: Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9876860

Award Number: 9876860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Carl Panetta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Paullet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Bertram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Penn State Erie's REU Program in Mathematical Biology will involve
              undergraduates in one of the richest and fastest growing fields in mathematics.
               It gives the six participants research training in mathematical biology and
              introduces them to several areas of current interest: cancer modeling, pattern
              formation in active media, and the modeling of electrically excitable cells. 
              The only prerequisites are the successful completion of a course in ordinary
              differential equations and an interest in biology.  The goal of the program is
              two-fold.  First the students receive an introduction to the theory and methods
              of nonlinear dynamical systems, including phase plane analysis and bifurcation
              theory.  These techniques are then used to answer questions about mathematical
              models of biological phenomena.  This is of great value since dynamical systems
              arise in many areas in addition to biology, such as physics, engineering, and
              chemistry.  The experience gained in studying models in detail will serve them
              well in future courses regardless of the field they choose to pursue.  Second,
              the students are exposed to current topics of research in mathematical biology.
               Many of the topics discussed during the program are at early stages of
              development, and offer many opportunities for future research.  Students will
              have access to Pentium computers running the Linux operating system and will
              learn the mathematical software package XPP, a powerful tool for phase plane
              and bifurcation analysis.  Seminars will be given throught the program by both
              faculty and student participants along with discussion groups at the end of
              each day.
