Title       : Lymphatic Transport in Skeletal Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9876379

Award Number: 9876379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geert W. Schmid-Schoenbein gwss@bioeng.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of Dr. Schmid-Schoenbein's research is to examine how blood
              flow works in skeletal muscle and how muscle cells are supplied by nutrients. 
              Recent research has shown that many aspects of this problem depend not only on
              the blood vessels but also on the operation of the lymphatics.  In this
              research application, he proposes to focus specifically on the
              lymphatics.

While it is already known that lymphatics transport fluid away
              from the skeletal muscle, we do not know with any degree of certainty how
              lymphatics achieve that.  In fact, the mechanisms of lymphatic transport in any
              organ are not understood.  Therefore he is not able to influence lymphatic
              transport in a controlled fashion.  The proposed research program is focused on
              the hypothesis that lymphatics require two valve systems.  One of these valve
              systems is well known, but the other valve system which is equally important,
              remains largely unknown.  This second valve system is located at the junctions
              between lymphatic endothelial cells.  His research program will lead to a
              detailed description of this lymphatic endothelial valve system and will
              provide a bioengineering analysis how it works.  Besides the fact that this is
              a fundamental problem in biology and physiology, this research has several
              applications: It will lead to the design of improved instruments to assist
              individuals with lymphatic vessels in the future for tissue engineering
              applications.  It may suggest, by imitation of the way nature has solved this
              problem, the invention of a new class of valve mechanism, which can be applied
              to industrial, agricultural and environmental fluid drainag

