Title       : The Kansas Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation (KCETP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9876676

Award Number: 9876676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Heppert jheppert@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aleda S. Gay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Nationwide, research universities that prepare undergraduates as K-12 science
              and mathematics teachers come up short. Education majors are routed through
              uncoordinated courses that often fail to link their mathematics and science
              courses and their teacher preparation courses. Frequently, teacher preparation
              programs do not identify students who could become strong science and
              mathematics teachers. Finally, many early-career mathematics and science
              teachers don't get the support they need to stay with and grow in their
              careers. The Kansas Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation (KCETP)
              seeks to reverse this pattern and proposes a plan to create a coherent teacher
              preparation program in mathematics and science that is not duplicated with any
              other program or agency in the state. With NSF support, this three-year Track 1
              CETP project will 1) create the KCETP Academy to deliver a reformed teacher
              preparation program by supportive collaborations between Universities, Two-year
              Colleges, and School Districts; 2) develop and implement a plan for the
              recruitment and retention of minority students; 3) modify Science, Mathematics,
              Engineering and Technology (SMET) content courses to model best practices in
              pedagogy; 4) involve education students in SMET research; and 5) mentor
              early-career K-12 teachers. KCETP is led by the University of Kansas (KU) and
              Kansas State University (KSU) and includes four Two-year Colleges and ten major
              School Districts along a 120-mile corridor of Interstate 70. Its proposed
              program is aligned with the national mathematics and science education
              standards. It will promote a statewide strategy that can be used as a national
              model for the reform of mathematics and science teacher preparation. KCETP
              programs will be coordinated with NSF and Department of Education projects at
              KU and KSU that support professional development and K-12 curriculum
              innovation.
