Title       : Tunneling and Transport in Ordered and Disordered Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a9876816

Award Number: 9876816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen M. Goldman goldman@physics.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9876816
Goldman
This research is focussed on the investigation of the
              properties of ultra-thin films, which undergo superconductor-insulator
              transitions controlled by disorder or magnetic field. These films are members
              of a class of materials exhibiting behavior governed by a zero-temperature
              critical point, which separates two distinct quantum mechanical ground states.
              Such quantum phase transitions are an important paradigm in contemporary
              Condensed Matter Physics. Among other systems exhibiting such transitions are
              high-mobility two-dimensional electron gases, certain magnetic compounds,
              high-Tc superconductors, and liquid helium adsorbed on random substrates. The
              underlying physical model of the superconductor-insulator transition is
              unresolved, as competing pictures have been developed. A series of electrical
              transport, tunneling and structural investigations are proposed to provide
              experimental tests of these competing theories. An important feature of the
              work is the extension of the experimental parameter space to low temperatures
              (T ~ 20mK) and high frequencies (f ~ 50 GHz) so as to explore the critical
              regime of the transition, which is essential to determining its character. Also
              the insulating state will be probed in search of superconducting
              fluctuations.
%%%
This work is directed at the study of the transition of
              superconductors into insulators, driven by disorder and magnetic field, at the
              limits of zero temperature and two dimensions. The resultant phase transitions
              are quantum transitions. Other materials exhibiting quantum phase transitions,
              and thus potentially explainable within a common theoretical framework, include
              helium-4 in porous media, high temperature superconductors, superconducting
              junction arrays, two-dimensional electron gases exhibiting the quantum Hall
              effect, and various magnetic compounds. Electrical measurements and structural
              investigations using scanning tunneling microscopy are proposed to provide
              experimental tests of competing theories. The work breaks new ground in
              combining ultra-low temperature cryogenic technology, ultra-high vacuum thin
              film growth techniques, and scanning tunneling microscopy. The work will shed
              light on the formation of amorphous films, a problem of technological
              importance. The understanding of superconductivity in two dimensions is also
              critical to the understanding of high temperature superconductors. Students in
              this program receive rigorous training in physics and materials, and can pursue
              careers in either academic or industrial science.


