Title       : NetSolve: Enabling Environment for Fault Tolerant, High Performance Network
               Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9876895

Award Number: 9876895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack J. Dongarra dongarra@cs.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Plank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The concept of a Computational Power Grid has emerged as a way of capturing the
              vision of a network computing system that provides broad access, not only to
              massive information resources, but to massive computational resources as well. 
              Such computational power grids will use high-performance networking to connect
              hardware, software, instruments, databases, and people into a seamless web that
              supports a new generation of computation-rich problem solving environments for
              scientists and engineers.  NetSolve is a software environment for network
              computing that addresses the complexities of such systems. 

NetSolve uses a
              modular, client-agent-server architecture.  Moreover, it is designed to be
              highly composable in that it readily permits new resources to be added.  In
              these respects NetSolve is to the Grid what the World Wide Web is to the
              Internet.  But like the Web, the design that makes these features possible can
              also impose significant limitations on the performance and robustness of a
              NetSolve system.  This project explores design innovations that push the
              performance and robustness of the NetSolve paradigm as far as possible without
              sacrificing the Web-like ease of use and composability that make it so
              powerful.

This work will focus on issues of fault-tolerance and computation
              migration in the NetSolve environment. NetSolve's composable architecture and
              dynamic access to heterogeneous resources make it ideal for investigating a
              variety of approaches to fault-tolerance, and then for deploying any valuable
              results that ensue. The research on NetSolve aims to improve NetSolve's design
              by exploring the following techniques:


-	Fault-tolerance and migration
              between resources.  This is termed inter-serverfault-tolerance, in which a
              computation is moved off a server that falls or is not progressing fast
              enough.
-	Introduction of storage servers to store checkpointed state, so that
              if a given server falls, the NetSolve agent can send its state to a new
              server.
-	Data logistics for improved performance through techniques that
              manage user data, for example to eliminate redundant transmissions of large
              data sets across the network.
- Dynamic loading of new software componet ts
              from network repositories to satisfy user requests. 




