Title       : A New Combined Collection Facility for the University of Connecticut Systematic
               Research Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a9876793

Award Number: 9876793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janine N. Caira jcaira@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald H. Les  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Schwenk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              




Natural History and Systematics have figured prominently in the
              history of biology at the University of Connecticut.  As a consequence, the
              last 50 years have seen the development of significant collections of mammals,
              birds, fishes, insects, ant guests, parasites, contemporary plants, and fossil
              plants.  These collections have continued to grow, despite the lack of an
              appropriate facility in which to house them.  Not unexpectedly, and perhaps as
              a credit to the opportunistic nature of the active faculty associated with
              them, they have come to fill whatever space was available for them.  Thus,
              these specimens are presently distributed across the University of Connecticut
              campus in five different locations.  Several of the collections are located in
              public space and thus security is also an issue.   Even the collections located
              in more accessible space are so cramped that it is no longer possible to
              properly incorporate returned loans.  Clearly this situation is less than
              ideal: many of these specimens are difficult to access, curation is inefficient
              and awkward, comprehensive study of specimens in most is very difficult. 
              However, in an unprecedented display of support for these systematics
              collections, the University is in the process of constructing, a 7,831 ft2
              state-of-the-art facility to house the collections.  In spite of all this,
              there is more to be done.  This project will implement the move to the new
              facility as well as equip the new facility with the necessary computers,
              microscopes, etc. and supplies to allow it to function as a truly
              state-of-the-art facility.  As part of this project additional temporary
              curatorial staff will be hired to assist with the move, take advantage of  this
              move to integrate the collections into a single functional unit, as well as to
              carry out curatorial activities not routinely possible.  In addition, the
              project will support the implementation of an aggressive pest management
              program prior to specimen transfer to the new facility.  World Wide Web
              presence for the collections will be established.
Natural History and
              Systematics have figured prominently in the history of biology at the
              University of Connecticut.  As a consequence, the last 50 years have seen the
              development of significant collections of mammals, birds, fishes, insects, ant
              guests, parasites, contemporary plants, and fossil plants.  These collections
              have continued to grow, despite the lack of an appropriate facility in which to
              house them.  Not unexpectedly, and perhaps as a credit to the opportunistic
              nature of the active faculty associated with them, they have come to fill
              whatever space was available for them.  Thus, these specimens are presently
              distributed across the University of Connecticut campus in five different
              locations.  Several of the collections are located in public space and thus
              security is also an issue.   Even the collections located in more accessible
              space are so cramped that it is no longer possible to properly incorporate
              returned loans.  Clearly this situation is less than ideal: many of these
              specimens are difficult to access, curation is inefficient and awkward,
              comprehensive study of specimens in most is very difficult.  However, in an
              unprecedented display of support for these systematics collections, the
              University is in the process of constructing, a 7,381 ft2 state-of-the-art
              facility to house the collections.  In spite of all this, there is more to be
              done.  This project will implement the move to the new facility as well as
              equip the new facility with the necessary computers, microscopes, etc. and
              supplies to allow it to function as a truly state-of-the-art facility.  As part
              of this project additional temporary curatorial staff will be hired to assist
              with the move, take advantage of  this move to integrate the collections into a
              single functional unit, as well as to carry out curatorial activities not
              routinely possible.  In addition, the project will support the implementation
              of an aggressive pest management program prior to specimen transfer to the new
              facility.  World Wide Web presence for the collections will be established.
