Title       : Development of an Extensible Software Instrument for the Analysis of Bioacoustic
               Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9876714

Award Number: 9876714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher W. Clark cwc2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt M. Fristrup  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
9876714
TITLE:  Development of an extensible software instrument for the
              analysis of bioacoustic signals
ABSTRACT:  The quantitative analysis of animal
              sounds is important both in basic studies of animal behavior and in applied
              contexts such as acoustic censusing of endangered animal populations. In recent
              years, the primary tools for such analyses have been computer programs that
              allow researchers to visualize signals and to make measurements of time,
              frequency, and amplitude parameters of individual sounds. Two limitations of
              these tools are that (1) they require the operator to manually select the
              sounds to be measured, and (2) they are not easily modified to incorporate new
              measurements or complex analysis algorithms. These restrictions have emerged as
              key impediments to the rapid analysis of large quantities of acoustic data. We
              propose to develop a software instrument for the analysis of animal acoustic
              signals that will overcome these limitations of existing packages. The proposed
              program - herein identified as "Raven" - will combine a user-friendly interface
              with advanced tools that enable users to (1) automate the processing of large
              quantities of acoustic data, (2) visually evaluate the performance of automatic
              acoustic data processing algorithms, and (3) extend and customize the
              capabilities of the program to incorporate new types of measurements and
              analyses. The key to automating and extending Raven's capabilities is the
              program's ability to communicate with external programs via a publicly defined
              interface. An external program, which can be written in a general-purpose
              programming language, can perform arbitrarily complex analyses of signals
              (e.g., selecting signals from background noise, classifying signal types). The
              results of this processing can then be used to direct measurements or
              interactive displays in Raven. Raven will be an improved data exploration and
              analysis utility, and will also catalyze the development of more sophisticated
              acoustic processing tools by providing biologists with insights into the
              operation of signal processing algorithms.


