Title       : CAREER: Symbiotic Interfaces to Enable Cooperative Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9876217

Award Number: 9876217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200385             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Steere   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Tomorrow's system software must provide efficient resource management across
a
              range of operating environments, and hence needs to adapt its
              policies
dynamically to suit its changing environment. Currently such
              adaptation is
hampered by modular software architectures that prevent informed
              adaptation
by hiding all implementation details. This proposal advocates a
              new
approach to building software that enables cooperative adaptation by the
              use
of symbiotic interfaces. A symbiotic interface extends a
              system's
application programming interface (API) to incorporate
              high-level
abstractions designed to both better support the application's
              needs while
simultaneously giving the system the information it needs to adapt
              its
policies. A symbiotic interface encapsulates user level semantics to
              improve
support for the application, and thus improves usability of
              the
system. Capturing user-level semantics through the interface
              discloses
information to the system, so it can make informed decisions on how
              to adapt
to better suit the application's needs. Like symbiotic relationships
              in
nature, the symbiotic interface allows mutually beneficial
              cooperation
between the application and system. Professor Steere's educational
              plan
involves creating advanced courses in systems architecture that focus
              on
building adaptive and predictable systems, beginning with a survey course
              on
mobile computing that concludes with a project in building adaptive
              software.



