Title       : Career: New Materials for Photonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a9876265

Award Number: 9876265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas A. Kotov kotov@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,9179,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Nicholas A. Kotov at Oklahoma State University is supported
              by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division.  The focus of the
              research is the synthesis and characterization of chemically modified
              semiconductor nanoclusters where the modification consists of coordinatively
              binding transition metal complexes to the chalcogenide atoms on the nanocluster
              surface. Specifically, stabilized cadmium chalcogenide nanoclusters will be
              prepared and surface modified by reaction with copper and ruthenium amine
              complexes. The chemically modified nanoclusters will be characterized by TEM,
              XRD, ESR, NMR, MS, and emission and absorption spectroscopy. Optical properties
              will be studied by time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, pump-probe
              spectroscopy and Stark spectroscopy. Electronic interactions between the
              semiconductor nanocluster and the surface bound transition metal complex
              markedly effect the nonlinear optical properties of the nanoclusters including
              second and third harmonic generation. By adapting optical properties of
              nanoparticles to a particular application, chalcogenide modified systems will
              provide a new pathway for the preparation of novel light-emitting and nonlinear
              optical materials.

The CAREER educational plan will integrate research and
              education in the area of photonics. Specifically, a curriculum will be
              developed in support of the new interdisciplinary Photonics Ph. D. program at
              Oklahoma State. Laboratory courses in optics, spectroscopy, microscopy and
              semiconductor synthesis will be formulated. These courses, in concert with
              industrial internships and a photonics business lecture series will prepare
              Ph.D. students with the necessary skills for meaningful careers either in the
              business or academic sectors.



