Title       : CAREER: Analysis and Construction of Polysaccharide Synthases and Production of
               Novel Biomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a9876193

Award Number: 9876193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. DeAngelis paul-deangelis@ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma HSC
	      P O BOX 26901
	      Oklahoma City, OK  731260901    405/271-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9150,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
9876193
Polysaccharides, large polymers of sugars, serve structural and
              communication roles in animals, plants, and microbes.  These molecules are also
              major raw materials for the production of many foodstuffs,
              industrial
reagents, and consumer products.  The physical and the biological
              properties of polysaccharides are dependent on their chemical structure.  Many
              of the molecular details surrounding the polysaccharide synthases, the enzymes
              that polymerize these carbohydrates, are not known.  The long-term objective of
              this research project is to develop model systems for the production of
              biomaterials and biomimetics for use in the food and industrial fields.  The
              process of polysaccharide biosynthesis will be characterized, modified, and
              controlled using the tools of molecular biology, biochemistry, chemistry, and
              genetics.  A combination of basic science characterization and
              application-driven approaches will be employed to create novel hybrid
              biomaterials and to construct new polysaccharide synthases. Also, alternative
              polymer structures not normally found in nature may be created in some cases. 
              These new biomaterials are expected to be more resistant to biological
              degradation or possess altered physical properties.  Microbial hosts will also
              be metabolically engineered to
support the production of large quantities of
              desired polysaccharides.  Overall, these complementary goals promise to
              illuminate the catalytic mechanism of these intriguing enzymes and to develop
              sources of new biomaterials.  A series of education initiatives will expose
              students from the high school through the graduate level to the vistas and the
              realities of biotechnology with a focus on career development. The courses and
              workshops should enhance efficient technology transfer and improve human
              resources.

This research will enhance understanding of the enzymes
              responsible for polysaccharide biosynthesis. The resulting information should
              also allow the design and the production of new biomaterials with improved or
              different properties for use in the biotechnology, food, and industrial fields.
              In the initial phase, enzymes that produce carbohydrates found throughout the
              human body will be studied with a focus on developing biocompatible polymers. 
              In the long-term, explorations of other polymers may yield, for example,
              industrial lubricants that survive longer in the field, or food polymers that
              are rendered indigestible and calorie-free.  The ultimate goal of the project's
              multi-level education aspect is to accelerate the conversion of laboratory
              discoveries into useful applications.



