Title       : Center for Environmentally Responsible Solvents and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a9876674

Award Number: 9876674
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Donald M. Burland                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24999479           (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. DeSimone desimone@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1297      SCI & TECH  CTRS (INTEG PTRS)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Science and Technology Center for Environmentally Responsible Carbon Dioxide
              Processes, directed by Joseph M. DeSimone, University of North Carolina, and
              Ruben G. Carbonell, North Carolina State University, supports a
              multidisciplinary research program to establish the fundamental understanding
              necessary to enable liquid and supercritical carbon dioxide (CO2) to replace
              aqueous and organic solvents in a large number of key manufacturing and service
              processes.  The Center also supports a range of educational activities
              including a novel program for undergraduate and graduate students in
              collaboration and innovation process skills and the development of K-12
              education modules.

The Center is organized around four research thrust
              areas:  interfacial and colloid science in compressible media;  molecular
              thermodynamics and computer simulations; rate and transport processes; and
              chemistry and catalysis.  Emphasis will be placed on development of an
              understanding of surface and interfacial phenomena involving liquid and
              supercritical CO2 with the goal of designing surfactants compatible with CO2,
              constructing theoretical intermolecular potentials to permit simulation of
              processes in CO2-based systems, understanding the kinetic, transport and
              rheological properties in these systems, and designing efficient chemical
              reaction pathways and chemical processes involving CO2 as a solvent. The Center
              is expected to have a significant impact on the development of environmentally
              benign CO2 as a solvent to replace aqueous and organic solvents in such
              industrially important processes as polymer synthesis, spin coating of thin
              films, textile dying, cleaning, and degreasing. 

The 39-member team of
              investigators includes 10 faculty at the University of North Carolina, 13 at
              North Carolina State University, 5 at the University of Texas, Austin, 5 at
              North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University (an historically black
              university) and one at the University of Venice (Italy).  Five researchers from
              National Laboratories (Oak Ridge, PNNL, Los Alamos) will also participate. 
              Technology transfer to industry will occur via interaction with the 16
              industrial partners of the existing UNC/NCSU Kenan Center for the Utilization
              of CO2 in Manufacturing and the thirty partners of the Separations Research
              Program at UT-Austin.   Approximately 13 postdoctoral associates, 31 graduate
              students, and 19 undergraduates will participate each year.  

