Title       : Development of New Methods and Software for X-ray Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a9876668

Award Number: 9876668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Liang Tong tong@como.bio.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9876668





Abstract



X-ray crystallography is a powerful tool for
              determining the three-dimensional structures of macromolecules. Such structural
              information is extremely useful in understanding the biochemical properties and
              the biological functions of proteins and DNA. Three major methods are currently
              available for X-ray structure determination of biological macromolecules
              multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR), multiple-wavelength anomalous
              diffraction (MAD), and molecular replacement (MR). This projectl will focus on
              developing new techniques and computer software for the molecular replacement
              method. The MR method solves new protein structures using the atomic model of a
              homologous protein as the starting point. Rotation and translation functions
              are calculated to correctly orient and position this search model in the
              crystal. The remarkable success of protein crystallography and NMR has led to
              the elucidation of many unique protein structures protein folds), such that a
              new protein of interest oftentimes displays some degree of amino acid sequence
              homology to a protein of known structure. The MR method so far works best when
              the amino acid sequence homology is high, but generally has had only limited
              success in the more common cases of lower homology. Many new techniques have
              been developed in recent years in attempts to enhance the capability of this
              important method of protein structure determination. Further developments are
              still needed, and possible, to make the MR method even more powerful.
              Successful developments in this area can increase the productivity of the
              entire crystallography community. The specific aims of the current research
              project are the development of new techniques for - I. deriving more
              appropriate search atomic models; 2. obtaining better rotation function
              results; 3. obtaining better translation function results; 4. better
              combination and automation of the rotation and translation function searches.
              The overall goal of this project is the development and maintenance of a new
              and user-friendly computer software package that incorporates these new
              techniques. This software will be made available to the entire crystallography
              community.

