Title       : Acoustic Wave Sensors for In-situ Detection and Characterization of Organic
               Contaminants in Aqueous Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a9876366

Award Number: 9876366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fabien Josse jossef@vms.csd.mu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio J. Ricco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rongnong Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876366
Josse

Overview.  To detect organic compounds in contaminated ground
              and waste water that result in human and environmental health hazards, this
              research project will investigate and design a rapid, reliable, and
              high-sensitivity sensor device for reproducible measurements in liquid
              environments.

Problem.  Organic contaminants, particularly volatile organic
              compounds (VOCs), pose significant human and environmental health hazards. 
              More precisely, groundwater and mixed waste water samples often contain such
              VOCs as trichloroethene, halogenated phenols, vinyl chloride, benzene, toluene,
              and xylene.  Currently, sampling must be collected and transported to
              laboratories for analysis.  As a consequence, analyses are not only delayed,
              but more importantly, the delays result in compromised scientific data due to
              degradation and evaporation of the samples.  Accordingly, there is need for a
              rapid and sensitive method to reproducibly detect ground and waste water
              contaminants, with ease of testing.

Goal and Objectives.  The goal of this
              multidisciplinary research proposal is to investigate, characterize, and design
              polymer-coated chemical sensors for the direct, rapid, in-situ monitoring of
              organic compounds and other hazardous constituents in water.  To meet this
              goal, three specific objectives will be met.
	
1.  To investigate and design
              a reliable and high-sensitivity sensor platform utilizing shear horizontal
              surface acoustic wave (SH-SAW) device for reproducible sensor operation in
              liquid environments
	
2.  To characterize individual sensors and classify
              polymer coating-analyte pairs into patterns

3.  To investigate the
              implementation of sensor arrays to characterize mixtures of analytes using the
              weak selectivity of the coatings together with proven pattern recognition
              methods.
***

