Title       : Economic Conditions, Health Investments, and Health Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a9876511

Award Number: 9876511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201687             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Ruhm   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Economic contractions are costly in a variety of ways.  Permanent layoffs
              often cause a reduction of pay, with some persons losing employer-based health
              insurance, and recessions may reduce opportunities for promotions, result in
              deteriorating working conditions, decrease asset values, and lead to higher
              crime rates. In addition, economic downturns may adversely affect health.
              Seminal, but widely disputed, research indicates that unemployment rates are
              positively correlated with admissions to mental hospitals, infant mortality
              rates, and deaths due to cardiovascular disease, cirrhosis, suicide, and
              homicide. However, the results are sensitive to the choice of samples,
              estimation methods, and time periods.
     In fact, recent work that
              controlled for many of these problems has produced the surprising result that
              most types of fatalities exhibit a procylical variation. It is obvious why some
              kinds of mortality (e.g. motor vehicle fatalities) rise during expansions but
              less apparent why deaths from disease are also procyclical. The primary current
              explanation is that time is an important input into the production of health,
              and that such investments become more difficult to undertake during cyclical
              upturns, since individuals are working more hours and possibly with greater
              intensity. There are at least two reasons why this interpretation might be
              incorrect. First, fatality rates are an imperfect proxy of health and other
              aspects of health could improve when the economy strengthens. Second, there has
              been little research examining whether individuals change their behavior and
              health investments in the hypothesized manner.
     This project will address
              these concerns by using microdata to examine the following four questions.
              First, do direct measures of health (other than mortality) decline in economic
              expansions and improve during contractions? Second, are risky activities such
              as smoking and drinking reduced when the economy falters? Third, do healthy
              behaviors requiring substantial time investments, like exercise and the use of
              preventive medical care, rise when the economy reaches the low point in the
              cycle? Fourth, do these patterns vary with the duration of the change in
              economic conditions?
     The analysis should provide fairly definitive
              information on whether health really does improve when the economy deteriorates
              or, alternatively, show if the earlier results reflect limitations in the
              method of analysis or are restricted to specific aspects of health. The
              findings of this project will be important because substantial previous
              research examining the relationship between health and economic conditions has
              yielded inconclusive results. They will also be of more general interest
              because they will increase our understanding of the role of time in producing
              health. This latter issue is relevant for a variety of policy questions (such
              as the health effects of rationing medical care by time costs rather than price
              or the impact of increased female employment on the health of young children)
              and constitutes a broader future research agenda.

