Title       : Quantum Mechanics of Macroscopic Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9876874

Award Number: 9876874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Siyuan Han han@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9876874
Han

Experiments will be undertaken to explore the quantum mechanical
              nature of a macroscopic variable -- in this case the magnetic flux F linking a
              SQUID (a superconducting loop containing a Josephson junction). A particular
              focus of this work will be to understand the effects of the environment
              (damping and temperature) on the evolution of F from purely classical to
              quantum behavior as seen in the switching of the SQUID between two fluxoid
              wells by tunneling through a potential barrier. The system energy can be
              quantized into discrete levels within each of these macroscopically distinct
              fluxoid wells. During tunneling, the magnetic moment of the system flips,
              changing by about 1010 mB --- a very macroscopic quantity. Thus these
              experiments will represent a physical realization of the famous Schrodinger's
              cat paradox resulting from the coherent superposition of macroscopically
              distinct states. Additionally, the experiments will permit controlled tests of
              the underlying theory for the interaction of quantum systems with their
              environment, which is applicable to many physical systems: microscopic as well
              as macroscopic. This work will be carried out as coupled research projects
              between SUNY Stony Brook and the University of Kansas. Initially, work at
              Kansas will focus on development of new microwave techniques for measurement of
              Rabi oscillations and at Stony Brook on the extension of previous techniques as
              well as new sample fabrication. Data and analysis will be shared between
              groups.
%%%
Experiments will be undertaken to explore the quantum mechanical
              nature of a macroscopic variable -- in this case the magnetic flux F linking a
              superconducting loop. A particular focus of this work will be to understand the
              effects of interactions with surrounding matter on the evolution of F from
              purely classical to quantum behavior as seen in the switching of the magnetic
              moment of the loop due to quantum mechanical tunneling. During tunneling, the
              magnetic moment of the system flips, changing by about ten billion times that
              of a single electron --- a very macroscopic quantity. Coherent oscillations of
              the flux will demonstrate purely quantum behavior. Additionally, the
              experiments will permit controlled tests of the underlying theory for the
              interaction of quantum systems with their environment, which is applicable to
              many physical systems: microscopic as well as macroscopic. This work will be
              carried out as coupled research projects between SUNY Stony Brook and the
              University of Kansas. Initially, work at Kansas will focus on development of
              new microwave techniques for measurement of oscillations and at Stony Brook on
              the extension of previous techniques as well as new sample fabrication. Data
              and analysis will be shared between groups. Students will receive extensive
              training both in fundamental physics and a variety of state-of-the-art
              techniques such as electronic measurements and sample fabrication, which will
              prepare them for both academic and industrial careers. 




