Title       : PECASE: Adhesion and Mechanics of Normal and Dystrophic Muscle Cells - A
               Cellular Engineering Basis for Gene Therapy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a9876328

Award Number: 9876328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis E. Discher discher@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,5345,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876328
Discher
To achieve tissue integrity and resilience, cells must have
              sufficient ability to adhere and deform with tissue structures or matrices. 
              One overall goal of this NSF-CAREER proposal is to develop novel approaches to
              cell adhesion, with a particular focus on muscular dystrophy (MD).  A second
              goal is to create new educational opportunities and resources in the broader,
              emerging area of cell and molecular engineering.  Integration of these research
              and education plans is expected to promote partnerships for the transfer of
              engineering research to both the clinical and industrial sectors, to prepare an
              increased number of underrepresented minorities and women for achievement in
              engineering science, and to expose a broad-based audience to the excitement of
              discovery.

Motivation for detailed study of muscle cell adhesion is provided
              by burgeoning treatments of gene therapy for MD, a collection of common,
              debilitating, and often fatal genetic disorders.  Though adhesion and
              cytoskeletal proteins at the cell membrane are loosely implicated in these
              disorders, very little is known in terms of quantitative aspects of function. 
              Novel, patterned protein substrates -- of potential interest to industry and
              tissue engineers -- will first be engineered to geometrically control the
              growth and differentiation of muscle cells.  Individual cells grown on these
              defined substrates will then be forcibly peeled from the substrates.  Various
              optical microscopies will allow quantitative analysis at the nano- to micro-
              scales.  The responses of several dystrophic-type muscle cells will be compared
              to normal cells with the intent of complementing and motivating gene therapy
              efforts which are emerging.  Theoretical models at multiple scales, including
              an inextensible tape-peeling model and "molecular" element models rooted in
              molecular mechanics, will be pursued to advance structure-function hypotheses
              on cell membrane mechanics and adhesion.

A complementary educational plan in
              the broader area of cell and molecular engineering is proposed for various
              academic levels as well as for the general public.  An in-lab internship
              program will enable the mentoring of undergraduates from diverse backgrounds. 
              New hands-on cell and molecular engineering laboratory exercises for diverse
              audiences will supplement focused course offerings at undergraduate and
              graduate levels of the engineering curriculum, and a public-access internet
              site will be dedicated to Education in Cell and Molecular Engineering
              (http://www.seas.upenn.edu/ ~discher/ cme.html).

