Title       : STC: The Nanobiotechnology Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a9876771

Award Number: 9876771
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23738200           (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Baird bab13@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold G. Craighead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1297      SCI & TECH  CTRS (INTEG PTRS)
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876771
Craighead

This award is for a Science and Technology Center devoted
              to the emerging area of nanobiotechnology that involves a close synthesis of
              nano-microfabrication and biological systems.  The Nanobiotechnology Center
              (NBTC) features a highly interdisciplinary, close collaboration between life
              scientists, physical scientists, and engineers from Cornell University,
              Princeton University, Oregon Health Sciences University, and Wadsworth Center
              of the New York State Health Department.  The integrating vision of the NBTC is
              that nanobiotechnology will be the genesis of new insights into the function of
              biological systems, and lead to the design of new classes of nano- and
              microfabricated devices and systems.  Biological systems present a particular
              challenge in that the diversity of materials and chemical systems for
              biological applications far exceeds those for silicon-based technology in the
              integrated-circuit industry.  New fabrication processes appropriate for
              biological materials will require a substantial expansion in knowledge about
              the interface between organic and inorganic systems.  The ability to structure
              materials and pattern surface chemistry at small dimensions ranging from the
              molecular to cellular scale are the fundamental technologies on which the
              research of the NBTC is based.  Nanofabrication can also be used to form new
              analytical probes for interrogating biological systems with unprecedented
              spatial resolution and sensitivity.  Three unifying technology platforms that
              foster advances in materials, processes, and tools underlie and support the
              research programs of the NBTC: Molecules of nanobiotechnology; Novel methods of
              patterning surfaces for attachment of molecules and cells to substrates; and
              Sensors and devices for nanobiotechnology.  Newly developed fabrication
              capabilities will also be available through the extensive resources of the
              Cornell Nanofabrication Facility, a site of the NSF National Nanofabrication
              Users Network.  The NBTC will be an integrated part of the educational missions
              of the participating institutions.  NBTC faculty will develop a new cornerstone
              graduate course in nanobiotechnology featuring nanofabrication with an emphasis
              on biological applications.  Graduate students who enter the NBTC from a
              background in engineering or biology will cross-train in the other field by
              engaging in a significant level of complementary course work.  Participation in
              the NBTC will prepare them with the disciplinary depth and cross-disciplinary
              understanding to become next generation leaders in this emerging field.  An
              undergraduate research experience program with a strong mentoring structure
              will be established, with emphasis on recruiting women and underrepresented
              minorities into the program.  Educational outreach activities are planned to
              stimulate the interest of students of all ages.  One such activity partnered
              with the Science center in Ithaca is a traveling exhibition for museum showings
              on the subject of nano scale size.  National and federal laboratories and
              industrial and other partners will participate in various aspects of the NBTC
              such as by hosting interns, attendance at symposia and scientist exchanges. 
              Partnering with the industrial affiliates will be emphasized to enhance
              knowledge transfer and student and postdoctoral training. This specific STC
              award is managed by the Directorate for Engineering in coordination with the
              Directorates for Biological Sciences, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and
              Education and Human Resources.
***

