Title       : CAREER: Controllable Visual Cues: Analysis and Applications of Images as Sensory
               Signals in Complex Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9876145

Award Number: 9876145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefano Soatto   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              IIS-9876145
Soatto, Stefano
Washington University
$51,710.00

CAREER:
              Controllable Visual Cues: Analysis and Applications of Images as Sensory
              Signals in Complex Control Systems

This is the first year funding of a
              four-year continuing award. This project is concerned with the study of vision
              as a sensor for engineering systems operating in complex, dynamic and unknown
              environments. It entails the analysis of measurable properties of images that
              depend upon controllable parameters such as the geometry and optics of the
              imaging device. These properties are called "controllable cues" and they
              include, for instance, stereo, motion and accommodation. In the project, the
              purposeful aspect of vision is emphasized: knowledge and representation of the
              environment are only functional to the accomplishment of control tasks, as for
              instance visual-based navigation, docking, manipulation, endoscopic surgery,
              Human-Machine Interaction. In order to address the issue of modeling and
              representation, it is necessary to understand how the geometry and the dynamics
              of the environment are related to the information coming from the imaging
              sensor. In the long term, these issues will become crucial in the study of
              complex systems, where low-level information needs to be organized in order to
              perform effective communication between different levels of a control
              hierarchy, or between different agents involved in the control structure. The
              research material will be integrated into an educational plan that spans
              graduate, undegraduate and pre-college levels. In addition, to emphasize
              physical intuition, the PI plan to develop an experimental setup on the use of
              controllable cues, which will be accessible by precollege students through an
              Internet educational service.

