Title       : CAREER: Programmable Mobile Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9876299

Award Number: 9876299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Campbell campbell@comet.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rapidly evolving nature of the mobile application base, mobile service
              demands and underlying network technologies presents a significant challenge to
              the mobile computing and communications research community. Existing mobile
              network architectures exhibit three basic limitations that prevent us from
              meeting this challenge: (i) the lack of quality of service support for the
              transport of audio, video and
real-time data;  (ii) the lack of intrinsic
              architectural flexibility in the adaptation to new mobile user and service
              provider needs; and (iii) the lack of automation of the process of realization
              and deployment of
new and distinct mobile network architectures. In response
              to these limitations, the PI argues that there is a critical need to propose,
              investigate and evaluate alternative mobile network architectures to
those
              existing today. The proposed research goes far beyond a proposal for yet
              another experimental mobile network architecture, e.g., mobile IP++. Rather, it
              calls for new innovative approaches to the way we
design, develop, deploy,
              observe and analyze next-generation mobile networking architectures in response
              to the future needs and requirements of mobile users, service providers and
              equipment vendors.

The goal of this research in "spawning networks" is to:
              (i) establish a methodology and creation environment for spawning and
              prototyping virtual mobile networks and their architectures; (ii) deploy
              programmable foundation services, network controllers and open programmable
              networking interfaces for a distinct set of baseline architectures that will
              include a new broadband cellular network architecture, next-generation mobile
              Internet architecture and mobile ad hoc network architecture; (iii) demonstrate
              the spawning, visualization and management of these baseline virtual mobile
              networks over the same physical high-speed mobile networking testbed; and (iv)
              investigate trade-offs in the architectural design space of the spawned
              architecture through visualization, management and refinement.

The
              realization of spawning networks capable of profiling, spawning, visualizing
              and managing distinct virtual mobile networking architectures will represent a
              major shift in the way network architects design, deploy and manage new and
              novel mobile networking architectures.

The PI is also responding to the
              strong demands from industry and academia for graduate students with mobile
              networking and distributed systems skills through the introduction of new and
              innovative initiatives in education. The PI has introduced a graduate-level
              course in Wireless and Mobile Networking and is teaching another newly created
              course in Distributed Telecommunications Systems. Each course
              addresses
fundamental concepts, through the presentation of state-of-the-art
              research seminars from some of industry's leading researchers and emphasizes
              "hands on" term projects. The PI is very keen to promote
interaction between
              academia and industry. This interaction provides a great learning opportunity
              benefiting students, faculty and industry alike.


