Title       : A New Fluorescence Technique for Protein-Folding Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1999     
File        : a9876443

Award Number: 9876443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay R. Winkler winklerj@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
9876443
Jay Winkler
Califomia Institute of Technology
A New
              Fluorescence Technique for Protein-folding Studies

A heterogeneous ensemble
              of unfolded protein molecules should exhibit a broad, nearly Gaussian
              distribution of end-to-end distances, consistent with a large number of
              degenerate conformations and, hence, a high configurational entropy. Proteins
              in their native states, by contrast, have definite three-dimensional
              orientations of their peptide backbones and, to a certain extent, their side
              chains as well. The conformational freedom in folded proteins is far smaller
              than that of random polymers and, consequently, the configurational entropy is
              considerably lower than that of the unfolded ensemble. The energy landscape
              representing the conversion of a heterogeneous ensemble of unfolded proteins
              into a uniformly folded collection is expected to resemble a funnel. A
              continuing challenge in protein-folding research is understanding how a
              heterogeneous ensemble of unfolded polypeptides evolves into a collection of
              neatly folded proteins. The development of suitable probes of the folding
              process is of paramount importance. An effective folding probe must report not
              just on the populations of unfolded, intermediate, and folded forms, but also
              should provide information about the structural homogeneity of these
              entities.

Fluorescent protein-folding probes can be engineered to provide
              both population and heterogeneity information for a polypeptide ensemble. The
              rate of dipole-dipole fluorescence energy transfer (FET) from an excited donor
              * D to an acceptor A varies as the inverse sixth power of the DA separation. If
              D and A are incorporated into a single protein molecule, measurements of *D
              fluorescence decay kinetics can be used to extract distributions of DA
              distances. Measurements of fluorescence decay kinetics during a protein-folding
              reaction can distinguish between a two-state folding mechanism and one in which
              the unfolded ensemble continuously evolves into the folded protein. The goal of
              this research program is the development of instrumentation and methods for
              evaluation of DA distance distributions during the entire course of protein
              folding from triggering to formation of folded protein.

