Title       : Parallel Implicit Solution-Adaptive Schemes for Space Weather and Geospace
               Environmental Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9876943

Award Number: 9876943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darren L. De Zeeuw darrens@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton P. Groth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project studies robust and efficient methods for the numerical solution of
              ideal and resistive magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), with applications to a variety
              of space physics applications. This will allow users to routinely perform
              simulations of such phenomena as cometary x-ray emission, the Earth's
              magnetosphere, and coronal mass ejections on current and future generations of
              massively parallel computer architectures. These MHD simulations are performed
              by block-based hierarchical adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) techniques for which
              the investigators have developed a highly efficient parallel implementation.
              Future applications to resistive MHD, however, require a more sophisticated
              time integration procedure to effectively deal with the large disparities of
              time scale associated with convection, magnetosonic and Alfven waves, and
              thermal transport. The researchers will investigate parallel implementations of
              both implicit Newton-Krylov-Schwarz (NKS) and full approximate storage (FAS)
              multigrid strategies in this context.  In summary, the combination of robust
              finite-volume discretization of the governing equations, block-based AMR,
              domain decomposition, and parallel implementation of implicit NKS and/or
              multigrid strategies should yield an efficient, reliable, and powerful
              numerical method for large-scale simulation of MHD flows on high-performance
              parallel machines.  Moreover, the resulting method should represent a
              significant improvement over the current generation of space plasma simulation
              tools and permit the study of a wider class of problems.


