Title       : Regulation and Assembly of Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9876680

Award Number: 9876680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas D. Randall Randalld@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan A. Miernyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A major point of interaction among photosynthesis, photorespiration and
              
mitochondrial respiration is the reaction catalyzed by the mitochondrial
              
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (mtPDC). This multi-enzyme complex is the
              
primary entry point for carbon into the Krebs cycle for energy production
              
and the generation of biosynthetic intermediates. The plastid isoform of
              
PDC provides the precursor for fatty acid biosynthesis, branched-chain amino
              
acids, some isoprenoids and growth regulators. The mtPDC is regulated in
              
part by reversible phosphorylation of multiple serine residues catalyzed by
              
a novel and specific histidine-like protein kinase (PDK). Objectives: To
              
establish the phosphorylation sites on the E1 subunits of plant PDC; to
              
characterize recombinant PDKs with regard to effectors and kinetics; to
              
establish the expression of PDK isoforms as function of plant development
              
and environmental influences; to establish amino acids essential for
              
catalysis and binding in the PDK primary sequence; to establish the
              
physiological role of PDKs using transgenic plants over- and underexpressing
              
PDK and by identifying "gene knockouts" of PDK in maize and Arabidopsis
              
thaliana; to characterize events, mechanisms and modulators of PDC activity
              
during development and photosynthesis in C4 and C3 plants; to investigate in
              
vitro assembly of PDC component enzymes and their import and assembly.
              
Experimental approach: 1) 32P-labeled E1 subunit will be purified from 
the
              complexes exhibiting various states of activity and the phosphorylated
              
serines identified. 2) Effectors and kinetics of recombinant PDK will be
              
determined. 3) Specific hybridization probes and antibodies for PDK
isoforms
              will be used to measure developmental and spatial expression, and
responses to
              environmental and nutritional cues.
 4) Standard site-directed mutagenesis
              methods will be 
used to systematically change specific amino acid residues of
              PDK, and 
activities will be assayed using kinase-depleted PDC. 5) A. thaliana
              will 
be transformed; down regulation of PDK and PDH will be accomplished
              using
T-DNA tagged genomic DNA pools. 6) In vitro assembly studies will
              utilize 
subunits of component enzymes in conjunction with various chaperone
              systems; 
import and assembly will utilize purified pea mitochondria and
              subunit 
precursors. 7) Conditions and metabolites that affect reversible
              
phosphorylation of mtPDC will be determined using purified functional
              
mitochondria, protoplasts or whole tissues. Significance: The results
              
obtained will help clarify control of interactions among multiple distinct
              
catabolic and anabolic pathways. The mechanisms and structural requirements
              
of a unique class of protein kinases will be determined. Factors that
              
affect expression of PDK and of the PDC subunits will be identified.
              
Details of the synthesis, organellar import, and assembly of the components
              
of PDC will be resolved. Finally, mechanisms for controlling the activities
              
of plastid and mtPDC will be ascertained. Plastid PDC is likely to be
              
essential for fatty acid biosynthesis, and unique regulatory properties are
              
required in this subcellular compartment. 

