Title       : Center for Behavioral Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a9876754

Award Number: 9876754
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11914983           (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliott Albers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Insel  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kelly R. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Marsteller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis C. Liotta  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1297      SCI & TECH  CTRS (INTEG PTRS)
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1096,9169,9171,9177,9183,BIOT,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              How brain mechanisms regulate and are regulated by complex social behaviors
              across animal species is one of the greatest challenges for neuroscience.  This
              Science and Technology Center for Behavioral Neuroscience brings together a
              diverse group of behavioral biologists, psychologists, neuroscientists,
              molecular biologists and engineers from a mix of research-intensive and
              teaching-oriented institutions in the Atlanta area, including five Historically
              Black Colleges and Universities.  A novel intensive collaboratory approach
              introduces modern molecular biology into behavioral research with an explicitly
              comparative aspect. A novel perspective is taken on how brain function, even at
              the molecular level, may be influenced by particular kinds of social behavior
              among individuals.  Comparing different species offers insights about the
              conservation of genes and circuits during evolution, and it may transform the
              way we think about how hormones influence behavior, how genes are regulated,
              and how brain mechanisms have been adapted for different environmental demands.
               Six core facilities are formed for technical developments to allow answering
              scientific questions that previously could not be asked.  The research of this
              center will produce new discoveries, and the integration of research and
              education for a broad diversity of students will promote a new generation of
              interdisciplinary neuroscientists.
   The impact of this Center extends beyond
              the scientific advances.  The infrastructure of this Center creates a new
              network of research and educational institutions in the Atlanta area to provide
              a strong local focus, where excellent facilities and researchers from diverse
              backgrounds also offer outstanding opportunities for underrepresented groups at
              all educational levels.  Taken together, these features make this Center an
              exceptional investment by NSF for research and education with a high quality
              and a high impact.

