Title       : CAREER: IC-Compatible Ferromagnetic MEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9876285

Award Number: 9876285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Judy jjudy@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876285
Judy 
This applicant proposes a career development program with the
              following objectives: (I) to develop a strong laboratory-based
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) educational program, that will have a
              multidisciplinary impact on the training of graduate and undergraduate students
              of all backgrounds; (2) to develop a strong research program that focuses on
              the methods and applications of compatibly integrating ferromagnetic materials,
              MEMS, and ICs.

The objectives of this research program are: (I.) to develop
              methods of compatibly integrating ferromagnetic materials with MEMS and ICs;
              (2) to combine ferromagnetic materials with micromachined flexures and
              capacitive position detecting ICs (very similar to those used in micromachined
              inertial sensors), to produce extremely sensitive micropower magnetometers
              (suitable for long-term wireless sensor networks); (3) to develop methods of
              integrating dense high aspect ratio windings, that are imbedded into the
              substrate and can enable high-force magnetic microactuators that consume less
              power and die area.

Educational Program:
The educational part this career
              plan consists of several major efforts, including the development of a summer
              outreach program and four new courses, which will compliment the existing
              graduate-level MEMS courses available at UCLA. (1) Introduction to
              Micromachining and MEMS, an undergraduate course on MEMS that emphasizes
              micromachining and has an accompanying weekly 4-hour laboratory. This course
              will serve as an entry course for students of all backgrounds who have an
              interest in MEMS. (2) Advanced Micromachining and MEMS Laboratory; a
              graduate-level laboratory on micromachining that wiJJ give students valnabie
              hands-on experience with the same equipment they will use in their research on
              MEMS. (3) Introduction to Magnetic Materials, a course taught at the
              senior/graduate level that will serve the entire campus, since there is
              presently no course that covers the engineering properties of magnetic
              materials in depth. (4) MEMS Seminar Series, a weekly seminar that provides a
              forum for featuring speakers varying from students on campus to visiting MEMS
              researchers from overseas. (5) MEMS Summer Research and Outreach Program,
              specifically tailored for UCLA undergraduates and advanced high school seniors
              from the surrounding Los Angeles area.
***

