Title       : Curation of a Major Alaska, Arctic and West Coast Orphan Paleontological
               Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9876840

Award Number: 9876840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole S. Hickman caroleh@ucmpl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Wetmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will assist in the curation of a large, unique, and irreplaceable
              collection of fossil marine invertebrates recently transferred to the museum by
              the U.S. Geological Survey.  The most significant part of this collection is
              the Alaskan and Arctic material, which includes the only fossil specimens ever
              collected from many regions of Alaska.  The Menlo Park Collection is currently
              stored in an off-campus site, in considerable disorder due to the haste with
              which the collection was transferred and moved to the University of California
              Museum of Paleontology.  As a result, research access is very difficult.  The
              project will provide staff to catalog the collection, for movers to bring the
              Alaska and Arctic material to campus and integrate it with the UCMP fossil
              invertebrate collections, and for additional casework to accommodate this
              material in the UCMP collection room.  The remaining material, primarily from
              California, Oregon and Washington, will be cataloged and placed in order to
              make it accessible for scientific study, but will remain in an off-site storage
              facility due to space limitations on campus. This award will provide a complete
              physical reorganization of the collection, provide efficient and effective
              access to these unique specimens, provide a complete computer locality database
              of the collection, and  increase the availability of collection data to the
              research community.
