Title       : CAREER: Methods Evaluating Public Policies and Assessing Effects on Employment,
               Crime, and Poor Neighborhoods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9876337

Award Number: 9876337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Kling kling@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      This CAREER proposal outlines a four-year plan with the primary
              objective of establishing and refining a research technique for policy
              evaluation that combines powerful econometrics with institutional knowledge and
              qualitative fieldwork.  This technique is intended to make methodological and
              substantive contributions to economic knowledge which are directly useful to
              social scientists and public policy makers: the goal is to uncover the
              behavioral mechanisms through which policies operate, in order to assess the
              effectiveness of current policy and to intelligently create new policies. The
              researcher will use the methods developed to assess the impact of particular
              policies affecting employment, crime and the general well being of families in
              poor urban neighborhoods, and also to train future researchers and public
              policy makers. 
There is an overwhelming association between residence in a
              very poor area and negative outcomes for individuals, such as low education
              attainment.  However, the apparent pathology of these urban ghettos could
              simply be the result of low skills and low motivation of individuals that would
              not be affected by changes in the surrounding neighborhood.  Very little
              empirical evidence convincingly distinguishes between individual and
              neighborhood effects, or identifies the social forces within neighborhoods that
              influence individuals; social scientists do not have the double-blind
              randomized trials that a biostatistician might use to evaluate the causal
              effect of a new drug.  However, social scientists can use quasi-experiments in
              which otherwise comparable groups of individuals face different rules or
              incentives that affect their behavior.  
	The proposed research uses
              institutional features of housing mobility programs, which select participating
              families by a type of lottery, to distinguish distinct effects of residential
              location on well being.  Preliminary empirical work will estimate the direction
              and magnitude of the average effect of moving out of the ghetto to a new
              neighborhood by comparing program participants to families who would like to
              have moved if they had been selected to participate.  Various outcomes, such as
              mortality, criminal victimization, health, education, welfare use, and
              employment, will be measured to assess well-being, and the researcher will
              concentrate on identifying the social forces that influence those outcomes that
              appear to be affected by where a family lives.  Observing how the programs
              work, and directly interviewing participants, will help identify the aspects of
              neighborhoods that exert this influence.  For instance, survey work will allow
              the researcher to ask detailed questions about some types of activities, such
              as drug use, crime, and sexual activity, that are vitally important but only
              crudely recorded in administrative data (e.g., arrests, births).  The fieldwork
              will provide a context within which to interpret the average program effects. 
              In addition, the qualitative work will generate specific hypotheses about the
              mechanisms through which neighborhoods influence outcomes, and suggest
              implications of these hypotheses that may be tested through further data
              collection and statistical analysis.  
	Development of econometric techniques
              tailored to these new projects is a another element of this plan, such as
              formulation of a technique to measure sentencing disparity between judges that
              has general applicability as a nonlinear model for correlated random effects
              with count data. Educational activities will involve teaching and advising
              graduate students in Economics and Public Administration programs. Students
              will work with a government agency in New York City to help them evaluate the
              effectiveness of their anti-crime initiatives in public housing, using the
              combination of qualitative and quantitative methods developed and refined in
              the research component of this project.

