Title       : Determinants of Conjugative Transposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a9876427

Award Number: 9876427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon G. Churchward   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Conjugative transposons are genetic elements that transpose from one place in
              the genome of a donor bacterium to a new place in the genome of a recipient
              bacterium.  The transfer from donor to recipient requires intercellular
              contact.  They have an extraordinarily broad host range, being able to transfer
              between bacteria of different species and genera.  The best studied of these
              transposons, Tn916, and its close relative, Tn1545, transpose by a mechanism
              that involves excision of the transposon in the donor bacterium to form a
              circular intermediate.  This circular form of the transposon then transfers to
              the recipient, where integration occurs.  Unlike most transposable elements,
              transposition of Tn916 does not result in duplication of the target sequence. 
              Rather, one of two 6 base-pair sequences flanking the transposon in the donor
              (called coupling sequences) is transferred with Tn916 to the recipient.  Upon
              excision, either the original target sequence is restored, or 6 base pairs of
              the target are replaced by the coupling sequence introduced with the
              transposon.  Two transposon-encoded proteins called Int and Xis are involved in
              excision and integration.  Int is member of the integrase family of
              recombinases.  Current evidence suggests that transposon excision is the
              rate-limiting step in conjugal transposition.  Two factors have been shown to
              influence the frequency of conjugative transposition.  These factors are the
              nature of the coupling sequences flanking the transposon and the presence of a
              transposon-encoded accessory protein.  The most remarkable property of
              conjugative transposons like Tn916 is their ability to operate in wide variety
              of different bacterial hosts, yet how the frequency of excision, and thus
              transposition, is determined remains poorly understood.  The recent
              establishment of an in vitro assay for transposon excision means that the
              hypothesis that coupling sequences and accessory proteins together determine
              the frequency of transposon excision can be rigorously tested.  It is not clear
              whether accessory proteins play a significant role in determining the frequency
              of conjugative transposition.  This research will remove major uncertainty from
              the study of these elements that are important mediators of gene transfer
              between many important species of bacteria and lead to a much greater
              understanding of how conjugative transposition occurs.
