Title       : The Economics of Land Rights, Efficiency, and Resource Degradation in China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9876576

Award Number: 9876576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Rozelle rozelle@primal.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Lindert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9200,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Secure property rights are considered an important catalyst for economic
              growth, the argument being that investment can only flourish when there is a
              reasonable chance of reaping its rewards. Today, however, insecurity of
              ownership remains a major issue in former socialist economies, and fear of
              expropriation may even impede efforts towards further reform. Yet little, if
              any, evidence exists on how investors respond to heightened expropriation risk,
              or on the social cost of insecure property rights.
     Given this, it is
              unsurprising that the nature of property rights in agricultural land and the
              extent to which market activities should supplant administrative authority are
              important topics in China's current policy debate. Without a solid empirical
              foundation, the land rights reform debate in China is stuck in its formative
              stage. Continuing calls for further land reform by those inside and outside of
              China's policy making circle should have made this an area of high priority
              policy research; instead, fundamental dimensions of the debate have yet to be
              fully articulated and empirical evidence on even the most rudimentary aspect of
              land rights is nearly non-existent.  No one has ever attempted to identify the
              determinants of local land right regimes or explain the heterogeneity that
              exists even among villages within townships. Much of the focus of previous work
              has been on tenure security when other dimensions of the land rights, such as
              transfer rights, control rights, and income rights, may have equal or greater
              impacts on farmer behavior. Also, with only several exceptions, the costs
              arising from poorly defined land rights have not actually been estimated and
              almost no work has attempted to uncover the relationship between land rights
              and input use, investment, yields, or soil quality.
     The proposed research
              is to use community level data to examine the forces determining the propensity
              for leaders to expropriate land from farmers and to understand how these
              reallocations affect the utilization of village resources, the equity of asset
              holdings and earnings among farmers, local resource quality, and the
              development of other institutions (such as land rental markets).  The study
              will also investigate the links between expropriation risk and investment using
              household level data. Rural China is an ideal case study of tenure insecurity,
              providing the requisite cross-sectional variation in expropriation risk.  The
              researchers will try to measure the impact of expropriation risks on investment
              and the size of its welfare impact on households, and investigate how village
              level investment decisions (such as in irrigation and terracing) help attenuate
              adverse impacts of weak rights and the determinants of these village-level
              activities.  Among other outcomes, the proposed research investigates the
              interactions of rights, market emergence, and soil quality in an economy in
              transition, and seriously examines the effect that expropriation risk may have
              on investment behavior and resource degradation.
