Title       : CAREER: Multiresolution-Based Continuous Phase Retrieval: Theory and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9876025

Award Number: 9876025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy E. Bell abell@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research involves a heretofore unsolved signal reconstruction problem
              called phase retrieval. A signal--such as an electrocardiogram, an image, or
              video--can be represented in terms of magnitude and phase information. However
              if the phase information is unavailable, the difficult problem of
              reconstructing the signal from only its magnitude information arises. The
              objective of this research is to further develop new multiresolution-based
              phase retrieval methods and to transfer them directly into practice and into
              the engineering classroom.  The principal investigator is also applying these
              multiresolution-based techniques to image compression--an essential technology
              for wireless communications, digital image libraries, multimedia over the
              Internet, etc. Furthermore, the educational initiatives of this research
              include: incorporating research-based projects into undergraduate and graduate
              courses; utilizing collaborative learning and web-based teaching tools; and,
              conducting activities designed to recruit and retain women in engineering.
              

Phase retrieval has important applications in several areas of engineering
              and applied physics, such as: antenna design, astronomy, instrumentation
              design, electron microscopy, and x-ray crystallography. For instance in antenna
              design, the measurement of phase information in the far field of an antenna can
              be prohibitively expensive at very high frequencies (e.g. in the terahertz
              regime). However, the phase information is necessary for reconstructing the
              transmitting antenna's aperture field distribution. Thus, the reconstruction of
              phase from only the measured magnitude information enables potentially low cost
              antenna measurements. This research extends the investigator's new phase
              retrieval methods that provide solutions to previously unsolvable problems
              through their novel multiresolution approach. The principal investigator's
              on-going research has also led to new results in multiresolution-based image
              compression--a synergistic relationship that will continue to develop
              throughout this research project.
