Title       : Improvement of Historically Important CAS Wet-Preserved Invertebrate Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9876821

Award Number: 9876821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Mooi rmooi@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Van Syoc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence M. Gosliner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              




The management plan for this project is to sort, taxonomically
              upgrade, and computerize collection event data for the estimated 50,750
              unallocated specimen lots in the wet-preserved invertebrate collection over the
              next three years.

The unallocated material includes several large
              collections from San Francisco Bay, the mouth of the Columbia River, Monterey
              Bay, and Coos Bay.  Latitudinal shifts in sea surface temperature isotherms due
              to El Ninos can result in invertebrate faunal population changes in the eastern
              Pacific in general.  Historical shifts of this type can be recorded in the
              older collections now held in the unallocated material.  The significant
              benthic collections from San Francisco Bay and other coastal localities of the
              Northeast Pacific have great value as historical markers of invertebrate
              population levels and diversity.  The San Francisco Bay collections in
              particular are unique as a historical record of changes in a fauna heavily
              impacted by human development and successive invasions of non-indigenous
              organisms.  These data are not available elsewhere, and with increasing public
              and scientific concern over these issues, the impetus to process the specimens
              constituting the data is at an all-time high.

For groups in which in-house
              expertise is available, staff will refine these initial taxonomic allocations
              of the lots sorted to species level.  The specimen lots will then be shelved in
              the main taxonomic collection.  Further taxonomic refinement by invited
              visiting scientists will assist in identifying specimens and disseminating data
              from those taxa for which in-house expertise is not available and to provide
              informal training and technical support to the students and volunteers that
              have become an integral part of departmental activities.

Availability of the
              newly sorted, accessioned and taxonomically allocated specimens will be
              announced via the CAS WWW page as well as the Crust-L (Crustacea), and Mollusca
              lists on the Internet.  Notes will also go to the ASC Newsletter, Journal of
              Crustacean Biology, Crustaceana, Echinoderm Newsletter, Chaetozone (Polychaeta
              e-newsletter), Systematic Biology and Veliger. 

