Title       : CAREER: First Principles Studies of Interfacial Phenomena: Applications to
               Catalysis and Electrochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9876065

Award Number: 9876065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Perla B. Balbuena balbuena@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Professor Perla Balbuena will develop molecular modeling methods to study the
              crystalline and interfacial structure and properties of metals, carbon-metal,
              alloys and electrolytes. The properties of particular interest are ionic
              diffusion coefficients, ionic conductivities, solvation structures, heats of
              adsorption and reaction. The outcome will impact chemical and electrochemical
              principles and applications. It will pertain mostly to industrial products such
              as adsorbents, catalysts, batteries, and fuel cells; the fundamental
              physicochemical phenomena involved in their utilization; and the applied
              processes derived from them. 
The first objective of the research is the
              modeling of Li intercalation in graphite. The expected result is prediction and
              validation of the dependence of open-circuit voltage and differential capacity
              with respect to composition, and the conditions for the transition from the
              super dense phase LiC2 to LiC6. The second objective is the determination of
              diffusion dynamics of Li and perchlorate ions, and of ion-pair association of
              Li perchlorate, in ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate electrolytes.
              Following that objective, the PI will investigate the mechanism of degradation
              of graphite electrodes, in particular the formation of a presumed Li2CO3
              passivation layer. She will also model the intercalation of solvated species
              into graphite. The third objective is the study of methane cracking over Ni and
              Ni/Cu to produce hydrogen and carbon, and the related phenomenon of hydrogen
              storage in carbon. These investigations will involve the development of
              structural models, ab initio and semiempirical quantum mechanical calculations,
              and molecular dynamics simulations, for chemical and electrochemical systems of
              practical importance. The methodology to be developed will likely have impact
              in the training of chemical engineering students as well as the practice of
              process and product design. The PI is developing new introductory courses and
              modifying the existing ones to raise the engineering students' capability to
              predict microscopic properties from first principles.


