Title       : RUI: Relativistic Compton Scattering in Neutron Star Magenetospheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1999    
File        : a9876670

Award Number: 9876670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79228              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Gonthier gonthier@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice K. Harding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1206,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Gonthier   AST 9876670

The recent observations of soft gamma-ray
              repeaters and anomalous X-ray pulsars furnish data for greater evidence of the
              existence of a class of neutron stars with surface magnetic fields exceeding
              the critical field of 4.4 ten thousand billion Gauss.  This research effort
              seeks to understand the role of strong-field, quantum electrodynamic (QED)
              processes such as Compton scattering, pair production, photon splitting, and
              cyclotron and synchrotron radiation in the magnetospheres of neutron stars.  In
              this study, an acceleration model of electrons and positrons will be developed
              to provide a self-consistent description of the input parameters to a Monte
              Carlo cascade model that simulates the emission of X-rays and gamma rays from
              the magnetosphere.  The main effort will be to study the role of relativistic
              Compton scattering as it operates with other QED processes, to develop
              approximate expressions of the exact QED scattering cross section and
              incorporate them in a full acceleration-cascade model.  Previous studies have
              assumed that Compton scattering can be adequately described by the
              non-relativistic Compton scattering cross section (Thomson limit) below
              resonance and at the resonance, or the Klein-Nishina cross section for
              scattering above the resonance.  Consequently, these studies have not included
              the effects of the strong magnetic fields.  Since these processes are highly
              dependent upon the polarization of the interacting photons, polarized
              differential rates for each QED process will be investigated.  Pulse profiles
              as well as phase dependent spectra of the soft gamma-ray repeaters, anomalous
              X-ray pulsars, the high field gamma-ray pulsars, PSR 1509-58 and PSR 0656+14,
              along with the Crab, Vela and Geminga pulsars will be simulated and compared
              with those observed by the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory (CGRO), the Rossi
              X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) and the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and
              Astrophysics (ASCA).  The calculated thermal X-ray emission from polar cap
              heating by pair-created positrons returning to the surface will be compared
              with the observations of Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) and upcoming measurements
              from the Chandra X-ray Observatory that is scheduled to be launched in 1999. 
              The study of the strong field effects on the inverse Compton scattering process
              will provide insight into the particle-photon interactions associated with a
              variety of pulsar phenomena, including burst spectra of soft gamma-ray
              repeaters and the transport of thermal radiation through neutron star
              atmospheres.


