Title       : Center for Adaptive Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a9876783

Award Number: 9876783
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Morris L. Aizenman                      
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25065765           (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry E. Nelson jnelson@ucolick.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claire E. Max  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Quirrenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1297      SCI & TECH  CTRS (INTEG PTRS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Center for Adaptive Optics
The University of California at Santa
              Cruz

ABSTRACT


Adaptive optics is a method for removing the blurring of
              images caused by changing distortions within optical systems. Turbulence in the
              Earth's atmosphere causes blurring of astronomical images.  In an analogous
              manner internal imperfections and fluids in the eye cause blurring of images
              striking the retina. The use of adaptive optics allows groundbased telescopes
              to see as clearly as if they were in space, and these techniques, when used to
              look at the retina of the human eye, dramatically sharpens images of the
              retina.

Although adaptive optics was suggested for astronomy in the 1950s,
              only today are the requisite technologies (optics, computers, lasers) mature
              enough for adaptive optics to make an important impact on astronomy and vision
              science.  Adaptive optics for astronomy on large telescopes promises a
              spectacular improvement in resolution, by factors of 10 to 30. Large
              ground-based telescopes using adaptive optics can even exceed the performance
              of the Hubble Space Telescope and at much lower cost. Adaptive optics for
              vision science promises to correct the aberrations of the eye and to provide a
              powerful tool for understanding the structure and development of cones and rods
              in the living human retina. It also holds the promise of diagnosing tiny
              retinal defects before they become large enough to threaten our a person's
              vision.

Adaptive optics systems require the marriage of several very
              advanced technologies--precision optics, wavefront sensors, deformable mirrors,
              and lasers--all tied together by high-speed control systems.

The Center for
              Adaptive Optics (CfAO) will concentrate on astronomical and vision science
              applications of adaptive optics and will reach out to other adaptive optics
              communities to share technologies.   It will develop new instruments optimized
              for adaptive optics. Examples from astronomy include "integral-field"
              spectrographs that take spectra of thousands of tiny contiguous regions of the
              sky simultaneously (for studies of distant galaxies and proto-solar-systems),
              as well as coronagraphs to image very faint objects close to bright ones (for
              studies of black holes in galaxies and planets around nearby stars).
              Instruments to be developed for vision science include a confocal scanning
              laser opthalmoscope, which achieves high depth resolution as well as lateral
              resolution. This instrument will make possible high-resolution 3-D
              reconstruction of retinal blood vessels and of optic nerve fibers that carry
              signals to the brain.

The CfAO will conduct a strong program in science
              education and outreach, with significant components in the systemic improvement
              of education, diversification of the trained work force, and enhancement of
              public scientific literacy.


