Title       : From the West: The Diffusion of Woman Suffrage Legislation 1840-1920
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9876519

Award Number: 9876519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie Cornwall marie_cornwall@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Torres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kendra Schiffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the success and failures of woman suffrage legislation in
              49 U.S. states and territories.  The study begins with social movement theories
              which focus on political opportunity structures, mobilization, and framing as
              predictors of social movement emergence, but also incorporates ecology and
              institutional theories of organizations to explain 1) why women suffrage was
              successful in the western states, but less successful elsewhere, and 2) how the
              enfranchisement of women in the West paved the way and influenced the fight for
              suffrage elsewhere in the country.  Rather than define suffrage success as the
              state enfranchisement of women, the study examines the full sequence of
              events-all legislative initiatives (e.g., bills before state legislatures)
              presented before state and territorial legislators.  The researchers
              hypothesize that their timing and sequence eventually legitimated the suffrage
              cause in other states.  Western suffrage was facilitated by state building
              opportunities (e.g., amendments to territorial constitutions were easier to
              pass than amendments to state constitutions), while structural inertia (e.g.,
              the longer an organization has been in existence, the greater the constraints
              faced in changing its core features) operated in the southern states.  Western
              adoption legitimated woman suffrage as a principle and raised the cost of
              ignoring the issue for any other state or set of legislators.  Social movement
              opposition reinforced structural inertia and hindered legitimation and
              diffusion processes.  In addition to standard indicators of mobilizing public
              opinion sponsored by formal organizations, this study considers the impact of
              petitions and memorials (collective expressions of public opinion sponsored by
              formal organizations but drawn upon a loose network of people to demonstrate
              the legitimacy of change) and women mobilizing into the public sphere (e.g.,
              women in law, medicine, and higher education) on suffrage success. Historians
              note that suffragists framed their cause using two different arguments: justice
              and expediency.  This study suggests a third framing discourse that became more
              prominent over time--campaign literature emphasizing the enfranchisement of
              women in other states.  A qualitative comparative analysis supplements findings
              from event count analysis using maximum likelihood estimation.  The comparative
              analysis provides rich descriptive details; the statistical analysis
              facilitates use of control variables and estimates of the relative impact of
              various factors.
