Title       : CAREER: Yield Behavior of Particulate Aggregates and Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9876135

Award Number: 9876135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly T. Miller ktmiller@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9876135
Miller

The yield properties of gels of aggregated particles are of
              great economic significance in the ceramics manufacturing, chemical processing,
              and mining industries, yet remain very poorly understood.  Progress has been
              hampered by the lack of experimental techniques to directly examine the
              deformation properties of particle aggregates and gels.  This Faculty Early
              CAREER Development project utilizes newly developed digital video microscopy
              and micromechanical testing techniques to gain a quantitative understanding of
              the mechanisms, frequencies, and forces required for particles to rearrange
              during shear and compression.  Particulate gel deformation will be observed
              in-situ to determine the different rearrangement modes which occur, as well as
              their frequency.  Micromechanical testing will directly measure the forces
              required for particle rearrangement.  The micromechanical testing methods have
              great potential in the study of colloids - with further development, these
              methods may be able to rival the force resolution of colloidal probe atomic
              force microscopy.  The experiments will be conducted using a variety of model
              and technically relevant colloids, systematically varying particle size,
              particle volume fraction, and interparticle potential.  It is anticipated that
              this work will serve as the experimental basis needed to guide the theoretical
              modeling of particulate gel rheological behavior.  Continuing development of
              undergraduate and graduate level courses will be a major educational goal. 
              Specific projects include the implementation of web-based three dimensional
              crystal structure models for a structure of materials class, development of a
              graduate lecture/-laboratory class in ceramics processing, and implementation
              of new course assessment techniques.  Outreach activities will focus upon
              development of a professional enhancement course for high school science
              teachers, emphasizing the use of examples from materials science and
              engineering in standards-based education.  The course will be offered in two
              forms: a lecture/-discussion format to be taught at the Colorado School of
              Mines, and a web-based distance learning format. It is anticipated that the
              latter effort will be especially attractive to teachers in rural and
              disadvantaged areas.

The proposed research utilizes new developed digital
              video microscopy and micromechanical testing techniques to quantitatively
              examine the deformation modes of particulate gels.  The educational component
              of the plan includes mentoring of freshmen and undergraduate researchers,
              teaching at all student levels, and course development. The outreach activities
              are focused upon developing and teaching professional development courses for
              high school science teachers.  The use of visualization techniques to enhance
              understanding is a theme running throughout the proposed activities.



