Title       : Modeling Tornado Vortex Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9876450

Award Number: 9876450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270094             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Lewellen   (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Lewellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              While much has been learned over the last decade on the formation of tornadoes,
              it is still unknown why some supercell storms produce tornadoes and others do
              not.  The objective of this renewal project is to provide a better
              understanding of the near surface dynamics of a tornado vortex evolving within
              a mesocyclone.  The Principal Investigators expect to expand upon the results
              of their prior grant involving a sensitivity study of the flow in the tornadic
              corner flow region where the turbulent interaction of the central vortex with
              the surface produces maximum wind speeds in a very unique environment.  This
              renewal study will include looking at the effects of unsteadiness and asymmetry
              in the boundary conditions on the tornado domain; increasing the size of the
              domain of interest; and attempting to incorporate some of the small-scale
              results obtained into subgrid parameterizations appropriate for use with larger
              domain simulations.  The project will rely heavily on the use of the authors'
              existing high-resolution, three-dimensional, numerical model for simulations of
              tornado like vortices.  A key objective is to discover more about the special
              conditions which allow a mesocyclone to spawn a dangerous tornado.  

Results
              from the authors' prior grant demonstrated that the interaction between a
              tornado like vortex and the surface can lead to a strong intensification of the
              winds with the degree of intensification depending critically on the angular
              momentum within the surface layer inflow.  This suggests that the essential
              difference between similar mesocyclones, some of which generate strong
              tornadoes and some of which fail to do so, may largely depend upon the boundary
              layer flow.  By exploring the impact of different boundary conditions which the
              tornado vortex domain inherits from the mesocyclone, the authors hope to extend
              idealized results from their prior grant in order to have a significant impact
              on the problem of tornadogenesis.  

It is expected that this study will
              determine which dynamical features of the mesocyclone (ideally ones which may
              be determined from observational radar data) are most closely related to the
              near surface intensity of the tornado evolving within it.  This potentially may
              lead to an improved ability to forecast these severe events.

