Title       : CAREER: High Bit Rate Wireless Infrared Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9876149

Award Number: 9876149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey B. Carruthers jbc@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876149
Carruthers

This proposal proposes a program of research and
              education in techniques for very high bit rate wireless infrared
              communications. In the context of wireless networks, the term "high bit rate
              system" refers to one that transmits tens or hundreds of megabits per second.
              The project lies in the intersection of the fields of photonics,
              communications, and networks. These fields are undergoing rapid growth and are
              becoming increasingly important components of an emerging information
              society.
The research program involves both theoretical and experimental
              investigations into the nature and potential of the wireless infrared channel
              as a high-quality communications medium. The educational goals of the proposal
              are to develop and enhance the curriculum in the intersection between
              photonics, digital communications, and networks. The emphasis will be on
              developing interdisciplinary components to courses in these areas that will
              enhance students' ability to function effectively in these very different but
              linked fields.

Wireless Infrared Communications. Infrared radiation is a
              medium that can be used for high-speed wireless digital communication [1,2].
              Since the infrared spectrum is blocked by typical surfaces, it is particularly
              well-suited to short-range applications, such as point-to-point links and local
              area networks. Infrared links can be classified as directed or non-directed.
              Directed links employ directional transmitters and receivers, which must be
              aimed to establish a link, whereas non-directed links employ wide-beam
              transmitters and wide-field-of-view receivers to remove the need for alignment.
              Line-of-sight (LOS) systems rely on a direct path between transmitter and
              receiver, whereas non-LOS links employ surface reflectivity to guide
              transmitted light to the receiver. The two extremes are directed LOS and
              non-directed non-LOS (or "diffuse"). Our focus is on diffuse links, which are
              the most suitable for use as the basis for a general purpose wireless
              local-area network.
The most practical modulation technique is intensity
              modulation (IM), in which the trans-mitted signal is modulated onto the optical
              intensity of the transmitted beam. Down-conversion is most effectively done
              using direct detection (DD), where a photodetector produces a current
              proportional to the received optical power.
The main challenges to achieving
              high speed communication over acceptable distances in IM/DD infrared systems
              are (1) the high path loss resulting from diffusing the signal energy, (2) the
              strong sources of background noise, including sunlight, incandescent lighting,
              and fluorescent lighting, and (3) the dispersion in the channel from multipath,
              photodetector capacitance, and photodetector transit-time.
We also look at
              multiple access or medium access control issues. This can be achieved with
              multiplexing techniques, either optical or electrical, which are normally
              associated with the phys-ical layer of network architecture models. We also
              consider statistical multiplexing or contention-based sharing techniques, which
              are consider part of the data link layer.
In the following sections, we
              describe both theoretical and experimental investigations into the nature and
              potential of the wireless infrared channel as a high-quality communications
              medium.
***

