Title       : CAREER: Telomere Dynamics in Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9876126

Award Number: 9876126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492436             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Kirk kirk@lfc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Forest College
	      Sheridan & College Road
	      Lake Forest, IL  60045    312/234-3100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Although meiosis and mitosis are programmed events which accurately separate the
              appropriate chromosomes into the appropriate eukaryotic daughter cells at the
              appropriate times and are, thus, central to the genetic program which
              ultimately produces progeny, little is known of the actual mechanisms involved.
              Investigations carried out in the protozoan, Tetrahymena thermophila, suggests
              that the ends of chromosomes, telomeres, are involved in the ordered movement
              of chromosomes during miosis and mitosis. Such information would be more easily
              obtained using Tetrahymena since the formation of the macronucleus from the
              micronucleus involves a large amount of DNA fragmentation and resealing of
              chromosome ends with telomeric DNA. Telomeric DNA mutants of Tetrahymena will
              be used in molecular and cell biology studies with the following two goals. 1)
              To determine telomere function during mitotic anaphase by analyzing the
              telomere repeat sequence and telomere structure of a mutant displaying a
              particularly severe defect in anaphase chromatid separation. 2) To investigate
              the role of telomeres in chromosome alignment and localization during meiotic
              prophase using cell biological approaches and utilizing Tetrahymena telomeric
              mutants. Undergraduate students will perform laboratory experiments and
              exceptional ones will have the opportunity to serve as laboratory course
              advisors. On-going laboratory research will be incorporated into a molecular
              genetics laboratory course which will culminate in each student writing an
              original manuscript based upon the work done in the laboratory course. A
              partnership between the Lake Forest College Biology Department and the Waukegan
              school district will also be established based upon the model developed by the
              University of California Medical School at San Francisco.

This work will not
              only produce information basic to the understanding of genetic mechanisms but
              will also serve as a means of introducing undergraduates to the excitement of
              basic biological research.

 

