Title       : Collaborative Research - Predicting Models of Decision Making: A Cross-Cultural
               and Multi-Method Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9876554

Award Number: 9876554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Hsee christopher.hsee@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9876554
Hsee

Suppose that a high school senior has been admitted by two
              colleges - a prestigious university in New Haven and a community college in
              Hawaii.  How would she go about deciding which offer to accept?  One
              possibility is that she carefully calculates the costs and benefits of both
              alternatives and chooses the one she concludes to have the greater net benefit.
               Another possibility is that she thinks about reasons for and against attending
              either school and chooses the option that she can best justify to herself and
              others.  A third possibility is that she simply bases her choice on her gut
              feelings about which alternative would be "better."  These are just some of the
              possible ways she can resolve the decision.  We refer to these different ways
              of making decisions as "decision modes."  Use of different decision modes can
              lead to different choices and thereby to different levels of satisfaction with
              the decision, after it is made and consequences are experienced.  The standard
              decision literature has focused primarily on the cost-benefit mode of
              decision-making, but recent research in psychology suggests that people often
              use other decision modes, including the justification-based and feelings-based
              modes we described.  In this project, we seek to accomplish two main
              objectives: 1) to systematically identify what decision modes people commonly
              use, and 2) to formulate a theory that can help us predict under what
              conditions people will use what decision mode.  Based on our own work and that
              of other scholars, we speculate that the answers to the second question depend
              on issues such as the motivation and the cultural background of the
              decision-maker, and the nature and the context of the decision problem.  We
              hope that, eventually, our work will not only predict when people use what
              decision mode, but will also provide constructive advice to decision-makers
              (such as the student mentioned earlier) as to which decision mode to use under
              a given situation, and thereby help them make the best decision -- the one with
              outcomes that will make them happiest in the long run. 

