Title       : U.S.-Japan Seminar: Workshop for Young Investigators in Molecular
               Science/October, 1991/Okazaki, Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1991    
File        : a9112567

Award Number: 9112567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16350              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Frederick jhf@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent M. Ervin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 5959      JAPAN INITIATIVE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5910,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a joint U.S.-Japan Workshop for Young                  
              Investigators in Molecular Science to be held during October,                  
              l99l in Okazaki, Japan.   Professors John H. Frederick and                     
              Kent M. Ervin, Department of Chemistry, University of Nevada,                  
              Reno, are the U.S. organizers and their counterparts in Japan                  
              are Professors Yoshiyasu Matsumoto, Koichi Yamashita, and                      
              Hrvoje Petek of the Institute for Molecular Sciences (IMS)                     
              in Okazaki, Japan.  The workshop will encourage and facilitate                 
              the initiation of research collaboration among early career                    
              scientists from the United States and Japan in the area of                     
              theoretical and experimental molecular spectroscopy and                        
              dynamics.  Panel discussions will be featured on the following                 
              topics:  i) gas-surface interactions  ii) spectroscopy of                      
              clusters/solulte-solvent interactions  iii) intermolecular                     
              dynamics of highly excited molecules and  iv) spectroscopy of                  
              the transition state/reaction dynamics.  These topics share a                  
              number of common challenges and concerns, among them the                       
              characterization and modeling of intermolecular forces, the                    
              nature of pre-and post-bond dissociation dynamics in highly                    
              excited molecular species, the role of an external bath (or                    
              solvent) in relaxation and accommodation processes, and the                    
              relationship between spectroscopic observations and the                        
              underlying molecular dynamics.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The twelve participants from both countries will each deliver                  
              a seminar on their research area which will be followed by                     
              group discussion.  They will also participate in guest                         
              lectures covering specific areas of molecular dynamics,                        
              discussions on future direction and challenge, and a visit to                  
              the laboratories of the Institute for Molecular Sciences.                      
              This Institute (IMS) is the ideal host for the workshop since                  
              one of its objectives is to promote international exchanges                    
              between Japan and other countries.  Because the participants                   
              are drawn from early-career scientists, the collaborations                     
              formed as a result of this workshop expect to affect the                       
              future direction of research in both countries, over a long                    
              period of time, to the mutual benefit of both the U.S. and                     
              Japan.
