Title       : Openness, Secrecy, Authorship, and Intellectual Property
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1991   
File        : a9112729

Award Number: 9112729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela O. Long 71574.174@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Issues of openness, secrecy, authorship, and intellectual property             
              remain of central concern in scientific and technical research.                
              The current debate between the French and Americans over the                   
              discovery of the HIV virus or the criticism of classified CIA-                 
              supported research at the Rochester Institute of Technology are                
              just two of many examples of conflicts that can arise concerning               
              these issues.  The creation of an office of scientific integrity               
              at the NIH and an Inspector General's Office at NSF are                        
              manifestations of the importance government has attached to these              
              questions.  Yet these are not in any sense new problems.  Under                
              this grant, Dr. Long is continuing her investigation of the origins            
              of beliefs and attitudes towards openness, secrecy, authorship and             
              intellectual property in the period before the rise of modern                  
              science and technology in the scientific revolution.  She argues               
              that the most important sources for these attitudes and beliefs                
              consist of practical, technical and military writings and craft                
              guild documents.                                                               
                                                                                             
              In this study, Dr. Long is evaluating the ways in which prior                  
              traditions of practical authorship influenced the development of               
              an ideal of openness in the new experimental science.  At the same             
              time, however, she has found a rising interest in secrecy,                     
              priority, intellectual property, patents and privileges.  She is               
              examining the conflicts that emerged from these competing                      
              interests.  Her study concludes with an analysis of the ways in                
              which scientific methodology was influenced by such issues as they             
              had been elaborated in prior practical traditions.  This research              
              promises to enrich our understanding of the bases for contemporary             
              debate over these issues.
