Title       : Epistemological Justification of Experimental Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9112048

Award Number: 9112048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8375               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose-Mary Sargent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Merrimack College
	      
	      North Andover, MA  01845    617/683-7111

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Science, it is frequently argued, merits its primacy in its                    
              knowledge claims because of its experimental foundations.  It is               
              not based on prejudice, superstition, astrology, common sense                  
              beliefs or even divine revelations, but rather on the disciplined,             
              public interrogation of nature known as the "experimental method."             
              Recent scholarship in the sociology of science, however, has                   
              challenged this presumed experimental foundation for modern                    
              science.  One of the leading sites for debate about the                        
              experimental method has centered around Robert Boyle, the 17th                 
              century chemist who was one of the most important original                     
              exponents of the experimental method.  Advocates of this                       
              revisionist view argue that Boyle's experimental practices                     
              "involved in the generation and justification of proper knowledge              
              were part of the settlement and protection of a certain kind of                
              social order."  Under her previous grant, Dr. Sargent began a                  
              "counter-attack" on this social constructivist view of Boyle and               
              the philosophy of experiment.  She argues that Boyle advocated the             
              experimental method not for social and political purposes but for              
              the advance of science.  Under this new grant, she is continuing               
              her efforts to provide a systematic account of the details of                  
              Boyle's experimental practice and the manner in which he defended              
              it against the serious criticisms of other natural philosophers of             
              his day.  Not only will this study help to explicate Boyle's                   
              sophisticated arguments in favor of the experimental method, but               
              it promises to make valuable contributions to current debates in               
              the philosophy and social studies of science about the role of                 
              experiment in the advance of science.
