Title       : Japan Long Term Visit: Study of Exactly Solvable Models in Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1991  
File        : a9112563

Award Number: 9112563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacques H H. Perk jhhp@jperk.phy.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Helen Au-Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1262,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a long-term visit by Professors                        
              Jacques H.H. Perk and Helen Au-Yang, Department of Physics,                    
              Oklahoma State University to travel to Japan to undertake a                    
              joint research project with Professors Michio Jimbo, Tetsuji                   
              Miwa and Mikio Sato who are located at the Research Institute                  
              for Mathematical Sciences (RIMS) which is located at Kyoto                     
              University in Japan.  Their research will involve continuous                   
              studies of the new higher-genus solutions of the star-                         
              triangle (Yang-Baxter) equation in the chiral Potts model.                     
              They will also continue research on the spin-spin correlation                  
              functions of the Z-invariant inhomogeneous Ising model on an                   
              irregular lattice.  The results may provide correlation                        
              functions of certain quasicrystals and of some quasiperiodic                   
              Ising lattices.                                                                
                                                                                             
              This research is of fundamental importance in statistical                      
              mechanics, in low-dimensional quantum field theory and                         
              completely integrable systems.  Progress on the higher-genus                   
              solutions may bring forth interaction between many other                       
              research areas in mathematics and physics.  RIMS is the                        
              ideal Institute for the PI's to carry out their research.                      
              The Japanese researchers have the greatest collective                          
              knowledge and expertise of integrable systems of any                           
              institution in the world.  Professors Perk and Au-Yang are                     
              among the few best researchers in solvable models in the U.S.                  
              The researchers from both countries are all very well known                    
              and respected in their field.  It is expected that, following                  
              the expiration of this award, collaborations between the                       
              researchers are likely to continue.
