Title       : Collaborative Research on Probability Conditionals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9112314

Award Number: 9112314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Stalnaker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Various theories have explored the hypothesis that ordinary mater-             
              of-fact conditionals (as contrasted with counterfactual                        
              conditionals) are probability conditionals.  David Lewis showed                
              that given certain natural assumptions, there could be no                      
              probability conditional except in certain trivial probability                  
              distributions, but others have shown that on different assumptions             
              nontrivial probability conditionals are possible.  Drs. Stalnaker              
              and Jeffrey are working together to develop a semantics for a                  
              probability conditional that avoids Lewis's trivialization, to                 
              explore its formal properties and intuitive plausibility, and to               
              relate it to other proposals for the development of a probability              
              conditional.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              In the proposed semantics, the values of sentences are random                  
              variables, functions assigning values between 0 and 1 to "possible             
              worlds", points in probability spaces.  A simple semantic rule for             
              the conditional ensures that it is a probability conditional, but              
              questions remain about the interpretation of complex sentences with            
              conditionals as parts -- both about conjunctions and disjunctions              
              of conditionals, and about nested conditionals.  There are also                
              interesting questions to be explored about the relation between                
              this semantic framework and truth-conditional semantics for                    
              conditionals developed in the possible worlds framework.  This                 
              research could contribute to clarifying the role of conditionals               
              in inductive reasoning and concept formation in science.
