Title       : New Intermolecular Traps of Captodative Stabilized and OtherRadicals: Studies
               Toward Radical Based Asymmetric Synthesis of Amino Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9112183

Award Number: 9112183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet W. Grissom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              This project will involve the study of intermolecular radical                  
              trapping of captodative stabilized radicals.  This work has                    
              important implications in two major areas:  1) the development                 
              of new intermolecular radical traps and  2) the use of chiral                  
              glycine radical templates for the asymmetric synthesis of                      
              natural and non-natural amino acids.  Given the tremendous                     
              utility of radicals in organic synthesis there is a real need                  
              for the development of new intermolecular radical traps.                       
              Radical traps that will be developed include nitrones, stannyl                 
              nitronates, vinyl aziridines (for both the synthesis of allyl                  
              amines and pyrrolidines), enol stannanes, stannyl alkynes, and                 
              chiral dehydroalanines.  For the asymmetric synthesis of amino                 
              acids, several chiral glycine radical templates will be                        
              investigated including a chiral diketo piperazine, oxazolidine,                
              and 9-phenyl menthol amino acid ester. Intermolecular trapping                 
              reactions of the chiral glycine radicals will be carried out                   
              with both established radical traps (such as allyl and vinyl                   
              stannanes) and with the novel radical trapping agents.  This                   
              work will be an important contribution to the areas of radical                 
              chemistry and asymmetric amino acid synthesis.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior                   
              independent Federal research support to develop a competitive                  
              research proposal.  This project involves the trapping of                      
              stabilized free radicals, i.e., molecules with unpaired                        
              electrons, for the construction of organic molecules.  Such                    
              reactions may have wide applicability in organic chemistry and                 
              complement other organic synthesis methods.
