Title       : Engineering Research Equipment - Submillimeter Laser System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9112373

Award Number: 9112373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68333              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold R. Fetterman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              New experiments at millimeter wave frequencies have                            
              shown important nonlinear effects using specially                              
              developed materials.  In each case the observations                            
              have been relatively difficult with the available                              
              materials and power densities.  At shorter                                     
              wavelengths these nonlinear effects become                                     
              significantly larger and more amenable to study.  One                          
              of our more novel experiments involves phase                                   
              conjugation, an important and useful area of research                          
              at visible wavelengths, which had not been achieved                            
              at longer wavelengths.  Using an artificial Kerr                               
              medium we were able to demonstrate four wave                                   
              mixing and phase conjugation in waveguides.  The use                           
              of higher frequencies will permit the crucial extension                        
              of this concept to free space.  Another set of                                 
              experiments uses high temperature superconductor                               
              films to make unique, tunable quasi-optical filters.                           
              The properties we are studying, involving                                      
              concentrations of paired superconducting electrons,                            
              will be much more sensitive to applied laser fields                            
              when observed at the submillimeter frequencies.  This                          
              NSF Engineering Research Equipment Grant will                                  
              therefore be used to purchase an optically pumped                              
              molecular gas laser system which will generate CW                              
              Submillimeter and Far Infrared radiation.  In                                  
              addition to opening up an entire range of new                                  
              experiments in nonlinear effects and superconducting                           
              structures, this work will have important applications                         
              in remote sensing and communications.
