Title       : Stochastic Theory, Method and Experimental Design in the Identification of
               Mental Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9112813

Award Number: 9112813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249913             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Townsend jtownsen@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will develop mathematical models of how people                   
              carry out simple mental tasks that involve more than one type of               
              information presented simultaneously.  Many theories and models                
              in psychology that are able to make definite predictions for                   
              experiments are very specific and particularistic.  In contract,               
              this project will continue Townsend's development of general                   
              mathematical representations of important psychological issues.                
              These general mathematical representations will then be used to                
              construct decisive experimental tests of the critical questions                
              posed by such issues.  The generality of the approach implies                  
              that these experiments will support or falsify the broadest                    
              possible potential "laws" of behavior, rather than quite specific              
              and rather limited aspects of such natural regularities.                       
              Rigorous mathematization of the principles and issues implies                  
              that the predictions follow rigorously from the assumptions                    
              embedded in the theory, and that the experimental tests really                 
              assess what is claimed to be assessed, which is not always true                
              in verbally stated theories.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research will move beyond Townsend's recent mathematical                  
              theories, which are based on the assumption that each successive               
              stage of the mental endeavor must be completed before the next                 
              begins.  Although this assumption is very likely correct in a                  
              number of situations, such as in mental arithmetic, it is                      
              probably wrong in other tasks where the information may be free                
              to flow continuously throughout the involved parts of the brain.               
              For instance, in the recognition of a familiar face, it may well               
              be that as sensory information comes in, it simultaneously flows               
              to visual-long-term-memory centers, to emotional-memory areas,                 
              and even to areas causing early portions of an action.  Thus, it               
              may not be necessary to first receive and process the sensation,               
              then pass on the completed sensory information to a recognition                
              device, and so on, in discrete stages.  This research will                     
              develop models that permit such continuous flow among the various              
              important parts of the cognitive system.  A second critical                    
              assumption has been an independence of the separate processing                 
              stages in cognition.  Again, this may be reasonable in certain                 
              contexts but not in others.  The research will begin to probe the              
              question of what happens when this independence is given up and                
              the different subprocesses can form serious interactions.                      
                                                                                             
              The outcome of such research is vitally needed to construct more               
              accurate and sophisticated theories of how people perceive and                 
              think.  This information will be useful for understanding of                   
              normal mental functioning within the education process as well as              
              for understanding mental functioning in cases of mental                        
              disabilitiy or disfunction.
