Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution of the Skull and Air Sinus System in
               Archosauria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1991  
File        : a9112070

Award Number: 9112070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9885               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Witmer  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The skulls of humans as well as other mammals are                         
              characterized by air sinuses associated with the nasal cavity and              
              the middle ear.  The mammalian sinuses tend to be minor aspects of             
              skull form.  However, another group of vertebrate animals, the                 
              Archosauria, certain extinct dinosaur groups and their presumed                
              living descendants the birds and crocodiles, exhibit air sinuses               
              in the skull but of different shape and position from those of                 
              mammals.  In many archosaurs, sinuses dominate skull morphology.               
              Although archosaurs have been the most diverse land vertebrates                
              for over 200 million years, their important anatomical system of               
              sinuses has been neglected in morphological studies.  Consequently             
              it has not been possible to determine which sinuses are strictly               
              comparable among archosaurs, that is, which are "homologous" in an             
              evolutionary sense, having evolved from the same developmental and             
              anatomical source in ancestral forms.                                          
                   Faculty sponsor David Weishampel and graduate student Lawrence            
              Witmer are studying the air sinus systems in several representative            
              samples of living birds and crocodiles and in well preserved skull             
              fossils of extinct archosaurs.  Their methods of study include                 
              sophisticated clearing and double staining procedures with the                 
              modern forms, and the use of elaborate casts from fossil forms.                
              Their comparative data will help determine which features of the               
              air sinus system are similar or different among archosaurs and                 
              which features provide strong evidence for close genealogical                  
              relationship within the group.  When correlated with what is known             
              about the life history of the animal, whether fossil or living, the            
              skull sinus data may help in solving the puzzle about what                     
              functions these cavities perform in the life of the organism.
