Title       : International Symposium on Environmental Ethics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1991  
File        : a9112433

Award Number: 9112433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8541               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Hartel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Ferre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia
	      Boyd Graduate Studies Res
	      Athens, GA  30602    404/542-3030

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides partial funding for an international symposium             
              in environmental ethics entitled "Theory Meets Practice."  The                 
              symposium is sponsored and supported by the University of Georgia,             
              the Fondazione Lanza, the International Scoeity for Environmental              
              Ethics, the International Ecological Society, and the Council of               
              Educators in Landscape Architecture.  The conference has four                  
              subthemes:  What are the practical implications of new                         
              environmental ethics theories on environmental problems?  To what              
              extent should legislation of ecological sustainability restrict                
              property rights?  How can nationsl share responsibility for global             
              environmental problems?  How can military and political threats to             
              the environment be diminished?  Speakers include philosophers,                 
              theologians, ecologists, and environmental policy experts from the             
              United States, other industrialized countries, and developing                  
              countries.  This is the first international environmental ethics               
              meeting to be held in the United States; the event and its                     
              proceedings should stimulate increasing attention to these issues              
              by U.S. academicians, policymakers, and interested citizens.                   
                                                                                             
              This project allows a highly qualified group of researchers from               
              different disciplinary backgrounds in the United States and abroad             
              to address theoretical issues in and practical issues of                       
              environmental ethics.  The principal investigators and conference              
              participants are well qualified; institutional support is very                 
              good.  A volume of general interest to the field will result.  The             
              budget request is modest.  Support is recommended.
