Title       : Bimetallic Complexes with Bridging Oxygenates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1991       
File        : a9112872

Award Number: 9112872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy H. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program is to support research by Dr. Dorothy H. Gibson of the                 
              Chemistry Department, University of Louisville, for studies of                 
              bimetallic complexes of late transition metals.  Complexes                     
              bridged by small oxycarbon ligands, such as dioxymethylene, and                
              carbon dioxide, will be synthesized and characterized.  These                  
              complexes are models for species which have been suggested as                  
              intermediates in catalytic conversions of carbon monoxide or                   
              carbon dioxide to ethylene glycol, acetaldehyde, and other                     
              oxygenated products.  The synthesis will be followed by studies                
              of the reactions of the bimetallic compounds, including carbon                 
              monoxide, carbon dioxide, and formaldehyde insertion reactions,                
              reaction with electrophiles, and thermolysis reactions.                        
              Crystallographic structures will be determined where possible.                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Although "syngas", a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen,                  
              has long been been processed commercially to produce                           
              hydrocarbons and oxygen-containing organic compounds using                     
              catalytic methods, the details of the processes are not                        
              completely understood.  The catalysts used contain cobalt,                     
              iron, ruthenium and other transition metals.  Because it is                    
              desirable to have more control over the distribution of                        
              products and to effect the conversions at lower temperatures,                  
              it is important to probe the details of this chemistry in order                
              to develop improved or alternative methods.  In this project,                  
              some bimetallic compounds which been suggested as models for                   
              intermediates in the production of ethylene glycol and related                 
              products will be prepared and characterized with the goal of                   
              understanding the factors which affect their reactivity.
