Title       : Dissertation Research: Genetic Variation and Relationships Among the Hair-cap
               Mosses (Polytrichaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1991   
File        : a9112554

Award Number: 9112554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5805               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Derda  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Mosses, perhaps because of their small size and seemingly                 
              inconspicuous role in nature, have been little studied genetically             
              or phylogenetically.  Based on what data do exist, mosses appear               
              to show ranges of genetic variation similar to that known for other            
              land plants.  There is little understanding, however, of the                   
              influence of ecological determinants and life history                          
              characteristics on the genetic structure of natural moss                       
              populations.  Like homosporous ferns, moss species show a high                 
              incidence of polyploidy (multiple sets of chromosomes), nearly 80%.            
              Unlike other land plants, however, most polyploid moss species have            
              been presumed to arise locally and spontaneously, that is by                   
              autopolyploidy, rather than by hybridization with nearby species,              
              or allopolyploidy.                                                             
                   Faculty adviser Robert Wyatt will direct graduate student                 
              Gregory Derda in an intensive genetic survey of several species of             
              the hair-cap mosses of the Pacific Northwest, a region of great                
              diversity in this group.  They will use horizontal starch-gel                  
              electrophoresis to determine levels of genetic variation in several            
              species, including groups where polyploidy is known or suspected.              
              On the basis of fixed heterozygosity of allozymes, it appears that             
              both Polytrichum ohioense and P. pallidisetum are allopolyploids,              
              one progenitor of each being P. commune.  But the other progenitors            
              are unknown.  A thorough survey of genetic markers of all species              
              in the region should reveal likely ancestral stocks, and provide               
              data for analysis of phylogenetic relationships among the numerous             
              species.  As well, the study will reveal what levels of genetic                
              variation are correlated with areas of glacial refugia in the                  
              Pacific Northwest and in areas of recent colonization.
