Title       : The History of Black Women: Biologists' Accounts of Race and Gender
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1992   
File        : a9112556

Award Number: 9112556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Fausto-Sterling Anne_Fausto-Sterling@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Fausto-Sterling is examining the intersection between the                  
              ideologies of social difference and the development of biological              
              knowledge.  As a part of a larger study, she argues that much of               
              contemporary biological knowledge and theory is covertly marked by             
              cultural values, both past and present, concerning gender and race.            
              She is examining the mutual interactions between social and                    
              intellectual forces and the development of scientific thought.                 
              Each part of this study probes the social nature of biological                 
              ideation with the examination and explication of the dissection                
              literature drawn from the 19th century being a cornerstone piece               
              for this undertaking.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Starting with Georges Cuvier's detailed examination of the body of             
              Sarah Bartman, a South African woman of color, and continuing into             
              the 1870's, biologists published scientific accounts of dissections            
              of women of color.  Under this grant, Dr. Fausto-Sterling is                   
              completing the compilation and examination of that dissection                  
              literature emanating from Europe.  She is also extending this study            
              to literature emanating from the United States.  She is searching              
              the biological literature of the United States for parallel                    
              examples of accounts of the bodies of black women.  The examples               
              found both expand and diversify her evidentiary base.  She is also             
              completing the review of a growing body of secondary sources which             
              provide both historical and theoretical background for placing and             
              interpreting the results of this project.  She will then be in a               
              position to interpret her findings from her investigation of 19th              
              century biologists and their scientific writings to create                     
              narratives of difference from the presumed norm of the European                
              male.  She hypothesizes that the narratives concerning people of               
              color helped to create icons:  body parts gained symbolical                    
              significance with regard to gender and deviant sexuality.  Such                
              icons derived from accounts of black female bodies, became mobile,             
              appearing form the last quarter of the 19th century, well into the             
              20th century in scientific accounts of deviant white women.  In                
              amplifying and documenting her claims, Dr. Fausto-Sterling is                  
              moving from an essentially literal reading of the biological                   
              literature to a social and cultural account of its significance.
