Title       : A Study of Behavior and Design of Reinforced Concrete Shear Walls With
               Unsymmetrical Cross-Section
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9112962

Award Number: 9112962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mahendra P. Singh                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163199             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Wallace   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1497,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In seismic design of reinforced concrete                                       
              structures using shear walls L-shaped or T-                                    
              shaped walls are often used.  The lateral                                      
              load behavior of these unsymmetrical "flanged                                  
              walls" is not well understood.  No                                             
              experimental studies have been conducted on                                    
              unsymmetrical flanged walls with aspect                                        
              ratios greater than two, and no                                                
              recommendations exist to provide guidance on                                   
              appropriate analysis or design procedures.                                     
                                                                                             
              This project involves both analytical and                                      
              experimental studies of unsymmetrical flanged                                  
              shear walls.  Detailed analytical studies                                      
              will be conducted on two shear wall dominant                                   
              buildings in the San Francisco Bay Area with                                   
              instrumented response data recorded from the                                   
              1989 Loma Prieta earthquake and its                                            
              aftershocks.  The analytical studies are                                       
              designed to investigate modeling techniques                                    
              for lateral load response by comparing                                         
              measured and computed responses.  The                                          
              experimental studies will involve the design,                                  
              construction, and testing of four specimens                                    
              with different flanged widths and reinforcing                                  
              ratios.  The specimens will be subjected to                                    
              reversed cyclic lateral loading and constant                                   
              axial stress to investigate stiffness,                                         
              strength, and deformation characteristics of                                   
              the walls.  Detailed analytical studies using                                  
              nonlinear finite element techniques will be                                    
              used to evaluate existing analytical models                                    
              and to develop new analytical models.                                          
              The objectives of the combined analytical and                                  
              experimental studies will be to establish                                      
              guidelines for analytical modeling,                                            
              proportioning, and detailing of unsymmetrical                                  
              flanged shear walls for earthquake                                             
              resistance.
