Title       : TOGA: Triple Doppler Radar Measurements from Aircraft
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1994  
File        : a9112043

Award Number: 9112043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Raymond raymond@kestrel.nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Blyth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is for the development of a technique to                    
              obtain triple Doppler Radar measurement of convective storms                   
              using aircraft radar alone.  Airborne Doppler radars that make                 
              fore and aft conical scans, such as the recently modified NOAA                 
              P-3 radars and the NCAR ELDORA radar now under development, could              
              be used with this technique.  The advantage of triple over dual                
              Dopper analysis is that all three components of precipitation                  
              particle velocity can be obtained.  Using mass continuity to                   
              obtain vertical air motion, particle terminal velocity can be                  
              derived, which allows inferences to be made about precipitation                
              growth.  This technique also makes possible a superior estimate                
              of vertical air motion at cloud top, which is needed to derive                 
              accurate vertical air velocities.                                              
                   This technique will be used to measure vertical mass fluxes               
              and precipitation evolution in oceanic convective clouds during                
              the intensive field phase of TOGA COARE.  Both pieces of                       
              information are important in characterizing the convection in the              
              COARE domain.  A preliminary test of the technique will be made                
              during the Tropical Cyclone Initiation experiment in July 1991                 
              using a P-3 radar.                                                             
                   Results of these measurements will be used to test a model                
              development to predict the vertical fluxes of mass, heat, and                  
              moisture in cumulus clouds.                                                    
                   This research is important because it is a key study in                   
              TOGA/COARE both to describe and understand the principal                       
              atmospheric processes that organize convection and to link those               
              convective scale physical processes to the larger scales that                  
              affect climate variability in an especially climate sensitive                  
              region of the world, the western Pacific Ocean, the field site of              
              TOGA/COARE.
