Title       : Conference on Animal Welfare and Conservation: Ethical Paradoxes in Modern Zoos
               and Aquariums, Spring 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1991  
File        : a9112807

Award Number: 9112807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58752              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan Norton bryan.norton@pubpolicy.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hutchins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Georgia Institute of Technology, in cooperation with the American              
              Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums (AAZPA) and Zoo                  
              Atlanta, will host a three-day conference to examine the impacts               
              on zoo policies of changing moral views regarding treatment of                 
              animals.  Their expanding agenda in conservation is viewed as one              
              aspect of the changing role of zoos and aquariums in response to               
              broader moral challenges by animal welfare groups, animal                      
              liberation advocates, and radical environmentalists.  In                       
              particular, the conference will consider ethical issues in policies            
              concerning the development and implementation of Species Survival              
              Plans, intended to provide buffers against extinction through                  
              captive breeding programs and the careful management of genetic                
              resources.  The proposed conference will assemble zoo                          
              professionals, professional ethicists, and conservation biologists             
              to discuss the difficult ethical issues -- regarding capture of                
              members of endangered species or the fate of zoo animals who have              
              already contributed to their species' gene pool, for example --                
              that arise in the administration of these plans.  The conference               
              will result in a position paper to be submitted to the AAZPA Board             
              of Directors for discussion and adoption and the conference                    
              presentations will be edited for publication in book form.                     
                                                                                             
              This project allows a highly qualified and diversified group of                
              researchers, zoo administrators, and moral advocates for animals               
              to address theoretical and practical issues in the development of              
              ethical policies and practices for the treatement of animals. The              
              principal investigators and conference participants are well                   
              qualified; institutional support is very good.  Guidelines and a               
              volume of general interest to the field will result.  The budget               
              request is reasonable.  Support is recommended.
