Title       : Research Equipment Grants: An Advanced Thermal Analysis System for
               Macromolecular Coal Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1991  
File        : a9112209

Award Number: 9112209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas A. Peppas   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Caruthers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The transport of various penetrants in well characterized,                     
              thin sections of coal will be examined at high temperatures                    
              (250-400C) using an Advanced Thermal Analysis System in an                    
              effort to investigate the mechanisms of transport in the                       
              highly crosslinked network structure of coal and to elucidate                  
              the effort of solvents in altering its chemical structure.                     
                                                                                             
              Experimental Studies will be performed at high temperatures                    
              both above and below Tg using thin sections varying in                         
              thickness from 20 to 1000 m.  In addition we will synthesize                  
              highly crosslinked polymers by reaction of multifunctional                     
              methacrylates such as di', tri' and tetramethacrylates.  Such                  
              polymer systems are glassy with high glass transition                          
              temperatures and well defined crosslinked structures.  They                    
              will be swollen both by dynamic and equilibrium studies in the                 
              same penetrants as the coal networks.  Then, the results from                  
              these two investigations will be compared in order to                          
              elucidate the nature of the crosslinked coal network                           
              structure.  Mathematical models will be developed to describe                  
              the unusual transport of penetrants (solvents) in coal.  These                 
              results will have direct applicability in the elucidation of                   
              the mass transfer limitations in coal processing, the                          
              importance of solvents in altering chemical stability and the                  
              mechanisms of molecular dissociation.                                          
                                                                                             
              The requested equipment, Advanced Thermal Analysis System,                     
              will be used to analyze the macromolecular coal structure at                   
              high temperature.  The differential scanning calorimetry                       
              module will provide the glass transition temperature of the                    
              macromolecular coal network structure as a function of a                       
              penetrant content.  The thermomechanical and dynamic                           
              mechanical analysis components will elucidate the viscoelastic                 
              behavior of coal networks below,  around and above their glass                 
              transition temperature in the presence of penetrants.  The                     
              thermogravimetric analysis module will be used to obtain                       
              penetrant uptake data at high temperature and to decouple the                  
              diffusional and relaxational mechanisms.
