Title       : Grant for Exploratory Research: Laser NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1991     
File        : a9112770

Award Number: 9112770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren S. Warren wwarren@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Professor Warren is supported by a grant for exploratory                       
              research from the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to                   
              develop the methods that will take advantage of a newly                        
              observed phenomenon in which irradiation of samples with                       
              circularly polarized light causes frequency shifts in the NMR                  
              spectral lines of a chiral molecule.  Since each NMR nucleus,                  
              depending on its location relative to the chromophore, will                    
              experience a different sign and magnitude of frequency shift,                  
              this phenomenon has the potential of being able to distinguish                 
              among the protons located close to the chromophore in a                        
              congested spectrum.  It is possible to eliminate all signals                   
              from achiral molecules in the majority, in order to observe                    
              minority chiral species by taking a difference spectrum for                    
              left vs. right circularly polarized light.  Since many                         
              important molecules are optically active, this phenomenon could                
              have very powerful applications. There are possibilities of                    
              incorporating this technique into multidimensional NMR                         
              spectroscopy of complex systems, with the laser on in one                      
              dimension.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              This exploratory research project will make use of the just                    
              discovered effect on the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)                      
              signals of nuclei that are located close to the chromophore                    
              group of a molecule possessing handedness (optically active)                   
              upon irradiation with circularly polarized visible light using                 
              a laser.  It is possible to eliminate entirely all signals in                  
              the NMR spectrum from all other non-optically active molecules                 
              in the sample.  If successful, this technique could have a                     
              great impact on the NMR spectroscopy of samples containing                     
              biological molecules.
