Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics and Control of Complex Patterns in Disturbed Chemical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1993    
File        : a9112977

Award Number: 9112977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsueh-Chia Chang chang.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Chemical systems are characterized by very complicated                         
              dynamics. For example, in a commercial chemical reactor, one                   
              may face unknown kinetics, multi-phase flow, difficult mass                    
              and thermal transport and a complex coupling of all these                      
              mechanisms in an irregular domain.  Therefore, reaction                        
              engineers have studied idealized problems in the past, with                    
              the hope of obtaining useful rules of thumb.  Because the                      
              dynamics of chemical systems are often dominated by only a few                 
              "master" spatial structures, the construction of low                           
              dimensional, nonlinear dynamic models from purely empirical                    
              estimations is possible.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The PI plans to develop a spatial and temporal correlation                     
              technique for the identification and construction of canonical                 
              distributed evolution equations of the master modes.  Because                  
              such canonical equations contain only a few coefficients,                      
              general reactor dynamic theory will be developed using                         
              bifurcation theory to encompass and classify all dynamic                       
              phenomena in distributed parameter chemical reactors.                          
              Specifically, reactor responses like growing hot-spots,                        
              creeping reaction zones, spinning instabilities of propagating                 
              fronts, etc. will be connected to specific classes of                          
              distributed disturbances in the theory.  The growth and                        
              propagation of these instabilities will be mathematically                      
              delineated in a general reactor stability theory.  Preliminary                 
              results suggest that the methodology can also be used to                       
              successfully control reactor dynamics and patterns without an                  
              explicit model.  The technique permits model updating on-line,                 
              including adjustments on the order of the model, thus                          
              overcoming some robustness issues.  Parallel experimental                      
              studies will be  carried out to confirm the dynamic patterns                   
              predicted by the theory and to verify the resultant control                    
              schemes.//
