Title       : Theoretical Studies on Ionospheric Irregularities and Plasma Instabilities in
               the Magnetosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1994   
File        : a9112796

Award Number: 9112796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravindra N. Sudan sudan@1ps.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1521,9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   This grant supports work on several aspects of ionospheric                
              and magnetospheric physcis.  Turbulence models developed for the               
              equatorial ionosphere will be extended to the more complex                     
              geometry of the polar ionosphere.  The density gradient along the              
              polar magnetic field is likely to make the turbulence in the                   
              polar ionosphere more 3-dimensional rather than 2-dimensional                  
              considered earlier.  This is borne out by observations of the                  
              radar backscattered spectrum of the irregularities in the polar                
              ionosphere.     In addition, work will be done on the anomolous                
              heating of electrons reported in the polar ionosphere.  Because                
              of the high electric fields present in the polar ionosphere                    
              existing theories developed by the PI and others require  re-                  
              examination to include nonlinear effects.  A third project will                
              address renormalization group analysis of drift-wave and E x B                 
              turbulance.  A powerful tool employing renormalization group                   
              analysis (RNG) has been recently developed  for the study of                   
              fully developed turbulence.  One of the important applications                 
              is the derivation of exact algorithms for subgrid modelling for                
              numerical computation.  In any numerical computation of a set of               
              partial differenial equations for a problem on the geophysical                 
              scale length, the degrees of freedom are enormously large and                  
              freedom must be severely reduced for actual computation on even                
              the largest supercomputers.  The central issue is how to make                  
              such a reduction without losing the essential physics.  In                     
              connection with another project the PI has already developed a                 
              RNG based subgrid model for Alfven wave turbulence.  For                       
              ionospheric physics, the PI is developing RNG based subgrid                    
              models for drift-wave turbulence and E x B turbulence prevalent                
              in E and F regions.
