Title       : Strategic Information Acquisition in Models of Settlement and Litigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1991  
File        : a9112914

Award Number: 9112914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72142              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew F. Daughety 319-335-0857                            University of Iowa  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer F. Reinganum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              82        Economics                               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Since most lawsuits never go to trial, there is a growing                      
              literature on the economics of settlement as well as litigation.               
              In the basic economic models, information is asymmetrically                    
              distributed among the parties and the timing sequence of settlement            
              proposals is specified exogenously.  In contrast to such efforts,              
              new work by Daughety and Reinganum aims to take better account of              
              the realities of negotiation and settlement by allowing both                   
              parties to influence the availability of information and the timing            
              of proposals.  Using models derived from game theory, these                    
              investigators examine the conditions under which information will              
              be exchanged and the impact of that information on settlement.                 
                                                                                             
              The research specifically focuses on procedural and institutional              
              design issues relating to the use of information in pre-trial                  
              bargaining in civil cases.  The extended model allows for voluntary            
              disclosure of information, for uncertain liability and damages, and            
              for the strategic use of the discovery process.  Also, it permits              
              analyzing the effects of making pre-trial negotiations admissible              
              evidence in court, the effects of liability and damage rules on the            
              settlement process, and the effects on the settlement process of               
              countersuits by the defendant and multiple suits against the                   
              defendant.  As conceptualized, this modelling promises to explore              
              both a richer set of informational assumptions and a broader range             
              of procedural devices than heretofore exists on litigation and                 
              settlement.  In real-life conditions for settlement, exchange of               
              information and strategic decisions by both parties are subject to             
              a variety of discovery and liability rules.  This effort holds                 
              promise of capturing these dynamics and moving beyond the highly               
              stylized models of the pre-trial process.
