Title       : Life Course and Generational Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9112143

Award Number: 9112143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Anderson barba@psc.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Silver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Estonia is an uncommonly appropriate setting for study of                 
              attitude change, life course patterns, and inter-ethnic attitudes              
              and contact.  Since the nineteenth century, Estonia has been in the            
              forefront of social change in the Russian Empire (until 1920) and              
              in the Soviet Union (since 1940).  In the late nineteenth century,             
              the provinces that become Estonia and Latvia were the only parts               
              of the Russian Empire in which there was evidence of voluntary                 
              fertility control in rural areas.  Currently, the population of                
              Estonia has the highest educational level of any republic in the               
              Soviet Union.  Depending on the indicator used, either Estonia or              
              Latvia has the highest standard of living within the Soviet Union.             
              Gorbachev has used Estonia as a test case for some aspects of                  
              perestroika.  It could be argued that if perestroika could not work            
              in Estonia, it could not work anywhere.  Social changes in Estonia             
              have often foreshadowed changes elsewhere in the Soviet Union.                 
              Thus, examination of attitutde change in Estonia can throw light               
              on future developments elsewhere in the Soviet Union and also                  
              provide a useful comparison to changes now occurring in Eastern                
              Europe. In addition, Estonia has a long tradition of survey                    
              research by sociologists.  This project investigates continuity and            
              change in social and political life in contemporary Estonia through            
              analysis of a re-interview household survey jointly planned,                   
              designed, and directed by the U.S. and Estonian scholars involved              
              with this project and conducted in 1991.  The new survey updates               
              the content of the initially administered 1979 questionnaire and               
              adds items that will facilitate international comparisons and allow            
              testing of hypotheses from the current sociological and comparative            
              politics literatures.  Specifically, it focuses on life course                 
              issues relating education, marriage, childbearing, labor force                 
              participation and career advancement; and on intra-generational                
              change in social and political attitudes from the Brezhnev to the              
              Gorbachev period and the process of inter-generational transmission            
              of values and attitudes.                                                       
                                                                                             
                   This project will contribute to our understanding of the                  
              relations between education, childbearing, and labor force                     
              participation; political socialization; political participation;               
              and patterns of regime support and the bases of that support.  This            
              project will also contribute to the support and strengthening of               
              the infrastructure of sociological research in Estonia.
