Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Subdivision in Trimerotropis saxatilis
               (Acrididae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1991   
File        : a9112619

Award Number: 9112619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne S. Gerber  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study will investigate the mitochondrial variation of                
              Trimerotropis saxatilis.  This grasshopper is found in                         
              subdivided populations throughout its range.  Ecological                       
              experiments have determined that population size is smaller than               
              expected from previous genetic studies and suggest gene flow is                
              nonexistent.  Mitochondrial DNA is a non-recombining molecule, so              
              nested cladograms of mitochondrial haplotypes will be constructed              
              and tested for significant differences at a variety of levels.                 
              Indirect methods of estimating gene flow and the coalescent                    
              theory will be used to determine whether "historical events"                   
              (e.g. bottlenecks) have taken place in the past or whether gene                
              flow is ongoing, but rare.  Populations throughout the range of                
              T. saxatilis will be sampled in order to compare the genetic                   
              variation found at the extremes of the range to that in the                    
              center.                                                                        
                   Aside from questions pertaining specifically to T.                        
              saxatilis, this study has broader applications to the field of                 
              conservation genetics.  T. saxatilis populations have undergone                
              habitat fragmentation in the last few thousand years due to                    
              climate change.  The statistical methods developed and used in                 
              this project can be used to assess the genetic status of                       
              endangered species.
