Title       : Cloning of the TuMV Genome and Analysis of Its Movement Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9112587

Award Number: 9112587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Bryant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9136,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed planning activity will enable the applicant to prepare            
              a cDNA library of the Turnip mosaic virus and develop viral mutants            
              and probes as well as other reagents required for a longer term                
              research plan directed toward establishing the gene sequence, the              
              protein structure and the function of the turnip mosaic virus                  
              movement protein.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Turnip mosaic virus is a member of an agriculturally important and             
              widespread group of plant viruses.  These viruses occur worldwide              
              and infect all vegetable and ornamental plants of the mustard and              
              cress family.  These viruses are transmitted by many species of                
              aphid.  When viruses are inoculated onto host plants, either by a              
              feeding insect or by an abrasion, the initial infection is limited             
              to a single or few cells of the plant.  In order for the virus to              
              successfully infect the entire plant, movement from cell to cell               
              is necessary.  This movement involves the plasmodesmata, which are             
              membrane-lined pores extending through the cell walls and                      
              connecting adjacent plant cells.  A virus-encoded factor termed the            
              "movement protein" is also required.  The movement protein of                  
              another plant virus has been shown to increase the effective size              
              of the channels between cells, and this is thought to facilitate               
              movement of virus from cell to cell.  The movement protein of                  
              turnip mosaic virus probably has a similar function.  The wide-                
              ranging turnip mosaic virus and its movement protein are excellent             
              candidates for genetic manipulation for crop protection, but the               
              molecular biology of this system also has the potential for                    
              providing new information on the biology of plant-virus                        
              interactions, the structure and function of the plasmodesmata and              
              the molecular biology of plant virus replication.  The goal of the             
              proposed planning activity is to lay the experimental groundwork               
              for determining the structure of the gene encoding the turnip                  
              mosaic virus movement protein and ultimately studying its function.
