Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Specification of Dimensional Inspection
               Techniques for Cylindrical Features
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9112673

Award Number: 9112673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Office Automation Assistant             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26289              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Amine Lehtihet lvo@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjay B. Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this grant is to purchase a Geometry                     
              Profiling System (Roundness Tester) which will be dedicated to                 
              support research in engineering.  This piece of metrology equipment            
              will be used in a research project seeking to specify dimensional              
              inspection techniques and guidelines for the measurement of                    
              cylindrical features with Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMM's).               
              CMM's have the potential to provide a wealth of information on                 
              manufactured part geometry.  However, for the metrologist, this                
              technology brings a host of problems related to the methodology,               
              quality and interpretation of measurements.                                    
                   The goal of this research project is to develop a set of                  
              guidelines designed to assist CMM operators in selecting                       
              appropriate measurement strategies for the verification of                     
              cylindrical feature tolerances.  Within this project, the Roundness            
              Tester will be used to generate polar chart of form errors                     
              characteristics of common cylindrical feature machining processes.             
              The data will then be processed to extract dominant harmonic terms             
              of these errors in order to build stochastic error models for form             
              errors.  The stochastic models will then be used to generate data              
              for a simulation module designed to help make inferences on the                
              performance of various inspection strategies.
