Title       : Ranking and Rating Systems as Vehicles for Incorporating Beliefs and Values into
               Environmental Management Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1993  
File        : a9112302

Award Number: 9112302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88548              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Leschine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Informal observations suggest that, despite a growing body of                  
              environmental agency experience with ranking and rating systems,               
              their effectiveness in informing the decision processes they are               
              intended to support has been very mixed.  More specifically, the               
              important actors in policy debates in which these systems are                  
              used appear about as likely to see them as irrelevant or as                    
              impediments to decisionmaking as they are to see them as truly                 
              instrumental to the outcomes achieved.  This observation appears               
              to be especially relevant to situations with the potential to                  
              affect significantly the distribution of resources outside of the              
              managing agencies themselves, the primary focus of the proposed                
              research.  The research objectives are to explore the                          
              relationships between the real or perceived utility of                         
              ranking/rating systems in informing policy debates and an array                
              of factors associated with a) technical aspects of how such                    
              systems are constructed, b) problem setting, and c) the                        
              institutional environment in which such systems are utilized or                
              applied.  The research will explore how values incorporated in                 
              mathematical formulations of ranking/rating systems inluence                   
              policy oriented learning, as well as how factors such as                       
              discretion, social conflict, and credibility of experts do.                    
              Thus, the study can focus on hypotheses and variables that can                 
              help in understanding and explaining when learning occurs within               
              and between groups concerned about environmental policy.  The                  
              investigator will study two cases in depth -- the use of decision              
              systems in coastal wetlands protection and mitigation, and use of              
              such systems in the cleanup of hazardous waste sites in the                    
              coastal zone.  The research design uses review of documentation,               
              and phone and in-person interviews.   It will use expert                       
              elicitation techniques in studying the first case and, possibly,               
              content analysis in the second study.  Results from this work                  
              have both theoretical and practical interest.  The investigator                
              is well qualified; the research plan is good; the proposal is                  
              recommended for support with high priority.
