Title       : The Rise and Institutionalization of Geophysics in American Universities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1994   
File        : a9112304

Award Number: 9112304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Doel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In the 20th century, geophysics moved from industrial laboratories             
              and endowed research facilities into the university.  It was one               
              of the last major branches of physical science in the United States            
              to do so.  The transformation of geophysics into a university-based            
              discipline challenged geologists, geophysicists, and university                
              administrators who wrestled with the sharp conflict between solid              
              earth geophysicists and field geologists over proper methodological            
              approaches and the daunting diversity of geophysics' component                 
              fields.  Geophysicists sought to develop academic facilities in                
              part to approach complex problems such as the nature of the Earth's            
              core through interdisciplinary contacts readily available at                   
              universities.  Its leaders also sought to develop professional                 
              centers for training new recruits to the field.  By the 1960s, the             
              rapid growth of geophysics reshaped existing departments of                    
              geological sciences and reoriented the study of geological                     
              phenomena.  Yet because the history of geophysics remains largely              
              unexplored, little is known about these significant and far-                   
              reaching changes.  Given the importance of interdisciplinary                   
              research in modern science, the subject merits special attention.              
              Dr. Doel is concentrating on the period from the early 1920s                   
              through the 1960s, utilizing the growth of solid earth geophysics              
              to explore several broad themes including discipline formation, the            
              development of American research universities, and the influence               
              of patronage and institutional settings on the production of                   
              scientific knowledge.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This study is being undertaken at the Center for History of Physics            
              of the American Institute of Physics (AIP).  The AIP is playing an             
              important role in this project, including the preservation of                  
              historical "raw data" such as unpublished correspondence,                      
              institutional records, and tape-recorded recollections, using                  
              methods AIP has developed for similar projects in other fields.
