Title       : Research Equipment Grants: Analytical Equipment for Phase Equilibrium Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9112276

Award Number: 9112276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley I. Sandler sandler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Analytical equipment for phase equilibrium research on three                   
              specific projects will be acquired.  The first project has to                  
              do with the thermodynamic properties needed to make                            
              intelligent choices for industrial water pollution reduction,                  
              water remediation, and for estimating the fate, transport and                  
              bioaccumulation of chemicals.  The second project concerns the                 
              reduction of automobile air pollution emissions by the                         
              reformulation of gasolines, i.e., the production of "clean"                    
              gasoline.  The key blending components in such gasolines may                   
              be oxygenated hydrocarbons, such as methyl tertiary butyl                      
              ether (MTBE) as these compounds have been found to increase                    
              octane numbers of gasolines while reducing polluting emissions                 
              of the oxides of nitrogen and carbon monoxide.  Research                       
              currently underway, for which some equipment is needed, is on                  
              the phase behavior of the oxygenate + hydrocarbon systems.                     
                                                                                             
              The third project is aimed at developing a predictive design                   
              model for the purification of biomaterials using aqueous two-                  
              phase two-polymer systems.  The experimental portion of this                   
              research deals with dependence of the liquid-liquid phase                      
              splitting and the biomolecule partitioning on variables such                   
              as polymer molecular weight and molecular weight dispersion,                   
              temperature, pH, ionic strength buffer salts used, etc.
