Title       : Progesterone and the Neural Mechanisms of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9112777

Award Number: 9112777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. DeBold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Progesterone is an important steroid hormone for regulating many               
              aspects of physiology. It also has a number of effects on                      
              behavior. The research findings from Dr. DeBold's previous NSF                 
              grant showed that progesterone can affect behavior through direct              
              action on two specific sites in the brain, one in the forebrain                
              and one in the midbrain. The primary objective of the present                  
              award is to determine how progesterone acts at its target site in              
              the midbrain to influence behavior. Steroid hormones generally                 
              exert their effects by entering cells, binding with a receptor                 
              inside the cell, and then the steroid-receptor complex acts on                 
              specific sites on the chromosomes to change the proteins that the              
              cell synthesizes. This mechanism of action has been found in                   
              virtually every cell that responds to steroid hormones. In the                 
              midbrain, however, progesterone appears to have its effect                     
              through a different mechanism. A form of progesterone which                    
              cannot enter cells can be effective in the midbrain, although it               
              is inactive elsewhere. The effect of progesterone on                           
              behaviorally-relevant actions via neuronal membranes will be                   
              tested. The specific protein which mediates this action will be                
              determined. The proposed studies will demonstrate an alternative               
              mechanism of action for one class of steroid hormones. This work               
              will contribute to knowledge about how hormones act to regulate                
              behavior.
