Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: A Range Finder and Manipulator for
               Empirical Verification of Sensor-Based Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9112458

Award Number: 9112458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Office Automation Assistant             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Kriegman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Hager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research equipment effort is to support             
              a broad, aggressive research program in sensor-based robotics and              
              automation.  Purchase of a laser range scanner and a robot arm will            
              support several research projects, including:  sensor data fusion,             
              object recognition, sensor-based reasoning in controlled and                   
              uncontrolled environments, and combined manipulation and mobility.             
              This research methodology is firmly grounded in theory.  Results               
              from elimination theory provide a general basis for relating sensor            
              observations to geometric models of curved objects.  Constraint                
              solving systems are used to recover the parameters of these and                
              other parametric models.  Decision theory provides a framework for             
              developing task-directed sensor control and data processing                    
              algorithms.  The solution techniques advance two computational                 
              models, specifically symbolic equation rewriting and interval-based            
              constraint solving.  To validate these theoretical advances, they              
              must be tested under realistic conditions.  Range sensing,                     
              providing a direct source of real-world geometry, and a robot arm,             
              providing sensor mobility and object manipulation capabilities,                
              will be employed to support the endeavors.                                     
                   This equipment will provide the nucleus of a laboratory                   
              devoted to the construction of integrated automated systems with               
              the potential for a broad range of future applications.
