Title       : Dissertation Research: The Speciation Process in Orconectes, subgenus
               Procericambarus (Decapoda:Cambaridae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1993    
File        : a9112000

Award Number: 9112000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15041              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Crandall  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The factors that permit or, at the least, are correlated with             
              rapid speciation of a lineage when a founding member moves into a              
              new habitat are little understood.  Yet the phenomenon of adaptive             
              radiation is considered significant, and numerous cases have been              
              proposed over the years.  One basic issue at the start needs to be             
              established solidly, that is the phylogenetic relationships among              
              the species of the radiating assemblage.  A test case of precisely             
              this matter is under investigation with North American crayfish of             
              the genus Orconectes.  Approximately 24 species of the subgenus                
              Procericambarus inhabit a variety of streams, pools, and river                 
              margins at high and low elevations in middle North America, and                
              provide opportunities to study the pattern of adaptive speciation              
              into new ecological habitats.                                                  
                   Faculty sponsor Alan Templeton and graduate student Keith                 
              Crandall are emphasizing molecular data from mitochondrial and                 
              nuclear DNA to establish a phylogeny of this group of animals.                 
              Special attention is being given to issues of assessing the                    
              statistical significance of these molecule-based phylogenetic                  
              reconstructions, and such statistical tests are likely to have                 
              general applicability to studies by other researchers.  With a                 
              robust phylogenetic estimate in hand, the investigators can then               
              explore such questions as: are habitat divergence and geographic               
              isolation among species independently associated through                       
              evolutionary time or do they interact with speciation events?  Does            
              a transition into a very different habitat type lead to much                   
              subsequent speciation (the well-known adaptive zone hypothesis of              
              the late paleontologist G. G. Simpson)?  Can speciation occur                  
              within an isolated drainage only if it is associated with habitat              
              divergence?  As well, the investigators will study aspects of                  
              morphological change including overall size reduction in these                 
              crayfish against the background of their molecularly based                     
              phylogeny.
