Title       : Modeling Phonetic Structure Using Articulatory Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9112198

Award Number: 9112198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine P. Browman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis M. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
	      
	      New Haven, CT  06510    /   -

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The investigator will continue the development of a computational              
              model of phonetic structure.  The model is based on a particular               
              dynamical systems approach called task dynamics, which abstractly              
              characterizes speech gestures in terms of coordinated patterns of              
              articular movements during speech production.  The relative                    
              timing and parameterization of the gestures comprising a given                 
              utterance are specified by a gestural score that is generated by               
              the model's linguistic gestural component.  The focus of furhter               
              development is the interaction of gestural organization with the               
              global rhythimic structure of speech.  Model development will be               
              guided by collecting articulatory data showing the influence of                
              stress on patterns of gestural cohesion.  Also, the different                  
              types of gestural patterns that underlie reduced syllables will                
              be investigated, in data to be collected from speakers of                      
              English, French and Hebrew.  Because the model is based on such                
              articulatory evidence, it particularly appropriate as a phonetic               
              framework for use with recent non-linear phonologies that                      
              emphasize the phonological relevance of articulatory features.                 
              Futher, because the model is couched within a dynamical systems                
              approach, it provides a concise and principled account of much                 
              variation in phonetic structures in terms of spatial and temporal              
              overlap among speech gestures.
