Title       : Dissertation Research: A Comparative Study of Skull Development in the
               Thamnophiine Snakes (Serpentes: Colubridae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1991   
File        : a9112100

Award Number: 9112100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Velhagen  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A central question in modern biology is the evolution of                  
              morphological diversity.  How does form in one species, where it               
              presumably fits the creature to life in its habitat, change to a               
              different form in descendant species, where each again must be                 
              fitted to life in its environment?  One approach used to address               
              this problem is to determine how changes in the morphological                  
              development of embryos have contributed to evolutionary changes in             
              the form or structure of adult organisms.  This developmental                  
              approach increasingly is being emphasized by morphologists, in                 
              conjunction with molecular data that provide a phylogenetic                    
              framework for the group of organisms under study.  The skulls of               
              snakes are highly complex in comparison with most other                        
              vertebrates; their structure is closely related to such functions              
              as feeding and in supporting and protecting the brain and sense                
              organs; but changes in skull morphology among snake species are                
              not well understood, either developmentally or evolutionarily.                 
                   Faculty advisers Virginia Roth and Alan Savitsky will direct              
              graduate student William Velhagen in a study of the pattern and                
              timing of development of the cranial bones of thamnophiine snakes,             
              the group that includes the gartersnakes and watersnakes.  Although            
              closely related genealogically, the thamnophiines are diverse in               
              their morphology and habits: some are large and eat fish and                   
              amphibians; some are small and feed only on soft-bodied                        
              invertebrates like earthworms; still others feed exclusively on                
              crayfish.  In analyzing the embryonic development of the                       
              thamnophiine skull within the context of the evolutionary history              
              of the group (derived from independent molecular data) and the                 
              known feeding adaptations of the species, insight will be gained               
              about the direction and extent of developmental change in closely              
              related species.  The study will contribute to the general issue               
              of whether, and to what degree, particular embryonic developmental             
              events constrain or facilitate change in adult form.
