Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis and Parameter Estimation of Models with Internal
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9112821

Award Number: 9112821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70058              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Cooke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stavros N. Busenberg  (Principal Investigator current)
              Courtney S. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,9251,
Abstract    :
                   The dynamics of age-structured epidemic and population                    
              problems lead to systems of nonlinear hyperbolic equations that                
              can be studied by the use of semigroup theory.  Explicit                       
              threshold criteria, the asymptotic behavior of the solutions, and              
              the general forms of the nonlinear force of infection terms have               
              been obtained in certain cases, and these results will be used as              
              the basis for a systematic development of methods for estimating               
              the pertinent model parameters using available data on specific                
              diseases.  A second area of biomathematical research that will be              
              pursued involves the study of the triggering of DNA synthesis in               
              eucaryotic cells through the use of compartmental                              
              reaction-diffusion models.  These models lead to                               
              coupled semi-linear parabolic equations with time delays that are              
              due to transcription and translation delays and the movement of                
              biochemicals in the cell.  The main methods of analysis here                   
              involve the development and use of local and global bifurcation                
              results for such reaction-diffusion equations.                                 
              Parameter identification and estimation on the basis of available              
              data will be addressed in these models also.                                   
                   This research is concerned with two mathematical problems                 
              with biological applications.  The first part of this research                 
              will develop and  study mathematical models that help predict the              
              course of infections and which form the basis for making                       
              decisions on how to best use available resources in order to                   
              control the spread of diseases.  The age structure of the                      
              affected population is very important in determining the course                
              and effects of most diseases.  Models will be developed and                    
              studied that account for the age distribution of the population                
              and that lead to methods for predicting the course of the disease              
              and the effects of proposed control strategies.  The results will              
              be applied to the study of optimal control strategies for                      
              specific diseases.   The second part of this research will seek                
              to shed light on the mechanism that triggers animal cells to                   
              start replicating their genetic material and reproducing.  This                
              is a fundamental question that has implications in the                         
              understanding of growth and development of embryos as well as in               
              disorders such as cancer that result from abnormal cell                        
              proliferation.  The mathematical models to be studied are                      
              designed to allow a detailed analysis of this crucial DNA                      
              synthesis triggering mechanism.
