Title       : Conservation and Preservation of Natural Science Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9112855

Award Number: 9112855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180586             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Donald Duckworth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn L. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh H. Genoways  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Inst Conserv Cul Prop
	      3299 K St NW
	      Washington, DC  200074415    202/625-1495

NSF Program : 1129      LONG-TERM PROJCTS IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1125,
Abstract    :
                   The National Institute for Conservation (NIC) is an                       
              organization devoted to the preservation of historical objects for             
              research.  The Institute's traditional focus has been on objects               
              in the arts, humanities, ethnography, archeology, and anthropology,            
              but the organization's vision has broadened recently to include                
              natural history specimens.  Dr. Donald Duckworth, President of the             
              Bernice P. Bishop Museum of Natural History, proposes an initiative            
              aimed at preserving natural history collections curated in museums             
              and herbaria.  NIC would conduct a series of meetings between                  
              materials scientists, conservators, and museum curators to better              
              define preservation problems and materials research needed to                  
              protect museum and herbarium specimens.  These meetings would                  
              result in a series of reports outlining recommendations for                    
              specimen care, materials research, and training of museum                      
              professionals.                                                                 
                   Museum and herbarium specimens are unique objects that record             
              the biological diversity on earth.  As natural habitats shrink and             
              species become extinct, these specimens become irreplaceable                   
              objects of study.  Future generations of biological research will              
              rely on the preservation of these specimens, and the proposed                  
              workshop activities will set in motion a long-term planning                    
              process.  These planning activities will formulate recommendations             
              and priorities, and will greatly advance the research community's              
              ability to preserve these resources.
