Title       : Dissertation Research: Studies of Diversification in Anolis marmoratus Lizards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1991  
File        : a9112602

Award Number: 9112602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10307              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Wake wakelab@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Schneider  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Lizards of the genus Anolis are the most common and diverse               
              terrestrial vertebrates in the Caribbean.  Despite extensive                   
              knowledge about their ecology, behavior, and geographical                      
              distributions, little is known about levels of genetic variability             
              within and between populations of the many species, and of how                 
              these levels affect processes of speciation.  The morphologically              
              diverse species Anolis marmoratus, with 12 named subspecies in the             
              Guadeloupean archipelago of the Lesser Antilles, provides a test               
              case for exploring the relationship between mating systems, levels             
              of genetic variability, and speciation involving morphological                 
              change.  Variation in this species is particularly conspicuous in              
              color and pattern of adult males; characters that, along with                  
              signalling behavior, are important in social competition and mate              
              recognition.  Variation in these characters, leading to what is                
              called assortative (that is, preferential) mating, will promote the            
              accumulation of genetic differences among populations, a postulated            
              first step leading to speciation (complete reproductive isolation).            
                   Faculty advisers David Wake and Harry Greene will supervise               
              graduate student Christopher Schneider in a study of genetic,                  
              behavioral, and morphological variation in this group of anolis                
              lizards.  Emphasis is placed on nucleotide sequencing of select                
              mitochondrial genes to acquire fine-scale evidence of variation                
              and of gene flow between populations, within islands and between               
              islands.  The gene data will allow several tests of hypotheses                 
              concerning how male color patterns and display behaviors affect                
              mating success, and thereby help structure local populations                   
              genetically.  In turn, knowledge about the genetic structure of                
              local populations will help test ideas about speciation processes              
              in this diverse group of lizards.
