Title       : Grant for Exploratory Research: Flow and Stopped-Flow NMR Spectroscopy of
               Reactions of Organotransition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1991      
File        : a9112802

Award Number: 9112802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis Messerle lou-messerle@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to establish the feasibility of                    
              using flow and stopped-flow NMR spectroscopy to study rapid                    
              (less than one second half-life) organometallic reactions. The                 
              combination of NMR spectroscopy, the most powerful method for                  
              characterizing organometallic species in solution, with rapid                  
              mixing techniques may provide a valuable probe of the                          
              structures and kinetics of important, previously unobservable                  
              intermediates in element-H activation, olefin insertion, and                   
              other important organometallic reactions.  Three specific                      
              systems from ongoing research that will be studied are: 1) E-H                 
              activation (E = C, B, H) reactions of dinuclear tantalum                       
              complexes, 2) CO and RNC insertion reactions of                                
              cyclopentadienyl tantalum complexes, and 3) olefin and                         
              acetylene insertion reactions of electrophilic zirconium                       
              complexes.  The results may yield new mechanistic insights to                  
              these specific reactions, and will provide the basis for more                  
              general application of these NMR techniques in organometallic                  
              chemistry.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              With this Grant for Exploratory Research from the Inorganic,                   
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry                      
              Division, Dr. Louis Messerle and Dr. Richard F. Jordan of the                  
              University of Iowa will endeavor to establish the feasibility                  
              of using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy for the                 
              study of rapid organometallic reactions that are complete                      
              within a few seconds.  This technique should enable the                        
              observation of unstable reaction intermediates and                             
              shouldsubstantially extend our understanding of the mechanisms                 
              of these important reactions.
