Title       : Stochastic Trees: Modeling and Preference Applications to Medical Decision
               Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9112854

Award Number: 9112854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104388             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon B. Hazen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rowland W. Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal introduces several new decision analysis techniques for          
              stochastic models (that is, probabilistic models in which uncertainty          
              unfolds over time).  These techniques cam fruitfully be applied to             
              medical decisions in which tradeoffs must be made between immediate and        
              temporally distant risks.  Two of these techniques, stochastic trees and       
              stochastic factoring, are model display approaches that have significant       
              advantages over current technique in medical decision modelling with           
              regard to:                                                                     
                 (a) formulation of the stochastic model by the analyst,                     
                 (b) presentation and display of the stochastic model to the medical         
              practitioner, and                                                              
                 (c) computational friendliness.                                             
              Like more familiar decision trees, stochastic trees may be rolled back         
              to determine the optimal treatment decision.  These techniques should          
              make stochastic modelling more understandable for the decision analyst         
              and the medical practitioner.  The third technique, risk-sensitive             
              stochastic trees, draws on newly developed results from preference             
              theory and has significant advantages over other risk-preference models        
              with regard to ease in modelling a patient's temporal risk-taking              
              preferences.  Using these techniques, the impact of risk-averse                
              preferences on medical treatment will be examined, and the utility of          
              these methods will be demonstrated with respect to the long-term               
              treatment of mild gout and decisions to undergo total hip replacement.
