Title       : Development of New Point Sources for IONS and Electrons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9112550

Award Number: 9112550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149300             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Spence spence@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Scheinfein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is for the construction of two UHV test chambers which              
              will be used for the development of a new type of highly coherent              
              electron or ion source.  The proposed instruments will combine the             
              functions of a field-ion microscope, a field-emission microscope,              
              and a low voltage field-emission electron gun.  The field-ion                  
              microscope images will be used to characterize and form single-atom            
              electron or ion emitting regions.  The field-emission mode will be             
              used for brightness measurements, and the tips will be evaluated               
              for operation in a field emission gun.  The main interest is the               
              development and application of these sources for use in field-                 
              emission electron beam instruments for microanalysis and materials             
              characterization.  Applications of the new sources to low voltage              
              reflection and transmission electron holography, low voltage                   
              scanning electron microscopy, electron and proton interferometry               
              and electron spectroscopy.  Quantum-mechanical and classical                   
              calculations of the emission properties accompany this research                
              program.  The ultimate interest is in the application of new                   
              electron and ion sources to the new electron-microscopy and                    
              microanalysis techniques under development at CHREM, which has                 
              about 60 users from the ASU community.                                         
                                                                                             
              One test chamber will be used for forming and evaluating single-               
              atom tips, measuring the tip properties, such as coherence and                 
              brightness, will have FIM/FEG/FEM capability, and will be bakable              
              to 200 C.  The second chamber will have nearly the same                        
              configuration, with the main application being implementation of               
              the single-atom sources into a simple low-voltage electron                     
              microscope column.
