Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution and Phylogeny of Hemidactyliine Salamanders:
               Molecular Tests of Morphological Hypotheses, and Relationships of Genome Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1991  
File        : a9112405

Award Number: 9112405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul T. Chippindale  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Inferences of evolutionary relationships in most groups of                
              organisms have traditionally been based on morphological                       
              characters. In recent years, however, the use of molecular data                
              has become widespread in systematics. Although there is usually                
              close agreement between morphology-based and molecule-based                    
              inferences about phylogeny, there are special cases in which rates             
              of evolution in the two components differ greatly. This appears to             
              hold for salamanders of the tribe Hemidactyliini in the family                 
              Plethodontidae, in which morphological characters alone do not                 
              appear to provide a reliable estimate of phylogeny. Knowledge of               
              patterns of genetic divergence in this group (which may occur in               
              the absence of morphological differentiation) also has implications            
              for the conservation of these salamanders and their habitat,                   
              especially because some of the species involved are threatened by              
              habitat destruction.                                                           
                   Under the guidance of faculty advisor David Hillis, graduate              
              student Paul Chippindale will use several molecular systematic                 
              techniques to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among these               
              salamander species. The techniques include protein electrophoresis,            
              restriction enzyme analysis of nuclear ribosomal and mitochondrial             
              DNA, and sequencing of mitochondrial genes. Special emphasis is                
              placed on the surface and cave-dwelling central Texas salamanders              
              of the genera Eurycea and Typhlomolge, with a diversity of                     
              morphologies and of life histories.The research will determine                 
              whether parallel changes in morphology and in life history                     
              characterize this group, and it will also test hypotheses about the            
              evolutionary significance of changes in genome size.
