Title       : Scanning Tunneling Microscopy for the Study of Heterogeneous Electron Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1991      
File        : a9112187

Award Number: 9112187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17136              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindra Alice Widrig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The study of electron transfer reactions both in solution and                  
              at electrode surfaces is currently an area of vigorous                         
              research.  At the present, however, there exist a number of                    
              experimental constraints that hinder the study of many aspects                 
              of heterogenous electron transfer.  A goal of the project of                   
              Dr. Widrig is the development of a general technique for the                   
              examination of electrode reactions which will overcome many of                 
              these current limitations.  In her experimental approach, the                  
              technology that recently has been refined in the realization of                
              the scanning tunneling microscope will be applied to the                       
              investigation of the redox chemistry of individual molecules.                  
              This will be accomplished by using the tip of the scanning                     
              tunneling microscope and a planar electrode substrate as the                   
              two working electrodes of a bipotentiostat.  The substrate                     
              electrode will be derivatized with an organized, monomolecular                 
              layer containing a reversible redox reagent.  As the tip is                    
              positioned within Angstroms above the substrate surface,                       
              voltages suitable for oxidation and reduction of the                           
              immobilized species will be applied to the tip and substrate                   
              electrodes, respectively.  As the immobilized molecule over                    
              which the tip is positioned is continually oxidized and                        
              reduced, the magnitude of the resulting current will be                        
              dependent on the rate constant for heterogeneous electron                      
              transfer to that species.  Preliminary calculations indicate                   
              that measureable currents will be obtained for redox couples                   
              whose standard rate constants are greater than 2 cm/s.                         
              Successful implementation of this technique will permit the                    
              measurement of formerly indeterminable rate constants for                      
              "fast" electrode reactions and allow an unprecedented                          
              assessment of the roles of the electrode-reactant separation,                  
              orientation, and environment in heterogeneous electron                         
              transfer.  Preliminary work includes the preparation and                       
              characterization of the electroactive monolayer, the                           
              development of tip insulation procedures, and modeling of                      
              heterogeneous electron transfer through individual molecules.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior                   
              independent Federal research support to develop a competitive                  
              research project.  This project involves the use of technology                 
              for the precise placement of electrodes in the scanning                        
              tunneling microscope for precision electrolysis of an organized                
              monomolecular layer.  This will permit the measurement of the                  
              rates of electron transfer previously not measurable.
