Title       : Research Equipment Awards: Integrated Thermal Analysis System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1991     
File        : a9112071

Award Number: 9112071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald D. Holder holder@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Tierney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An integrated thermal analysis system which will be dedicated                  
              to support research in Chemical Engineering will be purchased.                 
              The use of an integrated thermal analysis system will                          
              immediately support several research projects, including:                      
                                                                                             
              Heat Capacities of Gas Hydrates:  (G.D. Holder, PI) Heat                       
              capacities of methane hydrates.                                                
                                                                                             
              Probe Molecule Studies:  (D. Blackmond and R. Oukaci, PIs)                     
              Effect of probe molecules on the activation energy of the CO                   
              hydrogenation reaction over various catalysts.                                 
                                                                                             
              Synthesis of Octane Enhancers During Slurry Phase Fischer-                     
              Tropsch:  (J. Goodwin, PI) Characterization and screening of                   
              catalysts for the synthesis of methyl tertiary butyl ether                     
              (MTBE) which is used as an octane enhancer in fuels.                           
                                                                                             
              Thermal Analysis of Catalysts:  (J. Tierney and I. Wender,                     
              PIs) Determination of thermal stability of sulfated transition                 
              metal oxides used as catalysts for hydrocracking and                           
              hydroisomerization of paraffins and for direct coal                            
              liquefaction.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Re-Design of Expanded Polystyrene to Improve Recyclability and                 
              Allow Use of CO2 as a Blowing Agent:  (E.J. Beckman, PI)                       
              Examination of CO2/amine reactivity, polymerization and                        
              characterization of copolymers, and the physical and thermal                   
              properties of the foamable copolymers.                                         
                                                                                             
              Thermal Analysis of Coal Liquefaction Reactions:  (G.D.                        
              Holder, PI) Temperature measurement at which endo/exotherms                    
              occur in coal liquefaction reactions under liquefaction                        
              conditions.
