Title       : Dissertation Research: Resource Processing in Pitcher Plant Faunas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1991   
File        : a9112669

Award Number: 9112669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Heard  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                     Interactions arising from effects on resource quality have               
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              not received as much attention as those interactions (for                      
              example, exploitative competition) resulting from effects on                   
              resource quantity.  When two species use the same resource in                  
              different physical/chemical states, and the transformation of the              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              resource between states is influenced by one of the species, this              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              relationship is referred to as a "processing chain."  The                      
              influence of one species in a processing chain may be commensal                
                                                                                             
              or amensal, depending on the relative rates of processing in its               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              presence or absence.                                                           
                     Processing chains are widespread in nature, especially                  
              among detritivores, yet they have garnered little attention.                   
              Such a system is the subject of this research: the detritivorous-              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              insect larvae inhabiting pitchers of the purple pitcher plant                  
                                                                                             
              (Sarrecenia purpurea), native to many bogs across eastern North                
                                                                                             
              America.  Three species feed on captured prey items in different               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              states of decomposition: a sarcophagid fly, a midge, and a                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              mosquito.  Patch-level consequences of processing chain                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              interactions, the possible sensitivity of patch selection                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              (oviposition) to these interactions, and the implications for                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              coexistence and success of species at a supra-patch or regional                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              scale (across pitchers within a bog) will be studied.  Because                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              processing chains are common in nature, results from this study                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              in Newfoundland, Canada, will have pertinence for a wide array of              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              other organisms.
