Title       : Ecological Awareness and Risk Perception in Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1994      
File        : a9112030

Award Number: 9112030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114755             (Estimated)
Investigator: Conrad P. Kottak ckottak@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              With the growth of concern about global environmental change,                  
              many recognize the importance of understanding how the public                  
              comes to perceive threats to the environment and biodiversity and              
              to be ready to act upon their perception.  This understanding is               
              valuable to countries grappling with environmental issues, to                  
              policy makers seeking to avoid unproductive conflicts, and to                  
              researchers dealing with questions about the environment and                   
              technological risk.  This proposal is timely both in addressing a              
              current issue of prime importance and in undertaking                           
              investigation of attitudes toward the environment and risk in a                
              developing country at a critical moment when environmental                     
              awareness is changing.  A highly qualified investigator with                   
              extensive experience in Brazil will collaborate with Brazilian                 
              scientists and technicians in studying cultural values and social              
              attitudes toward environmental risk at several contrasting sites.              
              By interviewing key informants and by conducting survey research,              
              the investigator and his Brazilian associates will gather data on              
              emerging ecological awareness.  This data should be of use in                  
              Brazil and elsewhere for coping with environmental issues.  It                 
              should also contribute to an ongoing international discussion                  
              about how social and cultural attitudes shape judgments about                  
              environmental risk.  In addition, this project will support the                
              training of researchers and the research infrastructure in a                   
              developing country and contribute to efforts toward preserving                 
              biodiversity.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a reasonable request for support to enable a                  
              leading scholar and associates to address the problem of                       
              environmental awareness and the readiness to act on that                       
              awareness.  The principal investigator and project associates are              
              well qualified; institutional support is very good; the research               
              plan is well conceived; and the findings will be valuable to lay               
              people, policy makers, and research specialists in a number of                 
              fields.  Support is highly recommended.
