Title       : Displacement Chromatography of Proteins: Identification of Critical Displacer
               Properties and Development of Novel Nontoxic Displacers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1991    
File        : a9112481

Award Number: 9112481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Cramer crames@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1491,
Abstract    :
              The project studies displacement chromatography and polymer                    
              synthesis to investigate the effect of critical displacer                      
              properties using well defined polymeric displacer compounds.                   
              A variety of novel polymeric displacers will be synthesized                    
              for ion exchange, hydrophobic interaction, and metal                           
              affinity chromatographic systems.  The developed displacers                    
              will be purified and subjected to appropriate analytical                       
              chemical techniques to establish their structure and purity.                   
              Chromatographic behavior of these compounds will be                            
              evaluated using elution chromatography and adsorption                          
              isotherms will be determined by frontal chromatography.                        
              Model protein feed mixtures exhibiting a spectrum of                           
              properties will be established for these adsorbent systems.                    
              The ability of polymeric displacers of various molecular                       
              weights, functional group densities, and conformations to                      
              act as protein displacers in these systems will be examined,                   
              and the relative importance of these properties will be                        
              established.  The resulting data on displacer properties                       
              will be used to identify combinations of displacer                             
              physicochemical properties which are required for efficient                    
              displacement of biopolymers and rapid removal of the                           
              displacers for regeneration of the stationary phase                            
              materials.  This fundamental research will provide basic                       
              insight into the displacement phenomenon at the molecular                      
              level and will establish guidelines for the design and                         
              synthesis of appropriate displacers for future bioseparation                   
              problems.
