Title       : RUI: Tropical Forest Resource Management Along Deltaic Estuaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1991 
File        : a9112598

Award Number: 9112598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Hiraoka mhiraoka@desupernet.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                 Concerns about global warming and the loss of biological diversity          
              have focused attention on development processes in tropical forests,           
              which traditionally have been the locations of a large share of the            
              world's biomass and of many of its plant and animal species.  Recent           
              research by geographers, anthropologists, and other social and natural         
              scientists has helped improve understandings of the processes by which         
              humans and natural systems interact with each other.  Of special               
              interest have been the impacts of different types of economic activities       
              and land-use practices on forests.  This project will examine the              
              economic potentials and ecological viability of traditional farm- and          
              forest-management practices of indigenous residents along the estuary of       
              the Amazon River west of Belem in Brazil.  The spatial structure of            
              different management practices will be mapped using data from satellite        
              images, and field observations will be used to measure the sizes and           
              patterns of tracts worked by individual households.  Additional                
              information about the economics of indigenous management practices will        
              be gathered through participant observation, questionnaire responses,          
              interviews with household members, and data gathered by local                  
              informants.                                                                    
                 This project will contribute to greater knowledge about the ways that       
              agricultural changes affect traditional indigenous resource-management         
              and land-use practices in the lower Amazon basin and in other similar          
              locales.  In addition to enhancing understandings of interactions among        
              human and natural systems, the conclusions of this project also should         
              provide considerable information of use to managers trying to determine        
              what forms of tropical forest development will improve the economic            
              standing of local residents without harming the natural environment.
