Title       : Dissertation Research: Variation in a Mutualism: The Phenology and Reproductive
               Biology of Dioecious Figs in Seasonal Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1991   
File        : a9112319

Award Number: 9112319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6597               (Estimated)
Investigator: Aviva H. Patel  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                     Knowledge of how spatial and temporal environmental                     
              variation affects an ecological mutualism could reveal clues                   
              about mechanisms for the persistence and evolutionary origins of               
              the mutualism.  This study will focus on seasonal, site, and                   
              gender variation in the phenology of two dioecious fig species                 
              (Ficus, of which there are more than 500 altogether) and their                 
              pollinator wasps (including Ceratosolen marchali and Kradibia                  
              gestroi).  The dioecious fig - fig wasp mutualism is of special                
              interest because: 1) its persistence requires that wasps                       
              regularly enter and pollinate female fig flowers in which the                  
              wasps die, leaving no offspring, and 2) according to ideas                     
              relating seasonality to the evolution of dioecy, maintenance of                
              the obligate pollinators requires that male trees flower at times              
              when their success as pollen donors to female trees is small.                  
              How this mutualism persists seems therefore rather problematical.              
              This study will investigate predictions formulated from studies                
              of monoecious figs and a dioecious fig (Ficus carica), an                      
              ecological outlier exhibiting unusual phenology.  Detailed                     
              observations of known (mapped) individual branches, together with              
              hand pollinations, self-pollination, and choice experiments will               
              facilitate tests of hypotheses regarding the persistence of this               
              mutualism and various possible outcomes for each of the                        
              participating components.                                                      
                    Studies will be conducted in protected deciduous and                     
              evergreen forests of Karnataka State, India. It may be that these              
              figs, like many others, reign as keystone species in the forests               
              in which they occur, heavily influencing the occurrence/absence                
              of other particular plant or animal species within the same                    
              habitats.
