Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Heavy Particle IonizingCollision Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9112815

Award Number: 9112815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Olson olson@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Schulz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1241,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Ronald E. Olson, Michael Schulz and two                    
              graduate students of the University of Missouri-Rolla to collaborate           
              in atomic physics research with Horst Schmidt-Boecking and his                 
              large research group at the Institute for Nuclear Physics of the               
              University of Frankfurt, Germany.  These scientists are working                
              with a common goal of understanding ionizing collision systems.                
              However, the Frankfurt and Rolla research groups have different                
              theoretical and experimental strengths, and each laboratory                    
              possesses unique equipment that measures complementary and                     
              overlapping collision products.  Their efforts will be substantially           
              enhanced by sharing their expertise and cooperating in parallel                
              coordinated efforts to achieve the first complete momentum                     
              distribution of products in singly ionizing collisions between                 
              protons and a Helium target.  These data will provide a benchmark              
              for theoretical models at the most fundamental level, and thereby              
              improve understanding of ionizing collisions.  As a longer-term                
              goal, the collaborating scientists hope to combine their unique                
              equipment into one experiment.  This will enable them to study                 
              more complex processes such as multiple ionizations.                           
                                                                                             
              The microscopic details of ionization induced by fast collisions of            
              ions with atoms are poorly understood, even after decades of study.            
              The problem arises because of the difficulty of formulating                    
              theoretical methods to handle the "n-body" collision dynamics and              
              the lack of detailed experimental data to test critically the                  
              theoretical models at the most basic level.   While the current level          
              of research, such as that proposed here, is very fundamental, it is a          
              necessary prerequisite to models that will have applications in many           
              other fields, such as understanding the microscopic details of cell            
              damage in heavy-particle cancer radiotherapy, or cosmic ray                    
              damage to microprocessors in satellite based computers.
