Title       : Dynamic Light Scattering Investigations of Segmental Motion and Viscoelasticity
               in Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1996     
File        : a9112993

Award Number: 9112993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. H. Wang chwang@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 0000,1773,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study of the dynamics of local segmental motion in polymers               
              will include polymer solutions in semi-dilute and concentrated                 
              regions and in miscible polymer blends.  The techniques to be used             
              are various types of dynamic light scattering, including photon                
              correlation spectroscopy, Brillouin scattering and holographic                 
              grating relaxation.  Properties such as dynamic longitudinal and               
              shear compliances, dynamic longitudinal and shear moduli, hyper-               
              sonic velocity and attenuation coefficient, mutual and tracer                  
              diffusion coefficients of labeled chains in the semi-dilute or/and             
              concentrated polymer solutions will be investigated.  The spectrum             
              will be measured as a function of polymer molecular weight,                    
              concentration, scattering wavevector, and solvent qualities.                   
              Efforts will be made to relate the dynamic light scattering to the             
              mechanical relaxation spectrum of the polymer solution.  Experi-               
              mental verification of theoretical predictions is part of this                 
              research.  The kinetics and thermodynamics interaction in miscible             
              polymer blends will also be investigated by the static and dynamic             
              light scattering intensity measurements.  By combining the results             
              of mutual and self-diffusion coefficients of the polymer blend,                
              the role of cross velocity correlations between segments of the                
              same chain and between neighboring chains will be clarified.  The              
              mutual diffusion coefficient will be measured by using photon                  
              correlation spectroscopy, the self diffusion coefficient by pulsed             
              field gradient NM or by the holographic grating relaxation tech-               
              nique whenever appropriate.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Understanding of the thermodynamic interactions and the dynamics of            
              local segmental motion is vital to various application of polymers             
              in diverse areas, such as coatings, electronics, optics, and                   
              structural materials.
