Title       : Optical Phenomena in Materials (Physics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9350114

Award Number: 9350114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Bennett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Five Colleges Inc
	      97 Sprint Street
	      Amherst, MA  010022324    /   -

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1245,9225,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Bennett's research project involves two distinct area:                     
              nonlinear optics in optical fibers and optical properties of thin              
              polymer films.  In the first project, the nature of fibers which               
              have been conditioned to produce second harmonic generation (SHG)              
              will be investigated.  In particular, she will obtain a spatially-             
              resolved map of the built-in electric field along the length of                
              fibers conditioned for SHG.  It is expected that the effects of                
              surface charges will have to be very carefully controlled and                  
              analyzed.  The second project involves developing interferometric              
              techniques to measure thermally-induced changes in thin polymer                
              films, both in real time and in situ.  Specifically, Dr. Bennett               
              will distinguish between the separate contributions of thermal                 
              expansion and refractive index change to the variation in optical              
              thickness of thin films as the temperature and/or relative humidity            
              in their environment changes.  Dr. Bennett has had extensive                   
              experience in the measurement of surface characteristics and thin              
              film properties.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:                        
              interacting with women in physics at the five colleges in western              
              Massachusetts by teaching a Physics Laboratory at Mount Holyoke                
              College, teaching a short course on surface characterization during            
              the winter quarter, and lecturing at all five colleges on topics of            
              interest to students in Dr. Bennett's areas of expertise.  She also            
              plans to update the experiments in the optics laboratory and                   
              develop new experiments for an advanced optics laboratory at Mount             
              Holyoke College.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry government, and academic institutions.  By                
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
