Title       : Modeling the Interaction Between Speech and Gesture (Linguistics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9350179

Award Number: 9350179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Justine M. Cassell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1311,9225,
Abstract    :
              The relationship between speech and gesture in narrative discourse             
              will be investigated by animating the interaction between the two              
              media on a three-dimensional interactive animated model -- a                   
              graphic figure on a computer screen that would ultimately be able              
              to "communicate" with a listener, gesturing appropriately while                
              producing speech.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Research demonstrates that gesture is intimately linked to speech              
              both in the production and the comprehension of narrative                      
              discourse.  This interaction exists at many different levels of                
              organization.  The relationship between speech and gesture can be              
              specified at the level of the timing of gestures with respect to               
              the prosodic contour of a clause.  It can be specified at the level            
              of semantic and pragmatic descriptions of an utterance, and at the             
              level of narrative structure with respect to the types of gestures             
              found at different points in a narrative.                                      
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  meetings              
              once every two weeks, open to graduate students and junior faculty,            
              to discuss particular problems in accomplishing work and                       
              constructing a supportive environment for achieving professional               
              goals; hour-long meetings the alternate weeks of the month with                
              undergraduate students, to discuss similar topics; sponsorship of              
              two visiting cognitive scientists per semester, where these will be            
              women who have made 'non-standard' career choices and/or have                  
              written about professional issues facing women in academia; co-                
              teaching a seminar in Computational Linguistics with Ellen Prince              
              on discourse processing and gesture.  All of the parts will be                 
              carried out under the aegis of the Computer Science Department, but            
              will be open to other members of the Cognitive Science community at            
              the University of Pennsylvania.                                                
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
