Title       : Metastable Effects in a-Si:H Thin Film Transistors (Engineering)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9350110

Award Number: 9350110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185182             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatiana Globus tg9a@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1456,9102,9225,
Abstract    :
              This project will achieve a quantitative understanding and                     
              description of instabilities of the current-voltage characteristics            
              of amorphous silicon Thin Film Transistors (a-Si TFTs), and will               
              link these phenomena with the deep defect states in the a-Si                   
              bandgap.  Studies of current-voltage characteristics of TFTs in the            
              subthreshold regime (at gate voltages substantially smaller than               
              threshold) and, especially, studies of the leakage current can be              
              very useful for understanding degradation phenomena.  Dr. Globus               
              will analyze the results of the time and temperature dependence                
              measurements of current-voltage characteristics under the voltage              
              stress, annealing at elevated temperatures, and relaxation after               
              quenching.  She will study the leakage current in a-Si and poly-Si             
              TFT; derive information about the density of states in a-Si:H and              
              poly-Si using measured data in subthreshold regime; and will obtain            
              more detailed information about the density of states in a-Si:H,               
              the structure of defect absorption modes, the energy levels, and               
              optical spectra of defects from IR optical measurements on a-Si and            
              poly-Si thin films.  The understanding, and control of metastable              
              defect formation in a-Si are essential because this process is a               
              principal obstacle to the practical use of a-Si:H, and for the                 
              insight into fundamental physics of amorphous silicon.                         
                                                                                             
              The interactive activities at the host institution will include                
              teaching a course entitled "Thin Film Transistors", presenting                 
              guest lectures, and counseling and advising students.  Dr. Globus              
              will share, with the student body, her experiences as a scientist              
              in Russia, where almost half of scientists and engineers are                   
              female.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project furthers the VPW program objectives which are (1) to              
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
