Title       : Geophysics, Solid Mechanics and Geomechanics (Earth Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9350062

Award Number: 9350062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth A. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1574,
Abstract    :
              Thousands of small earthquakes rupture the earth's crust every                 
              hour, but few of these events ever evolve into the large                       
              earthquakes which threaten the human social structure.  The                    
              question of what stops most small earthquakes from cascading into              
              larger, more dangerous earthquakes remains a scientific enigma                 
              whose solution could provide a key to earthquake hazard mitigation             
              in many populated regions of the world.  Two possibilities have                
              been presented for determining what stop earthquakes.  The first is            
              that earthquakes are stopped by barriers of stronger material.  The            
              second is that earthquakes stop simply because they run out of                 
              energy and cannot continue propagating.  This project will use 3-D             
              finite difference computer modeling of spontaneous rupture                     
              propagation to assess the contrasting models of earthquake rupture             
              arrest.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  leading               
              seminars on static and dynamic fault interaction and presenting at             
              least one guest lecture per quarter.  Dr. Harris's visibility as an            
              active researcher in the field of earthquake seismology will both              
              encourage more women students to apply their expertise to                      
              scientific endeavors and encourage the existing majority of male               
              scientists to promote more women into the upper echelons of                    
              research and teaching.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
