Title       : Mathematical Discourse in Japanese and American Elementary School Classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9350004

Award Number: 9350004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427451             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Stigler stigler@psych.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Current reform efforts in mathematics education call for changing              
              patterns of classroom discourse to ones that foster students                   
              thinking and problem solving, and that more closely resemble                   
              discourse used among mathematicians.  Yet classroom discourse has              
              proven highly resistant to change.  One reason for this resistance             
              may be a lack of concrete examples, i.e., classrooms in which                  
              desirable patterns of discourse are actually used.  Japanese                   
              classrooms may provide us with just such a set of examples.                    
              Although no in-depth studies exist of Japanese classroom discourse,            
              prior work by the Principal Investigator and colleagues suggests               
              that discourse in Japanese classrooms may conform closely to                   
              recommendations contained in the NCTM Professional Standards.  The             
              goal of this study is to evaluate this suggestion, and to determine            
              the extent to which American reform efforts might be aided by                  
              empirical descriptions of Japanese classroom discourse.                        
                                                                                             
              The project proposed will be completed in 6 steps:  (1) Existing               
              videotapes tapes of 160 classroom mathematics lessons-half from the            
              United States- will be transcribed, translated, and entered into a             
              multimedia database that coordinates the verbal transcriptions with            
              the video; (2) Tools for analyzing the tapes in order to                       
              characterize and compare classroom discourse in Japan and the                  
              United States will be developed and applied; (3) Using the analyses            
              from Step 2, classroom discourse in Japan will be examined in light            
              of the NCTM standards and other current reform documents the focus             
              on talk in the mathematics classroom; (4) In those cases where                 
              Japanese classrooms are judged to exemplify ideal patterns of                  
              discourse, tasks, materials, and techniques used by Japanese                   
              teachers to achieve these patterns will be identified; (5)                     
              Exploratory research will be conducted in collaboration with                   
              American teachers to investigate the usefulness of Japanese                    
              techniques in American classrooms; (6) Results of the project will             
              be disseminated in both written reports and video presentations,               
              and the full multimedia database will be made available to other               
              researchers.
