Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9350210

Award Number: 9350210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dr. Hilary Lackritz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9296,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9350210  Lackritz    "Gas Phase Interfacial Photopolymerization of Vinyl
              Monomers  onto Metallic Substrates Studied using Surface Second Harmonic 
              Generation"    This AMPP research project concerns the characterization of "gas
               phase" photopolymerization shows promise in creating defect-  free, uniform
              thin films with excellent electrical and optical  properties for commercial
              applications such as protective  coatings and electrical insulators.  Other
              techniques for making  thin films, such as Langmuir-Blodgett deposition and
              spin  coating, yield films that have poor physical properties, are 
              inhomogeneous, or are difficult to make.  The issues to be  considered in this
              proposal are how the final film quality is  related to the interface and the
              polymerization mechanism and  kinetics, and the characterization of the gas
              phase reactions.   As  a part of a long-term goal to design novel nonlinear
              optical  techniques to study polymer processing, this research will  develop
              surface second harmonic generation to characterize the  dynamics at the
              metal/polymer interface.  Using surface second  harmonic generation (SSHG),
              issues that have not been resolvable  in the past including rate laws and the
              dependence of the film   properties on interfacial characteristics, can be
              effectively  examined in a continuous, real-time manner.  This research has 
              two important deliverables: i) the development of an improved,  generally
              applicable, analytical nonlinear optical technique for  studying reactions at
              surfaces in real time, and ii) the  resolution of important processing and
              characterization issues  in a technologically useful polymerization method. 
              The project  is supported under the Presidential Faculty Fellow program.  ***
