Title       : A Real-Time Systems Laboratory to Improve Undergraduate Instruction Computer
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9350841

Award Number: 9350841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger W. Webster webster@cs.millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Many of the manufactured products of the future will be                        
              computer controlled by real-time software embedded in                          
              microchips as we have already seen, for example, with microwave                
              ovens, refrigerators, and fuel-injected automobiles. In                        
              addition, real-time industrial control systems are becoming one                
              of the fastest growing fields within computer science.                         
              Automated manufacturing is leading the advanced technology                     
              revolution as companies vie for the competitive edge utilizing                 
              real-time robotic automation systems. It is crucial for today's                
              computer science and engineering graduates to be exposed to                    
              these complex real-time programming techniques and experiment                  
              with them in a laboratory, so that they may develop the skills                 
              necessary to write the software embedded in microchips in these                
              sophisticated products and control systems.                                    
              A Real-Time Systems course is seldom incorporated in a typical                 
              computer science program at a liberal arts college. At the                     
              nation's larger engineering schools this is addressed. As we                   
              compete with the Japanese and other industrialized nations                     
              developing the products and control systems of the future, all                 
              computer science and engineering students will benefit from                    
              exposure to these skills.This project improves the quality of                  
              instruction in computer science by providing students with a                   
              powerful computer workstation and a laboratory of three real-                  
              time platforms from which to study and experiment with the                     
              techniques of real-time systems: (1) a real-time model railroad                
              switching yard system, (2) real-time robotic automation, and                   
              (3) real-time ROMable microchip code development. With this                    
              equipment, students majoring in computer science, computer                     
              engineering, and physics will be able to develop advanced real-                
              time software projects. Also, students in senior research                      
              projects, independent study projects, and in the honors program                
              will be able to develop sophisticated real-time engineering                    
              software using this laboratory.  This laboratory project will                  
              give students who wish to pursue careers in industry, exposure                 
              to skills that are in high demand as we compete in a world                     
              marketplace developing the products and control systems of the                 
              future. The laboratory will also provide better preparation for                
              students who wish to go on to graduate school because of the                   
              opportunity to engage in advanced software projects. The                       
              grantee will provide funds for this project that are an equal                  
              amount for this NSF proposal.
