Title       : The Expansion of State Interest Group Systems (Political Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1993      
File        : a9350059

Award Number: 9350059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91810              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Gray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 1371,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop an understanding of the growth of                   
              interest groups in the fifty states and how such growth differs                
              across states.  This will be developed by constructing and applying            
              a theory of interest group formation.  The theory, developed in                
              preliminary work, connects the development of interest group                   
              systems at the state level with the formation of individual groups             
              at the micro level.  An existing data base will be disaggregated               
              and further analyzed.  A mail survey and interviews of groups in               
              selected states will be conducted.  The results of these studies               
              will be combined with earlier results into a book.  The book will              
              finish a complete description of interest group proliferation at               
              the state level, a theoretical account of variation in group                   
              growth, and will address normative concerns about groups' influence            
              on democracy.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include teaching a              
              graduate course on state public policy and interest groups.  Dr.               
              Gray will give several public lectures on her research, including              
              her prior research on women and politics, and she will participate             
              in several campus women's organizations.                                       
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing grater visibility for women scientists and engineers              
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging in the participation of women in science, it is a                  
              valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality
