Title       : An Electromagnetic Compatibility Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9350734

Award Number: 9350734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75829              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Van Doren   (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd H. Hubing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Drewniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              Government and commercial organizations that design and                        
              manufacture state-of-the-art electronic systems are well                       
              acquainted with electromagnetic compatibility (EMC)                            
              difficulties. Circuits and systems are requiring wider                         
              bandwidths, must operate at lower power levels, and are more                   
              compact. These trends render them susceptible to interference                  
              from numerous sources. Designing and implementing electronic                   
              systems that function correctly in a complex electrical                        
              environment, as well as meeting government emissions                           
              regulations, requires engineers that have a sound knowledge of                 
              electromagnetic field concepts. This project  introduces                       
              laboratory exercises based on industrial EMC applications into                 
              three undergraduate electromagnetics courses. Experiments                      
              illustrate such common problems as crosstalk, electrostatic                    
              discharge., circuit radiation, and RF susceptibility. These                    
              experiments reinforce fundamental principles and topics covered                
              in the undergraduate electromagnetics courses, including                       
              electric and magnetic fields, inductance, capacitance, wave                    
              propagation, transmission lines, and radiation. The laboratory                 
              exercises are designed to: 1) stimulate creativity and motivate                
              students at the introductory level to learn electromagnetic                    
              field fundamentals, while providing them with invaluable                       
              practical experience in EMC applications; 2) allow students in                 
              a junior/senior level EMC elective course to pursue in-depth                   
              lecture and laboratory EMC studies; and 3) provide facilities                  
              for students to pursue independent senior design and honors                    
              student projects in electromagnetic compatibility. The                         
              experience gained in applying electromagnetic field concepts to                
              EMC are essential to the practicing engineer for meeting the                   
              design challenges associated with faster electronic                            
              technologies and strict government regulations on emission of                  
              electromagnetic energy.
