Title       : VERMONT EPSCoR SYSTEMIC IMPROVEMENT PLAN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9350540

Award Number: 9350540
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6915000            (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Happ  (Principal Investigator former)
              Christopher W. Allen cwallen@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9350540  Happ  Title:  Vermont EPSCoR State Systemic Improvement Plan.  The 
              Vermont EPSCoR State Plan  has been designed to produce lasting systemic change
              in the  capacity of the state for science and  technology.  It has four goals:
              1) to build research  competitiveness in science and technology,  2) to create
              knowledge transfer mechanisms that effectively link  university expertise to
              the  private sector, 3) to recruit and train scientists, from high  school to
              postdoctoral, in research,  and 4) to institutionalize science policy and
              planning for the  state.  Activity will be centered at  the University of
              Vermont, the only doctoral institution in the  state, and will involve other 
              colleges across the state.  About 80% of the resources will be  devoted to
              building  competitiveness in four subdisciplines: (1) The Evolutionary 
              Ecology; (2) Computational  Mathematics; (3) Receptor-Mediated Signalling and
              Biotechnology;  and (4) Advanced Materials  Science.  All the clusters will
              interact in the EPSCoR Modeling  Colloquium, an interdisciplinary  seminar
              series which will explore general techniques for modeling  complex systems and
              data  sets.  In addition, the EPSCoR project fosters interactions between 
              academic and industrial  scientists by setting up a technology transfer team,
              drawn from the  university and the private  sector and by also offering a Small
              Business Innovation Research  public seminar program and  a unique SBIR "Phase
              O" seed grant program to help increase the  rate of SBIR submissions to 
              federal agencies.  EPSCoR activities will be used to train research  students,
              from high school  to postdoctoral.  The lead laboratories will be those of the 
              cluster faculty.  Working with the  Vermont NSF-sponsored Statewide Systemic
              Initiative program, EPSCoR  will present a yearly  Science-Math-Technology
              Careers Day for high school science  students and a research program  that
              joins highly motivated high school students and their teachers  with the
              faculty of regional  colleges.  In  addition, EPSCoR will provide an
              undergraduate  research referral service, to place  high school and college
              students in faculty research laboratories  for a semester or year.  ***
