Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9350276

Award Number: 9350276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis G. Tassinary   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Main Campus
	      
	      College Station, TX  77843    409/845-3211

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9296,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9350276  TASSINARY  This award provides support to Dr. Louis Tassinary under the
               National Science Foundation's Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF)  Program. 
              The PFF Program was established at the request of the  President of the United
              States to recognize and support the  scholarly activities of some of the
              Nation's most outstanding  science and engineering faculty members early in
              their careers.   Awards are intended to allow Fellows to undertake
              self-designed,  innovative research and teaching projects, to establish
              research  and teaching programs, and to pursue other academic related 
              activities.    This award will allow the investigator to pursue his research 
              agenda of attempting to specify the necessary and sufficient  conditions for
              the use of physiological signals as measures of  psychological processes and
              states.  Although converging scientific  evidence from laboratories throughout
              the world suggests that non-  invasive measurement of physiological activity
              within specific  assessment contexts can provide information on the duration
              and  character of specific psychological processes, the generalizability  of
              these relationships to real-world settings remains untested.   Dr. Tassinary
              will test the boundary conditions on these  relationships through the
              experimental assessment of typical human  transactions with simulated built and
              natural environments.  The  theoretical level of analysis will not be
              restricted to isolated  components of the body or the environment, but will
              focus on the  level of organismic-environmental transactions, with reference to
               both the physical and socio-cultural environment.     This research addresses
              a critical question involving whether human  contact with ambient conditions of
              varying physical form and  content influence our cognitive and emotional
              reactions.  Thus far,  there exists only self-report data to make judgments
              about how  different configurations of the design environment influence 
              individuals.  Using a combination of environmental simulat ion and  state of
              the art psychophysiological recording and data analysis  resources, Dr.
              Tassinary is at the forefront of a new field of  research in environmental
              psychology.  This five year award will  also enable him to train undergraduate
              and graduate students in  this critically important field.  ***
