Title       : Modern Astronomy In The Classroom: Introduction To CCDs AndImage Processsing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9350864

Award Number: 9350864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Binzel rpb@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Observational astronomy and planetary science are vital parts                  
              of the undergraduate science curriculum at MIT. There are two                  
              (one freshman, one upper level) laboratory courses which teach                 
              astronomical observing techniques using 8-, 14, 16- and 24-inch                
              telescopes. Rapid advances in digital imaging have rendered                    
              most astronomical laboratory teaching out of date and in                       
              critical need of improvement. Further, planetary science                       
              courses can be substantially improved by providing hands on                    
              access to spacecraft imagery.                                                  
              The undergraduate astronomy laboratory curriculum is being                     
              fully modernized through the purchase of charge-coupled device                 
              (CCD) camera systems to be used on existing telescopes. High                   
              quality and low cost astronomical CCD cameras for small                        
              telescopes have become commercially available only within the                  
              last year. Thus it is now possible to bring the state-of-the                   
              art technology in astronomical instrumentation into the                        
              classroom for both freshman and upper level laboratories.                      
              The CCD camera systems require Macintosh II computers for their                
              operation. As these computers will also be used for the                        
              subsequent manipulation of images, the curriculum is being                     
              further improved through the introduction and teaching of image                
              processing to all laboratory students, including freshman. The                 
              overall science and technology impact for educating students                   
              will therefore become enormous as image processing now pervades                
              all areas of science, engineering, and medicine.                               
              In addition, the scope of this project is being expanded beyond                
              astronomy laboratories to at least two planetary science                       
              courses through the availability of Voyager and other planetary                
              mission images on compact disks. Daytime use of the Macintosh                  
              computers gives hands-on experience with real digital images to                
              a very broad cross section of students. In this way the project                
              increases the educational impact in terms of the number of                     
              students, in addition to bringing the latest in science and                    
              technology into the classroom.
