Title       : In-situ TEM Heating Studies of Nanoscale and Submicron Sized Ceramic Oxide
               Powders (Engineering)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9350108

Award Number: 9350108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Rankin Janet Rankin@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1415,9225,
Abstract    :
              A preliminary study of the insitu heating behavior of single-                  
              crystal cubes of 100-300 nm MgO smoke particles has shown that the             
              stability of neck formed between 2 sintering single-crystal cubes              
              is directly related to the contact geometry of the particles.  This            
              research project is a logical extension of the initial MgO cube                
              study.  It will focus on the following objectives:  determination              
              of the specific mechanism(s) responsible for mass transport in                 
              vacuum heated, sub-micron-sized MgO single crystal cubes; insitu               
              TEM heating studies of coalescence and material transport in                   
              isolated pairs of nanoscale, single crystal, spherical particles of            
              ceramic oxides; insitu heating studies of larger arrays of                     
              nanoscale particles; and exsitu heating studies to examine the                 
              effects of the sintering atmosphere on neck morphology and                     
              stability.  The neck instabilities observed in the preliminary                 
              studies have never before been observed or predicted.  This                    
              research will develop our understanding of this phenomena, and                 
              further insitu experiments are likely to lead to additional new                
              insights into the sintering of fine particles.                                 
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  organizing            
              and teaching two new courses (one course will study noncrystalline             
              solids by examining both bulk and thin-film glasses, and the other             
              course will be an engineering/technology survey course for non-                
              engineers, based on materials science topics); and participation as            
              a discussion leader in Women in Science and Engineering, an                    
              organization for women undergraduates.                                         
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
