Title       : Rapid In Vivo Testing of Tissue-specific Promoters Using an Insect Virus Vector
               System (Biological Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9350079

Award Number: 9350079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara L. Tobin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
              The action of regulatory components during development is a crucial            
              issue for biological research, but investigations of such                      
              components are restricted to a few well known model systems.  Dr.              
              Tobin will undertake a novel system for analysis of complex,                   
              tissue-specific regulation of developmental genes in insects by                
              utilizing baculovirus vectors to carry promoter-reporter constructs            
              into lepidopteran larvae.  She will test application of this                   
              approach by investigating the elements responsible for expression              
              of actin in the microvillae of the intestinal brush border cells.              
              She will then address the ability of this system to define similar             
              elements of the 5C Drosophila actin gene in lepidopteran larvae.               
              This system will permit rapid, in vivo testing of DNA promoter                 
              fragments to regulate activity of the reporter gene and detect both            
              temporal and tissue-specific regulation.                                       
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  co-                   
              teaching a freshman course that is part of a Howard Hughes                     
              Foundation program designed to attract minorities and women into               
              biological sciences.  Dr. Tobin will also teach a graduate seminar             
              course in Insect Molecular Genetics, speak in the Entomology                   
              Seminar Series, and interact informally with female undergraduates,            
              graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows who intend to pursue               
              careers in academia and industry.                                              
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
