Title       : Arkansas Statewide Systemic Initiative Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9350027

Award Number: 9350027
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10150000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Crowe  (Principal Investigator former)
              Suzanne Mitchell   (Principal Investigator former)
              Woodrow E. Cummins  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : AR Dept. of Higher Educ
	      114 East Capitol
	      Little Rock, AR  722013818    501/324-9300

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9350027  Crowe      The Arkansas Systemic Initiative Project has at its core a
               vision that seeks to eliminate barriers to student success  in mathematics and
              science, raise achievement levels of all  students in grades K-16 and improve
              public understanding  that quality mathematics and science are crucial for 
              economic development and personal fulfillment.     Arkansas intends to
              restructure mathematics and science  education by changing attitudes toward
              mathematics and  science, improving student knowledge and skills and  fostering
              long-term community involvement in the education  system.  This transformation
              will occur through the work of  regional partnerships, each of which is a
              coalition of  schools, colleges, businesses, parents, and other community 
              leaders.  To ensure that needed changes occur, the  initiative will develop
              mathematics and science frameworks,  implement large-scale teacher development
              through the  Arkansas Math and Science Crusades, equip every classroom  with
              appropriate materials and technology, bring scientists  and mathematicians into
              classrooms, and place teachers in  real-world research settings.      Community
              education and leadership development will involve  parents and local leaders in
              important education system  roles.  Changes in teacher preparation and
              certification  will ensure that all students have access to quality 
              instruction.  The Applied Academics curriculum will  restructure vocational
              education, and appropriate forms of  technology will be employed throughout the
              Initiative.  In  addition, the State will be developing a new assessment 
              system that will include performance assessment and student  portfolios.  This
              new assessment system will be used to  monitor the success of the
              initiative.***
