Title       : SSC: Exploring Contemporary Biological Dilemmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1995      
File        : a9350576

Award Number: 9350576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Burnham   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Harker  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9350576  Oklahoma State University  Stillwater, Ok    Harker, Alan   
              "Exploring Contemporary Biological Dilemmas"    The NSF summer science camp
              will be executed within a larger  ongoing program to enhance recruitment and
              retention of Native  American students in the biological sciences.  It will
              employ an  investigative approach to a local environmental problem.  
              Interdependent research groups of students will focus on different  areas of a
              common problem and cooperate to propose a solution.  The  proposed research
              will combine field and laboratory components.   The environmental emphasis will
              allow students to focus on many  disciplines including: life sciences, physical
              sciences,  statistics, engineering, economics, library, writing, and 
              presentation skills.  The groups will attend joint meetings once  each week to
              inform others of their progress, share information,  and offer suggestions, 
              Students will see how the various  disciplines work together using technology
              to meet the needs of  society.    Local industry, community, and university
              professionals will  provide diverse presentations on relevant research
              activities and  career opportunities.  Local tribes will provide cultural
              evenings  and speakers to address issues relative to the preservation of 
              culture, traditional ways, and tribal views of the environment and  science. 
              Advisory boards composed of parents, tribal leaders,  teachers, and
              administrators within the cooperating tribes and  school districts will
              coordinate recruitment of participants.   Summer Science Camp activities will
              be coordinated with school year  programs established within the larger
              program.  These include  science clubs, equipment loans, speaker programs,
              problem-oriented  curriculum development, etc.
