Title       : META-Knowledge Formation from Text (Computer Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1993      
File        : a9350134

Award Number: 9350134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Rau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6856,9225,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Rau's research addresses the question of how computer systems              
              can automatically construct and use representations of knowledge               
              about what they know.  This is important not only for extending our            
              understanding of human behavior, but for increasing the                        
              intelligence, functionality, usability and efficiency of current-              
              day computer systems.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The objectives are to develop methods of extracting, representing              
              and utilizing meta-knowledge automatically derived from text.                  
              Previous research has developed methods of extracting information              
              from text, and methods of calculating the conceptual salience and              
              breadth of knowledge from databases.  This research will leverage              
              these advances to develop novel methods of creating summary                    
              representations of the content of text, and demonstrate their                  
              applicability to the problem of increased accuracy and efficiency              
              of conceptual information retrieval.                                           
                                                                                             
              The research methodology employed is experimental computer science.            
              Working programs will implement algorithms that create meta-                   
              knowledge from text, and demonstrate advances by exhibiting new                
              functionality with real problems in information access and                     
              retrieval.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  hosting a             
              two-day workshop on Diversity Awareness; teaching a graduate level             
              course; putting together a program to provide educational and                  
              career opportunities for women; and holding a series of special                
              seminars on "Industrial Research:  What's it Like?"                            
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
