Title       : An Undergraduate Research Experience in Cognitive Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9350798

Award Number: 9350798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 30,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mirsad Hadzikadic mirsad@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Foos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin J. Croy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paula Goolkasian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lori R. Van Wallendael  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The University of North Carolina at Charlotte is developing an                 
              undergraduate cognitive science laboratory which is functioning                
              as a center for student research projects. Upper division                      
              students enrolled in independent research are working on a                     
              research team under the joint guidance of faculty from several                 
              disciplines (Computer Science, Psychology, Philosophy,                         
              Linguistics) and participating in a cognitive science seminar.                 
              Since cognitive science is a new discipline and there is no                    
              formal coursework in this area, the independent research                       
              project with a monthly seminar is one way that students can                    
              gain an interdisciplinary perspective.                                         
              The laboratory is equipped with 5 student workstations so that                 
              students can use procedures with extensive symbol manipulation                 
              and become involved with multimedia projects. This research                    
              experience is of particular benefit to those interested in                     
              graduate work in cognitive science. After majoring in one of                   
              the participating disciplines for 2 years, students are ready                  
              to embark on complex issues which require a combination of                     
              interdisciplinary knowledge and powerful computers. The                        
              Cognitive Science Laboratory is exposing students to a high                    
              level of problem-solving mastery. This laboratory is also                      
              enriching the curricula of all of the participating                            
              departments.
