Title       : A Multidisciplinary Instrumentation Network Based Upon Gas Chromatography-Mass
               Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1995 
File        : a9350929

Award Number: 9350929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79829              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. D. Libby rdlibby@cs.moravian.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack R. Ridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Langhus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Bevington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Stoneback  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moravian College
	      Main Street & Elizabeth Avenue
	      Bethlehem, PA  18018    215/861-1300

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              We are proposing to purchase a gas chromatograph-mass                          
              spectrometer (GC-MS), a compatible GC, and the appropriate                     
              equipment to create a Moravian College Scientific                              
              Instrumentation Network (MOCOSIN) linking laboratories and                     
              classrooms in the Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, and                    
              Physics Departments. This combination of the instruments and                   
              MOCOSIN is designed to:     introduce mass spectrometry and GC-                
              MS into the curriculum across the sciences;     facilitate                     
              efficient use of expensive resources throughout the science                    
              division;     encourage broad collaboration among faculty and                  
              students by providing an intellectual as well as an electronic                 
              link among students and faculty of all departments; and                        
              provide all science departments with a connection to NSFNET.The                
              combination of an MS and a GC, a versatile and powerful tool                   
              for separating complex mixtures and characterizing their                       
              components, will be used as a connecting thread for courses                    
              across the natural sciences. GC-MS will be introduced to                       
              students in General Physics and Chemistry courses where it will                
              be used to illustrate isotopes and mass spectrometry. Students                 
              will use GC-MS again in intermediate level Biology, Chemistry                  
              and Physics courses as an analytical tool for separation and                   
              identification of organic compounds. Since all Biology majors                  
              take Organic Chemistry and all Chemistry majors take General                   
              Physics, by the time students use the GC-MS in their advanced                  
              Biology or Chemistry courses, they will have gained                            
              considerable sophistication in the use of the instrument. We                   
              believe our particular combination of the experiments and                      
              electronic network is unique and should serve as a model for                   
              other small colleges.
