Title       : Optical Image Processing And Acquisition Tools For The Undergraduate Optics Labs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9350853

Award Number: 9350853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28069              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Bunch Robert.Bunch@Rose-Hulman.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              One of the most compelling reasons students want to study                      
              applied optics is because it is a visual science. Even though                  
              students can easily visualize the physical phenomena of                        
              interest during a particular laboratory experiment they often                  
              find it difficult to record and quantify their experimental                    
              results. Recording optical images and subtle changes in optical                
              images using standard photography can sometimes be difficult                   
              and time consuming. Fortunately, computer hardware and software                
              along with cameras of sufficient resolution are now available                  
              to assist in this image acquisition process.The acquisition and                
              processing of images has grown into a routine tool used in                     
              research and industry today. Digital image processing tools and                
              optical techniques have come together to form a powerful                       
              processing environment, optical image processing. Students in                  
              physics and applied optics need to be well versed in the use of                
              these modern image acquisition tools, observe the benefits of                  
              optical processing techniques as well as understand the basic                  
              science of the phenomena that they are studying.The equipment                  
              requested in this proposal will be used to upgrade and enhance                 
              the undergraduate physics and applied optics program at Rose-                  
              Hulman Institute of Technology. We will: (1). develop a                        
              standard "Image Acquisition and Analysis Experimental Lab                      
              Station" for general use in optics labs, (2). expand and                       
              upgrade the laboratory component of our Principles of Image                    
              Processing course to include experiments on optical image                      
              processing, image acquisition and analysis of infrared images,                 
              and (3). enrich several of the experiments in other applied                    
              optics laboratories by introducing computer-based acquisition                  
              of images.
