Title       : SGER: National Mathematics Standards and Educational Equity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1993   
File        : a9350072

Award Number: 9350072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett Williams bwillia@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Longo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Anthropological research from the early 1960s helped educators                 
              focus their attention on teaching and learning as a sociolinguistic            
              process.  Teachers were asked to become more sensitive to the                  
              speech style differences of their minority students.  Educational              
              reform initiatives applied the findings from sociolinguistic                   
              research on cross-cultural and multi-ethnic classroom settings and             
              broadened participation structures to create educational equity                
              among diverse groups.  Similar sociolinguistic assumptions can be              
              found driving the current reform of mathematics education led by               
              the National council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM.  The NCTM               
              standards emphasize communication skills so that all students can              
              become mathematically literate.  This study focuses on how the NCTM            
              standards attempt to achieve educational equity through a                      
              prescribed restructuring of classroom communication and discourse              
              patterns.  However, critics of the sociolinguistic approach to                 
              educational equity have argued that broader socioeconomic and                  
              racial issues prevent some minorities more than others from full               
              participation in school.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This study follows a dual course.  Using a sociolinguistic                     
              framework, it approaches language usage within the immediate                   
              setting of the mathematics classroom.  Using an ethnographic                   
              framework, it examines the broader historical, political, and                  
              economic contexts within which the classroom and its students are              
              situated.  A comprehensive sociolinguistic model of elementary                 
              school mathematics discourse will be constructed which will expand             
              the anthropological and sociolinguistic notions of context of                  
              situation and functions of language.  In addition, this study will             
              address what educators, teachers, and taxpayers need to know about             
              a.)the cultural and linguistic diversities of students, b.)the                 
              underlying sociolinguistic assumptions used by the NCTM standards,             
              c.)the feasibility of the NCTM national mathematics standards, and             
              d.)the efficacy of national educational reforms that aim to achieve            
              educational by relying on strategies to restructure classroom                  
              communication and discourse patterns.
