Title       : Comparisons via Stochastic Simulation, with Applications to Manufacturing and
               Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9622065

Award Number: 9622065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219017             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry L. Nelson nelsonb@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Nelson  9622065   A great many manufacturing and service systems are so complex
              that the only analysis tool is discrete-event-stochastic simulation.  Although
              simulation is a powerful tool, it suffers from the shortcoming that it is an
              experimental (not analytical) analysis and requires proper statistical analysis
              of its output.  Since here, the experimenter has complete control over the
              experimental environment, much of classical statistics, with its emphasis on
              independent observations, is not applicable, as it often behooves the
              experimenter to purposely introduce correlation as a variance reduction
              technique.   This research concerns development of procedures to screen a large
              number of systems, to find the best system, to compare alternative systems to a
              known standard and to compare alternative systems to a default.  There are many
              classical ranking and selection procedures, but again, these assume the usual
              independence assumptions that are not always present in discrete-event,
              stochastic simulation.  Most of the classical procedures also assume normality
              of output data, and are developed to measure population means only.  More often
              than not, output data from stochastic simulations are not normal, and often,
              measures other than mean responses, are of interest (e.g., the probability of
              an item spending more than t months in production). Statistical efficiency,
              functional relationships among systems to be compared, non-standard performance
              measures, basic theory and implementation in the form of incorporation into
              existing popular commercial simulation software will be considered in the
              research.   With the advent of easy-to-use simulation software, it is
              relatively easy to model a rather complex system via discrete-event-stochastic
              system simulation.  However, most packages have no really adequate statistical
              analysis software built-in.  What this research will accomplish is not only the
              development of appropriate and efficient statistical procedures, but also
              procedures which can be inco rporated into software packages and will be
              transparent to the users, providing significant advancement for this very
              important area for studying complex manufacturing and service systems.
