Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Vlasov Kinetic
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  2000      
File        : a9622690

Award Number: 9622690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold D. Victory victory@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhimin Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622690  Victory    The primary goal of this research is the numerical analysis
              of Vlasov kinetic   equations which describe collisionless and collisional
              plasma models.    Research efforts will focus on particle methods used in
              conjunction with   finite element or finite-difference methods for determining
              the fields, and   with implicit time-integrating schemes for advancing
              particles.  Because   there are seven independent variables in realistic
              (three-dimensional)   problems, it is not practical to base numerical
              simulations on classical   finite-differences, finite elements, or spectral
              methods.  Practical   simulations are based on particle methods, whose
              implementation requires a   solid understanding of the existence, uniqueness,
              and regularity properties   of Vlasov kinetic models.  In particular, it is
              proposed to carry out   investigations in the following two directions: (A).
              Numerical analysis of   the Vlasov kinetic equations modeling collisionless
              plasmas.  In particular,   implicit time-integrating methods for advancing
              particles are incorporated   into the numerical analysis of particle-in-cell
              schemes for Vlasov-Poisson   systems.  Also the convergence theory of particle
              approximations for   Vlasov-Poisson systems is extended to treat Vlasov-Maxwell
              and Vlasov-  Einstein problems.  (B). Numerical analysis of Vlasov kinetic
              equations   modeling plasmas with collisions.  In particular, nonlinear
              collision   operators of Landau (Fokker-Planck) type and of Boltzmann type
              arising in   semiconductor physics are added to the underlying Vlasov-Poisson
              or   Vlasov-Maxwell system.  The analyses involve stochastic and deterministic 
               particle methods involving operator splitting into nonlinear convective and  
              collisional portions.    Much of the interest in kinetic equations is derived
              from the practical and   economic benefits that  would accrue from applying
              knowledge of such   equations to problems arising in laser fusion,  plasma
              physics, and   semiconductors.  Vlasov kinetic equation s mathematically model
              such   phenomena as diverse as laser-matter interactions occurring in
              controlled   and laser fusion, and the transport of electrons in quantum
              environments   present in semiconductors. The research efforts being  supported
              by the   National Science Foundation have as objective the rigorous
              investigation of   numerical approximations to Vlasov kinetic models, with the
              goal of   enabling scientists to perform computations efficiently in
              determining   energies, moments, etc.  The work undertaken here would affect
              the current   base of plasma and  semiconductor technology in providing
              extended   qualitative analysis and robust numerical procedures for the study
              of   transport of electrons in semiconductors, laser-matter interactions, and
              the   onset of instabilities in an electron plasma.  In addition, the numerical
                analysis of nonlinear mathematical models has had a traditionally wide  
              audience among applied academic and industrial mathematicians.  This fact  
              will have a significant impact on the academic or industrial career prospects  
              of students who decide to pursue advanced degrees in the study of nonlinear  
              equations of kinetic type.
