Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Geometry and Seiberg-Witten Invariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9622681

Award Number: 9622681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Friedman rf@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Friedman     Friedman studies the new 4-manifold invariants introduced by
              Seiberg and Witten and their connections with algebraic geometry in the case of
              algebraic surfaces.  For many interesting surfaces, there is little contact
              between the algebraic geometry of the surface and Seiberg-Witten theory. 
              However, for ruled surfaces, there is a close connection between Seiberg-Witten
              theory and certain questions in classical algebraic geometry.  If the ruled
              surface is a product, then the description of the Seiberg-Witten moduli spaces
              is related to Brill-Noether theory for curves, in both its
              deformation-theoretic and enumerative guises.  If the ruled surface is more
              general, the Seiberg-Witten moduli spaces are connected to questions concerning
              stable rank two vector bundles over algebraic curves.  One problem is whether
              the Hilbert scheme of a general ruled surface is  smooth.  This problem is
              related to a famous example of Mumford, which says  that every irreducible
              curve on a general ruled surface has positive self-intersection.  A second
              question in classical algebraic geometry is  to study various enumerative loci
              in the moduli space of stable bundles where the Hilbert scheme is not smooth or
              does not have the expected  dimension.  Another set of questions involves
              studying the classification of symplectic 4-manifolds, which in many ways
              should be similar to the classification of algebraic surfaces.     Algebraic
              geometry is an old branch of mathematics which studies the solutions to
              polynomial equations in the plane or in space.  It is important to study the
              solutions in complex numbers to such equations, in order to see more of the
              geometry of the solutions. Over the last fifty years, new methods in algebra,
              analysis, and topology have led to deep results in this theory.  Since an
              algebraic surface depends on two complex numbers and hence four real numbers,
              it is a four-dimensional object and thus is important physically,  since the
              universe of space-time has four dimensions.  Recent ideas  from physics have
              led to deep breakthroughs relating the topology of an algebraic surface to its
              geometry.  These methods have also led to progress in the understanding of
              four-dimensional objects with a geometry connected to classical mechanics,
              which are called symplectic 4-manifolds.
