Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular Systematics of Needlefishes: Interpreting
               Heterochrony and Biogeography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9622827

Award Number: 9622827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy R. McCune arm2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9622827  McCUNE  The needlefishes (family Belonidae), so-named because of their
              long needle-like jaws, are fast, predatory fishes found mainly in tropical
              marine waters.  Over the past century, biologists have been intrigued by
              striking changes of body shape that needlefishes undergo during their life
              span: juveniles have a long lower jaw, but later develop into adults with  long
              upper and lower jaws.  Curiously, adults of the closely-related halfbeak fishes
              (family Hemiramphidae), have a long lower jaw but never develop the long upper
              jaw, and thus resemble juvenile needlefishes. Halfbeaks may have arisen from
              needlefish-like ancestors, or vice versa, through changes in developmental
              timing (heterochrony) of upper and lower jaw growth.  Several needlefish
              species inhabit South American freshwater rivers.  These fish may have invaded
              freshwater from the Atlantic Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, or both - and the
              biogeographic patterns among needlefish may also apply to other organisms found
              in this region.  Interpretations of these developmental and biogeographic
              patterns depends on basic knowledge of how needlefish species are related to
              one another (a genealogy of species), and this knowledge currently is
              inadequate.     In this study, Nathan Lovejoy, under the supervision of Amy
              McCune and Richard Harrison, will investigate the relationships of needlefishes
              by comparing DNA sequences from different species.  Specimens of most species
              are available; a South American collecting trip will complete the list. 
              Mitochondrial and nuclear genes will be amplified from fish tissue samples
              using the Polymerase Chain Reaction, and the DNA sequences of these genes will
              be used to construct phylogenetic trees.  The resulting insights into
              needlefish biology will illuminate both the origins of the extraordinary
              diversity of aquatic species in the tropics, and the mechanisms producing
              dramatically different body-shapes among these species.
