Title       : Combinatorics and Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1997  
File        : a9622938

Award Number: 9622938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65017              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen-Ching W. Li WLI@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     Li 9622938  The applications of Number Theory to other fields have been
              attracting  increasing interest in recent years. This investigation will
              exploit the rich interplay between Number Theory and Combinatorics. The
              problems to be investigated either have their origin in Combinatorics or have
              immediate application to Combinatorics, yet the problems themselves are Number-
              Theoretic. Roughly speaking, the problems in this investigation can be  divided
              into two parts. The first part concerns the distribution of the character sums
              occurring as eigenvalues of Ramanujan graphs and their  connection with
              eigenvalues of Hecke operators. The PI will continue her investigation of the
              Kloosterman conjecture over rational function fields. This conjecture implies
              that certain Kloosterman sums are eigenvalues of Hecke operators over function
              fields. The proposed approach includes the  study of L-functions attached to
              curves over function fields and their  connection to L-functions attached to
              representations. The second part is to obtain good results for partial
              character sums defined using additive and multiplicative characters of p-adic
              fields. If established, these bounds will have immediate applications in
              information theory to design better families of periodic sequences with low
              partial correlation. The  proposed approach is a combination of the
              investigator's technique in estimating full character sums involving characters
              of p-adic fields  and estimating partial character sums involving characters of
              finite  fields. The PI plans to give a graduate course on "Number Theory with 
              Applications" in 1996-97, which will include her past work in this area as well
              as the results from this proposal.   This research falls into the general
              mathematical fields of Number Theory and Combinatorics.  Number theory has its
              historical roots in the study of  the whole numbers, addressing such questions
              as those dealing with the  divisibility of one whole number by another. It is
              among the oldest branches  of mat hematics and was pursued for many centuries
              for purely aesthetic  reasons. However, within the last half century it has
              become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data
              transmission and  processing, and communication systems. Combinatorics is also
              an indispensable tool in modern communications. One of the goals of
              Combinatorics is to find  efficient methods of studying how discrete
              collections of objects can be  arranged. The design of large networks, such as
              those occurring in telephone  systems, and the design of algorithms in computer
              science deal with discrete  sets of objects, and this makes use of
              combinatorial research.
