Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Abnormal Minimizers and Discontinuous Value Functions in
               Optimal Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9622967

Award Number: 9622967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Urszula Ledzewicz uledzew@siue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9622967  Ledzewicz  The project adresses two fundamental approaches to finding
              the  solution of  optimal control problems: 1) finding the optimal processes 
              through an  analysis  of the Maximum principle and 2) finding the 
              value-function as a  solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation. In this
              project  the  proposer investigates new nontrivial optimality conditions for 
              abnormal  trajectories and their role in connection with discontinuities in 
              the value  function. Most existing results for optimality  do not apply to 
              abnormal  extremals or require continuity of the value function. The  occurence
              of  abnormal processes is related to the fact the surjectivity  condition in
              the  Lyusternik theorem is not satisfied and as a result the classical 
              nontrivial  results cannot be derived. While mathematically desirable, 
              continuity of the  value function relates to small-time local controllability
              and  need not be  satisfied for many control systems with free terminal time.  
              Abnormal  processes which satisfy the Maximum Principle do so regardless of 
              the  objective. Hence if they are really optimal this strongly hints  that in a
               certain sense they are the only possible candidates to solve the  problem 
              whereas closeby trajectories fail to do so. Thus optimal abnormal  processes 
              somehow correspond to limiting or boundary-like behaviors of  optimal 
              trajectories which strongly correlates them with discontinuities  in the  value
              function. It is expected that the analysis of  discontinuities in the  value
              function coupled with existing theory provides a solution  methodology  to the
              general problem in optimal control. The proposal consists  of two  separate but
              closely related parts. The first part is a  continuation of  previous work and
              addresses further developments of the  proposer's earlier  theory of nontrivial
              optimality conditions for abnormal processes  based on  second order
              approximations. A high-order generalization of the  Lyusternik  theorem without
              surjectivity condition and high -order  approximations to the  constraint sets
              are investigated. Using these results extended  nontrivial  first and second
              order necessary conditions for optimality of  both normal  and abnormal
              problems in optimization and optimal control are  analyzed.  A  generalization
              of the proposer's existing results to a nonsmooth  setting  coupled with direct
              approximations in the dual space by means of  normal  cones is being pursued.
              In the second part of the project the  proposer  investigates sufficient
              conditions for the optimality of abnormal  trajectories. In particular, the
              proposer analyses the role which  is played  by optimal abnormal extremals in
              the construction of a regular  synthesis.  %%%  There are two fundamental
              approaches to finding the solution of  optimal  control problems: 1) finding
              the optimal processes through an  analysis of  the Maximum principle and 2)
              finding the value-function as a  solution of the  Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
              equation. Both of these are in general  rather  difficult objectives to achieve
              and depend on the specifics of  the problem  under investigation. On the other
              hand, judging by the known  examples the  discontinuities of the value-function
              seem to relate rather  directly to  abnormal processes. Since both abnormal
              processes and  discontinuities of the  value function are indicating the
              limiting behaviors of optimal  trajectories  the proposer expects that there
              exists a relation between these  two  phenomena in general. In this project the
              proposer investigates  optimal  abnormal trajectories in optimal control and
              their role in  connection with  discontinuities in the value function. It is
              expected that the  analysis of  discontinuities in the value function coupled
              with existing  theory provides  a solution  methodology to the general problem
              in optimal control. The  proposal consists  of two separate but closely related
              parts. The first part is a  continuation  of previous work and addresses
              further developments of the  proposer's  earlier theory of o ptimlity
              conditions for abnormal problems  based on second  order approximations. Using
              high-order approximations the  proposer  generalizes these results to obtain
              nontrivial first and second  order  necessary conditions for optimality of both
              normal and abnormal  problems in  optimization and optimal control. A
              generalization of the  proposer's  existing results to a nonsmooth setting
              coupled with direct  approximations  in the dual space by means of normal cones
              is being pursued. In  the second  part of the project the proposer investigates
              sufficient  conditions for the  optimality of abnormal trajectories. In
              particular, the proposer  analyses  the role which is played by optimal
              abnormal extremals in the  construction  of a regular synthesis, which is an
              essential part necessary for  the  complete solution of the optimal control
              problem.  ***
