Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Holomorphic Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1999   
File        : a9622594

Award Number: 9622594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey Pinchuk pinchuk@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9622594   PI: Pinchuk     The proposed research will be
              carried out in three directions.  The first is the study of the conjecture that
              in complex n-space any proper holomorphic mapping between bounded domains with
              real analytic   boundaries extends to a proper holomorphic mapping between
              neighborhoods of their closures. In dimension 1 this is a fundamental result
              known as the Schwarz Reflection Principle. For n>1 the conjecture has been
              proved only in special cases.  Pinchuk will use a geometric approach, which is
              based on the technique of Segre varieties, and is a powerful new tool to study
              various problems in domains with real analytic boundaries. The goal of the
              first part of the proposal is to develop the geometric reflection principle for
              higher dimensions and prove the conjecture above in general. The second
              direction is to   apply the technique of Segre varieties together with other
              geometric methods to study rigidity phenomena of holomorphic mappings. Namely,
              Pinchuk plans to describe domains with noncompact automorphism groups.  He will
              also attack the related problem that in rather general situations proper
              holomorphic self-mappings are biholomorphic. The third direction is the
              investigation of the so called Abhyankar Equations (AEs) with respect to the
              Jacobian Conjecture (JC). The JC (in the complex case, which is the principal
              one) claims that any locally inevitable (biholomorphic) polynomial mapping is
              globally inevitable.       The JC is one of the most intriguing problems in
              mathematics.  It has been intensively studied by many mathematicians (including
              very famous ones) since 1939. A number of partial results as well as   faulty
              proofs has been published.  Most of the experts believed and still believe that
              the JC is true. Therefore a recent counterexample to the real version of the
              JC, which was constructed by Pinchuk (using the Aes) came as a surprise.  The
              JC has equivalent formulations in different areas of mathematics. Among others,
              its resolution ( positive or negative) will have implications for the
              finiteness of inversion formulas, for the existence of global solutions of
              certain differential equations, and for singularities of algebraic sets.  The
              other problems of this proposal are natural, important, and known as hard
              problems in several complex variables. Their solution will became the essential
              part of the theory of holomorphic mappings.
