Title       : Study of Transition Metal-Carbon Mixed Clusters: From Gas Phase to Condensed
               Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9622733

Award Number: 9622733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lai-Sheng Wang LS.WANG@PNL.GOV  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1045,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9622733  Wang  This project will investigate the structure and formation of 
              metal carbide clusters (MxCy, where M is a metal and C is  elemental carbon) in
              the gas phase, as well as the  nanomaterials formed by these clusters in the
              condensed  phase.  The gas phase study involves anion photoelectron 
              spectroscopy, which will provide fundamental understanding  of the structure
              and bonding of the MxCy clusters in a wide  size range.  The technique is also
              sensitive to subtle  differences in bonding and structures between carbon and 
              different transition metals.  The condensed phase study  involves preparation
              of MxCy nanocluster samples by a novel  laser vaporization deposition technique
              and characterization  using various  modern microscopies (TEM, STM, AFM).  The
              gas  phase studies will lead to insight into the formation  mechanisms of three
              classes of novel materials: endohedral  metallo-fullerenes, single-shell carbon
              nanotubes, and  metallo-carbohedrenes.  Through the combined gas phase and 
              condensed phase studies, this project has  the potential to  discover new
              carbon-metal nanoclusters with novel electronic  and catalytic properties and
              efficient  methods to  synthesize them.  The project involves major
              collaborative  work at the Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories.  The 
              project is co-funded between the Condensed Matter Physics  Program and the
              Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics  Program NSF.  %%%  Carbon and metals
              form a class of metal carbide materials  with unusual properties that find
              applications in electronic  materials for making faster computers, in
              catalysis, such as  automobile catalytic converters, and in tool hardening 
              manufacturing processes.  These properties can be enhanced  or modified when
              the materials are made of small carbide  particles, called nanoclusters, some
              of which are composed  of new, stable metal-carbon molecules.  This project 
              investigates the mechanisms of formation of such carbide  nanoparticles and the
              new metal-carbon molecular forms, and  al so will study the unique physical and
              chemical properties  of these clusters.  Understanding the formation mechanisms
               will lead to more efficient methods to tailor the design of  the nanoclusters
              with desired properties.  The project  involves major collaborative work at the
              Battelle Pacific  Northwest Laboratories.  The project is co-funded between 
              the Condensed Matter Physics Program and the Atomic,  Molecular and Optical
              Physics Program NSF.  ***
