Title       : Fluxes of Dissolved Inorganic, Dissolved Organic and Particulate Carbon
               Associated with Water Masses of the Arctic Ocean Based on Samples from the 1996
               U.S.N. Pargo Cruise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9622621

Award Number: 9622621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227241             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond N. Sambrotto sambrott@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Proposal  No:  OPP- 9622621    Principal Investigator:  Sambrotto, Raymond
                   ABSTRACT       The  recent use of the U.S. Navy's atomic submarine Pargo
              for non-military scientific exploration in the Arctic has opened a new
              dimension in the oceanography of the least-sampled ocean basin.  Samples
              obtained from the first such cruise allowed me to add significant details to
              the 3-dimensional analysis of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in the Arctic
              ocean, a region that may play a much greater role in the carbon dynamics of the
              world ocean than has been appreciated.  Based on samples brought back from the
              1996 science cruise  of the Pargo, the proposed project will make additional
              measurements of DIC and add new and critical measurements of dissolved organic
              carbon (DOC) and particulate carbon (PC).  These measurements will qualify the
              inorganic and organic carbon pools associated with waters in the Canada,
              Makarov, Amundsen and Nansen basins as well as shelf and upper slope waters of
              the Chukchi region that appear to be the site of entry for a huge amount of
              carbon to the upper halocline of adjacent waters.  The fall timing of the 1996
              Pargo cruise is ideal for the latter measurements because it coincides with the
              end of the productive season and the beginning of the cooling and sinking of
              shelf waters into adjacent basins.  Spatial changes in the carbon pools will be
              analyzed with respect to geochemical tracer data such as tritium and  3He
              collected from the Pargo and other Arctic cruises to estimate the rates of
              change associated with each pool.  Such rates are critical for understanding
              the Arctic's role in the carbon cycle at the world ocean and global scale.  As
              one of the atmospheric constituents that is prominent in the heat budget of the
              lower atmosphere, carbon dioxide has received increasing scrutiny to assess the
              non-human induced factors that influence its abundance.  The Arctic Ocean is
              currently poorly characterized in this respect but is a potentially important
              link in the dyn amics of the ocean's carbon cycle.  First order questions
              include the size of the carbon reservoirs associated with the unique water
              masses of the Arctic, the water mass formation rates, and the changes, if any,
              that can be expected in these cold reservoirs if climate change brings about a
              warning in this region.
