Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Archetypal Analysis Applied to Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9622642

Award Number: 9622642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77734              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily F. Stone stone@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adele Cutler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              959622642  Stone  This project explores the application of Archetypal analysis
              to data  sets from dynamical systems.  Archetypal analysis is a new statistical
               method for extracting relevant features from experimental data sets that  has
              been developed by Cutler and Breiman (Technometrics 1995).  Archetypes
              characterize extreme data values (those lying on the convex  hull of the data
              set), and can be thought of as a variation of principal  component analysis,
              which is also called the proper orthogonal or  Karhunen-Loeve (KL)
              decomposition by the dynamical systems community.  One of the goals of this
              project is to compare and  contrast the two  methods, the KL decomposition and
              Archetypes, in their application to  several experimental dynamical systems,
              both physical and numerical.  Data sets possessing traveling structures present
              a special problem to  those hoping to reduce them using the KL decomposition.
              If the traveling  structure is sufficiently regular the eigenfunctions will be
              sines  and cosines, since the decomposition produces a Fourier basis from data 
              that are translationally invariant. Therefore, in situations where the 
              traveling structure itself is the feature to be extracted, a straight 
              application the KL decomposition will not suffice.  The proposers are 
              developing a method that builds on Archetypal analysis to analyze data  with
              translating coherent structures, by finding, in an objective manner, 
              archetypes that move with the traveling structure.  The shape of the  structure
              itself is extracted (or possibly shapes, if the structure  itself is varying as
              well as translating) along with information on how  the structure is moving
              across the spatial domain.  Finally, along with  the pattern recognition 
              problems mentioned above, the third goal of the  proposed research is
              determining the feasibility of using archetypes as  a basis upon which to do a
              Galerkin projection of the governing  equations of the dynamical system (when
              they exist), for modeling  purposes.  %%%  Understan ding, predicting and
              modeling complex dynamical systems is one  of the preoccupations of the
              dynamical systems community today.  The  family of techniques dubbed "dynamical
              systems theory" utilized in  this effort is expanding rapidly and in many
              directions, incorporating  ideas from such diverse fields as mathematics,
              physics, and engineering.  With the advent of high-speed, large capacity
              computers, more complex  methods from statistics have become practical in the
              analysis of data  from dynamical systems.  One such method is archetypal
              analysis, a new  statistical technique which models the state of the system at
              a given  time as a mixture of extreme states. The proposers study the
              application  of archetypal analysis to dynamical systems.  They are comparing 
              archetypal analysis with other statistical procedures for dynamical  systems,
              and are developing a new variant of archetypal analysis to  handle moving
              waves.  The research is interdisciplinary in nature,  involving ideas from
              statistics, mathematics, and physics.    ***
