Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Real-Time Scheduling via Large-Scale Problem
               Reformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9622138

Award Number: 9622138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Wortman wortman@mwx.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E. Andrew Boyd  (Principal Investigator former)
              Donald R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Shannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan L. Deuermeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Pignatiello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9622138  Boyd   Acquisition of a The equipment requested is  a Silicon Graphics
              Power Challenge L Deskside Server with four 75 Mhz processors will support
              research in the areas of:  (1) real-time scheduling via large scale problem
              reformulation; (2) design of robust manufacturing systems using simulation; 
              (3) real-time job flow control in non-concurrent queueing networks; and (4)
              safe and energy-efficient natural gas networks.  Real-time scheduling problems
              are naturally formulated as integer programming problems and are commonly
              inadequate for solving even small problems.  Reformulation of these problems
              with new sets of variables and constraints shows promise, resulting in
              large-scale problems to solve.  A robust system design based on a goal seeking
              expert system and utilizing a new and unique simulation environment for
              manufacturing systems in small and medium size operations is sought that
              satisfies multiple performance criteria and is insensitive to uncontrollable
              environmental or noise parameters.  Improved job throughput, while holding job
              sojourn times to within an acceptable range, based on mathematical foundations
              in the context of non-concurrent queueing networks require numerical procedures
              suitable for implementing real-time control.  Recent research in discrete
              optimization and large-scale integer programming will be brought to bear on
              evaluating tradeoffs between network safety and throughput and in designing
              safe and efficient natural gas networks.     The acquired equipment will be
              networked within an existing ethernet system to permit maximum utilization fro
              four important research projects.  The success of the research problems is
              contigent upon the availability of high-performance computing equipment.
