Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Projects in Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9622911

Award Number: 9622911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Florin Radulescu radulesc@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622911  Florin Radulescu    The aim of this proposal is the investigation of a
              range of problems in the structure theory of von Neumann algebras. The
              important objects in this research are the harmonic analysis of the von Neumann
              algebras arising in connection with discrete groups and in deformation
              quantization theory. The main stream is to determine the structure of the von
              Neumann algebras that reflect the properties of (quantum) non commutative
              probability and to relate this structure with the representation theory of Lie
              groups and their discrete subgroups. The recent advances by Voiculescu in
              noncommutative probability theory have shown that the asymptotic behavior of
              random matrices is best represented by elements in the von Neumann algebras
              associated with free groups, whose spectral distribution is the Wigner
              semicircular law. In this research an important part is played by the problem
              of characterizing the factors of discrete groups by computing the invariants,
              defined by Murray and von Neumann, related to the fundamental groups of such an
              algebra. This is also based on some analytical aspects of number theory and the
              von Neumann algebras of discrete groups. The connection is realized by using a
              new representation for the algebra of the modular group and its subgroups. This
              representation is obtained by the identification of Toeplitz operators whose
              symbols are (arithmetic) automorphic forms with intertwining operators between
              different representations of the modular groups (or its congruence subgroups).
              In this context, the arithmetic Hecke operators turn out to be completely
              positive maps for which the associated subfactors (via Connes's correspondence
              theory) have unexpected higher relative commutant invariants.     Recently, in
              the last twenty five years, the theory of operator algebras and in particular
              its sub-theory, concerning the von Neumann algebras, has been proven to appear
              in almost any other branch of mathematics. One possible explanation for this
              phenomenon is that (as  it was certainly first hinted by von Neumann) the
              operator algebras are concerned with the (hidden) symmetries of nature and in
              particular the symmetries and motion in the space-time as it was first
              envisaged by quantum physicists. The von Neumann algebras that are studied in
              this project have proven to be intimately related to some models for the atoms
              that were first studied by Wigner. One of the ideas in Wigner's approach was
              that a possible way to study those models, in view of Heisenberg's uncertainty
              principle, is realized by the random matrices. A surprising discovery in the
              last five years was that this amounts to the study of certain properties of the
              algebras described above. The random matrices in themselves have numerous other
              applications in other branches of science like prediction theory or atmospheric
              science, and there is acknowledged hope that the better our understanding is on
              random matrices and the algebras associated with them-the better will be our
              understanding on the above natural phenomena.
