Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "RUI: Magnetohydrostatic Problems Relevant to Current
               Sheets and Heating of the Solar Corona"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9622923

Award Number: 9622923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Stredulinsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Laurence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9622923  Stredulinsky    The main goal of this project is to give a careful
              mathematical analysis of a  theory due to E.N. Parker on solar coronal heating.
              According to Parker the main  source of heat  in the solar corona consists of
              very thin regions of intense  current (current sheets) which arise as a
              mediation between the tendency of  coronal plasma to relax to equilibrium, and
              certain topological constraints.  Such constraints arise due to the near
              perfect conductivity of the coronal  plasma, and the anchoring of magnetic
              field lines at their footpoints or ends in  the dense gas of the photosphere,
              the footpoints being convected by the  turbulent motion of the photosphere. In
              attempting to understand the phenomenon  of current sheet formation in Parker's
              model a variational approach associated  with energy minimization will be used
              which relies on decompositions of magnetic  fields as a means of characterizing
              and prescribing field line topology. A  careful study will be made of which
              field line topologies withstand the weak  Sobolev space limits associated with
              the relaxation of a plasma towards minimum  energy. A general two-dimensional
              theory will be developed and applied to the  analysis of well known examples of
              current sheet formation in the astrophysics  literature. Beginnings of a fully
              three-dimensional theory will be described  with special emphasis on localized
              vector potential analogs of the flux  function representation of plasmas in two
              dimensions. Also topological  constraints involving helicity, and more refined
              measures of field line topology  measuring higher order linkage will be
              explored.  %%%  One of the outstanding open problems in solar astrophysics is
              the existence  of enormously high temperatures in the sun's atmosphere
              (corona), on the order  of two million degrees Fahrenheit, which have baffled
              astrophysicists for  generations. Though a number of reasonable models of
              coronal heating have been  explored the issue still engenders intense debate.
              In this project one  of the  leading models of coronal heating, due to
              E.N.Parker, will be analyzed on a  rigorous mathematical level. It is hoped
              that this will help resolve  uncertainties, and clarify the basic physical
              mechanism involved in coronal  heating.  Due to the relationship with sun spots
              and solar flares(violent  disruptions in the solar corona which propel plasma
              and associated magnetic  fields toward the earth), the issue of coronal heating
              is directly tied to  practical issues of variations in the earth's climate and
              electromagnetic  interference.  ***
