Title       : Asymptotics, Existence, Symmetry and Uniqueness in NonlinearPartial Differental
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9622937

Award Number: 9622937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62669              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henghui Zou zou@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Zou    This proposal is concerned with problems of existence,
              qualitative properties (e.g., asymptotics, symmetry, etc.) and uniqueness of
              solutions for some model nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations as well as
              systems.  More specifically, efforts will be devoted to investigations of the
              asymptotic behavior and symmetry of positive solutions for the Lane - Emden
              equation and general nonlinear elliptic equations and systems, the existence
              and   non-existence for positive solutions of the Lane - Emden system, the
              scalar field system and a semilinear Hamiltonian system, the asymptotics of
              solutions of Ginzburg-Landau equations, the existence and regularity of
              solutions to a thermistor problem and the uniqueness of positive solutions of
              semilinear elliptic equations with emphasis on the impact of the geometry of
              the domain.  Systematic methods and approaches for general problems will be
              developed by studying these model equations.  Tools for this project include a
              variational approach, the moving plane method, the topological fixed point
              theory and degree theory, and, asymptotic and a priori estimates are essential.
                 Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the
              physical world. Our model problems in this proposal arise from the study of
              various nonlinear phenomena, including pattern formation and population
              evolution (mathematical biology), the stellar structure in astrophysics and
              superconductivity (physics), the thermistor problem   (industrial mathematics)
              and the Yamaba problem (differential geometry).  It is, in studying classical
              partial differential equations, fundamental and essential to provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about the solutions, which lies in the
              core of mathematical analysis.  This may include answers to questions about
              uniqueness, smoothness, shape and asymptotic behavior of solutions.  The
              proposed investigations in this proposal are to provide such studies for our
              model problems.  In addition, analysis often  develops methods for
              approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these
              approximations.
