Title       : Comparisons via Stochastic Simulation, with Applications to Manufacturing and
               Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9622269

Award Number: 9622269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170669             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Goldsman david.goldsman@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Goldsman  9622269   A great many manufacturing and service systems are so
              complex that the only analysis tool is discrete-event-stochastic simulation. 
              Although simulation is a powerful tool, it suffers from the shortcoming that it
              is an experimental (not analytical) analysis and requires proper statistical
              analysis of its output.  Since here, the experimenter has complete control over
              the experimental environment, much of classical statistics, with its emphasis
              on independent observations, is not applicable, as it often behooves the
              experimenter to purposely introduce correlation as a variance reduction
              technique.   This research concerns development of procedures to screen a large
              number of systems, to find the best system, to compare alternative systems to a
              known standard and to compare alternative systems to a default.  There are many
              classical ranking and selection procedures, but again, these assume the usual
              independence assumptions that are not always present in discrete-event,
              stochastic simulation.  Most of the classical procedures also assume normality
              of output data, and are developed to measure population means only.  More often
              than not, output data from stochastic simulations are not normal, and often,
              measures other than mean responses, are of interest (e.g., the probability of
              an item spending more than t months in production). Statistical efficiency,
              functional relationships among systems to be compared, non-standard performance
              measures, basic theory and implementation in the form of incorporation into
              existing popular commercial simulation software will be considered in the
              research.   With the advent of easy-to-use simulation software, it is
              relatively easy to model a rather complex system via discrete-event-stochastic
              system simulation.  However, most packages have no really adequate statistical
              analysis software built-in.  What this research will accomplish is not only the
              development of appropriate and efficient statistical procedures, but also
              procedures which can be in corporated into software packages and will be
              transparent to the users, providing significant advancement for this very
              important area for studying complex manufacturing and service systems.
