Title       : Agent-Based Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9622779

Award Number: 9622779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Wright pwright@robocop.me.Berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Dornfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9622779  Wright   This award provides funding to create Agent-Based
              Manufacturing Systems.   The key feature is that manufacturing software
              "agents" will be created to enhance precision and production speed. Today, a
              vast number of software packages for engineering design, analysis, planning and
              fabrication are available on the Internet. However, they exist in a
              heterogeneous distributed system, usually with no well-characterized link to an
              individual designer. For example, such remote services might be configured for
              one commercial CAD system while the individual designer is working on another.
              Or, the service might be a specialized manufacturing facility, that the
              designer would like to "query and get information about". The first research
              task will create a standard "wrapper" for such services, employing common
              languages, representations and   interconnections. The second task will create
              a collaborative environment so that all points-of-view are brought into the
              design.  The third task will create methods to satisfy trade-offs and resolve
              conflicts.     If successful, this research will enable US manufacturers to
              produce at low cost while addressing the stringent constraints on dimension,
              form, surface finish and part integrity. As one example, previous research at
              Berkeley created an integrated CAD/CAM system for the production of injection
              molds used in the consumer electronics industry. With "agent-based
              manufacturing", one agent will advise on how to obtain the best surface finish
              inside the injection molds, and another agent will compensate for tooling
              deflections, thus creating more accurate components. Agents will extract the
              knowledge that is now distributed on the Internet and incorporate it into
              design and planning. This will avoid ambiguities and mistakes during
              manufacturing, thus improving production.
