Title       : Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9622816

Award Number: 9622816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Askey askey@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS- 9622816  PI: Askey    The 3-j and 6-j symbols from
              angular momentum theory can be transformed into orthogonal polynomials.  When
              this is done, new orthogonality conditions arise, with an absolutely continuous
              measure replacing the discrete one.  The 9-j symbols are equivalent to
              orthogonal polynomials in two variables, but so far only the discrete
              orthogonality relation is known.  It is time to look seriously at these
              functions, to try to find a double rather than a triple series representation
              for them, and then to find the missing absolutely continuous orthogonality
              relation. The corresponding work for q-9-j symbols will also be studied.  In 
              addition to this work and other work on one variable hypergeometric and basic
              hypergeometric series, some differential equations with 4 regular singular
              points will be studied.  Lars Onsager's Ph.D. thesis from 1934 contained some
              interesting results for differential equations which are limits of these
              equations.  This thesis will appear in his "Collected Papers" later this year. 
              There are a number of interesting problems left open, including some on
              orthogonal polynomials that Askey will study.    The interaction between
              mathematics and physics can lead to new insights in both areas.  This has
              occurred in the quantum theory of angular momentum and in coding theory.  In
              both fields, certain functions arose which turned out to be identical.  These
              extended classical functions were studied extensively in the nineteenth and
              early twentieth centuries. The most general of these functions has recently
              arisen in the study of knots.  The physics problems have been partly extended
              to several variables, but many open problems have not yet been solved.  In the
              one variable setting, a very important aspect of these function was only found
              when some mathematicians studied them, while other ways of looking at them were
              discovered by physicists.  Askey will be looking at these problems as a
              mathematician, and expects that this point of view wil l yield new information
              of use in both mathematics and physics.
