Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Group Theory Methods in Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9622590

Award Number: 9622590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel Boston n-boston@csl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9622590 Boston  This award is for a project connecting Group Theory and
              Number Theory.  Many links between these two areas have already been forged, in
              particular, the use of Galois representations, whose study, by group-theoretic
              means or otherwise, has consequences to the theory of elliptic curves and 
              consequently to Fermat's Last Theorem. In a prior supported project, the PI
              exploited this link to prove theorems on the deformations of Galois
              representations and the structure of Galois groups, particularly of  unramified
              extensions. This project will exploit these ideas further with an eye towards
              proving further cases of the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture and towards elucidating
              the structure of deformation spaces of Galois  representations. The
              investigator also plans to continue his exploration of the function field case.
              Finally, the investigator will study Dirichlet series attached to profinite
              groups. This part of the project provides plenty of opportunity to transfer
              information on groups (much obtained computationally) to information in number
              theory, and vice versa.   This research falls into the general mathematical
              fields of Number Theory and Group Theory. Group Theory is the study of groups,
              which are algebraic structures with a single operation.  It appears in many
              areas of  mathematics, as well as physics and chemistry. Number theory has its 
              historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing such  questions
              as those dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by  another. It is
              among the oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for  many centuries
              for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half  century it has
              become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data
              transmission, data processing, and communication systems.
