Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Virtual Reality to Support Product Design,
               Virtual Prototyping and Virtual Disassembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9622665

Award Number: 9622665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajit Gadh   (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Uicker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip R. O'Leary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9622665  Gadh   This award is for the acquisition and development of a Virtual
              Reality Studio at the I-CARVE Lab at University of Wisconsin-Madison.  This
              Virtual Reality set-up consists of a Silicon Graphics Onyx Computer with a
              Reality Engine II graphics processor.  To this computer attaches a Cyber Glove
              for tracking the hand position.  Also attached to this computer is a head-mount
              display device by Visual Research that supports three dimensional
              visualization. The head-mount device carries a 6 degree of freedom head  
              tracker that determines head position in space.  The hardware is supported by
              software that consists of a number of virtual reality device interfaces,
              graphics modules and solid modeling software programs.  The grant also supports
              a part-time student for maintaining the Virtual Reality Studio.   This
              equipment will be used for research in three innovative engineering design
              application areas:  (1) virtual reality for product design, (2) virtual
              prototyping, (3) virtual de-manufacturing.  The virtual-reality-for-design
              research addresses a fundamentally new method for performing concept-shape
              design in a virtual reality set-up.  This integrates human voice command
              control and human hand control as input mechanisms.  The virtual prototyping
              research involves developing representational frameworks for defining and
              extracting information from near-net shape manufactured products so as to
              determine the prototypability of such parts in a virtual environment. Using
              this research, questions of production and tooling can be addressed in the
              virtual environment.  Virtual de-manufacturing allows innovative methods for
              evaluating product designs for disassembly and recycling--all in the virtual
              environment.
