Title       : PPD Special Proj: "Enabling Students to Undertake the Challenge of Careers in
               Engineering and Science in School (Enabling SUCCESS)"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9622322

Award Number: 9622322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553289             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul N. Hale, Jr. phale@coes.latech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley A. Napper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Tech University
	      P O BOX 3168 TECH STATION
	      Ruston, LA  71272    318/257-0211

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Proposal # HRD-96-22322  Applicant:  Louisiana Tech University  Principal
              Investigator:  Paul Hale  Title:  "Enabling Students to Undertake the Challenge
              of Careers in       Engineering and Science in School" (Enabling SUCCESS)      
                                          ABSTRACT    The Biomedical Engineering Department
              of Louisiana Tech University, through its Center  for Rehabilitation Science
              and Biomedical Engineering, proposes a three-year Special Project  directed at
              increasing the awareness of career opportunities in science, engineering, and 
              mathematics for middle school students with disabilities.  The overall goal of
              this project is  to work with middle school students, their parents, and their
              science teachers to increase the  number of students with disabilities that
              pursue science, engineering, and mathematics career  fields.  The specific
              goals of the project are to: 1) stimulate student interest in science, 
              engineering, and mathematics; 2) heighten the awareness among middle school
              students, their  families, and their science teachers of the opportunities for
              persons with disabilities in these  fields; and 3) provide them with an
              understanding of the importance of career exploration  and taking appropriate
              college preparatory courses in high school.    Students often begin to make
              career preparation decisions in the middle school grades as they  prepare to
              enter high school where college preparatory electives require decisions in
              earlier  grades.  This is especially true in science and math where a sequence
              of courses must be  followed from the earliest possible grade level.  Students
              with disabilities and their parents  need to be prepared for these decisions
              and to realize that these choices will influence  subsequent educational and
              career development activities.  For students with disabilities,  neglecting
              fundamental skills may exclude them from the opportunity to enroll or succeed
              in  SEM curricula when they enter college.    Primary components of the
              proposed project are:  (1) As sistive Technology and Careers in  SEM Workshops,
              (2) Adapted Classroom and Student Science Kits, (3) Teacher Awareness 
              Seminars, (4) Study and Career Guidance Mentoring Program, (5) Super Summer of
              Science  Showcases.    A unique feature of this proposal is its focus on middle
              school students with disabilities, their  parents, and their teachers.  For the
              purposes of this proposal, middle school grades will  include grades six
              through nine.  Through the mentoring and counseling program, the project  will
              address the educational transition from late elementary school through high
              school.  The  project would provide training for middle-school teachers in
              methods of including students  with disabilities in all aspects of classroom
              and laboratory learning experiences.  Activities  designed to stimulate
              students with disabilities to explore science projects and courses would  be
              undertaken and evaluated.  Information regarding available assistive
              technologies that  make SEM activities accessible to students with disabilities
              would be provided to science  teachers, students, and parents.  ***
