Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis for
               the Sublaplacians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9622996

Award Number: 9622996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guozhen Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Lu    The principal investigator  intends to continue to develop the
              theory of structural stability for infinite dimensional dynamical systems 
              originating in science and engineering, which  are generated by, for example,
              parabolic equations and to study the  related problems such as Floquet theory
              for parabolic equations, to develop the theory of the persistence of normally
              hyperbolic invariant manifolds, the existence of stable and unstable manifolds
              of the normally hyperbolic invariant manifolds, and the theory of invariant
              foliations for infinite dimensional dynamical systems generated by  partial
              differential equations. However, the infinite dimensional dynamical systems
              generated by, for example,  parabolic equations are not reversible and the
              phase spaces are not locally compact.  This characteristic creates difficulties
              not encountered in the study of finite dimensional dynamical systems and new
              methods need to be developed to understand the nature of these systems.  A
              theory of structural stability for scalar reaction-diffusion equations,  the
              Cahn-Hilliard Equation and Phase-Field System  has recently been obtained. 
              Techniques found by the PI in his previous works will be employed in  the
              current studies.  It is expected  that this work will  contribute to a better
              understanding of the dynamics of the models of physical systems described by
              partial differential equations.    Mathematical models for the state of an
              evolving physical system are the subject of investigation of dynamical systems.
               The main goal of the study of dynamical systems is to understand the long term
              behavior of states in the systems. In applications, the  mathematical models
              (say differential equations) approximately describe physical reality. To
              understand the qualitative properties of a physical system, one  needs to
              investigate not only the mathematical model but also the perturbations of the
              model. One  also needs to   study  how the qualitative properties of the
              perturbed  models are related to the  qualitative properties of the original 
              model. This is especially  important to the numerical computations for the
              models.  Because of round off error and numerical schemes, the  model studied
              by the numerical computations actually is a  perturbation of the original 
              model.The theory for dynamical systems has been considered by many
              mathematicians and scientists starting with Poincare, Liapunov, and Birkhoff. 
              One of the fundamental problems in the theory of dynamical systems is the
              structural stability of dynamical systems. For a structurally stable system,
              the qualitative properties  are preserved under small perturbations of the
              system. To understand the dynamics of a system, one needs to investigate the
              existence of invariant sets,  in particular,  such as equilibrium points,
              periodic orbits, invariant tori, and attractors, to study their structures and
              to know  what happens in their vicinity (do the nearby solutions approach  the
              invariant set, or stay nearby, or leave the neighborhood).  A fundamental
              problem is to  study the persistence of invariant manifolds and to study the
              qualitative properties of the flow nearby invariant   manifolds.  The theory of
              invariant manifolds and invariant foliations has become a fundamental tool for
              the  study of dynamical  systems.
