Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Problems in Piezocomposites for Transducer
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9622927

Award Number: 9622927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Berlyand berlyand@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9622927  Berlyand     The investigator will study a variety of mathematical
              problems which arise   in the study and design of polymer piezoceramic
              composites for transducer   applications. He will attempt to use methods of
              homogenization theory   in combination with the Bloch-Floquet expansion to
              understand various types   of resonances for wave propagation in composite
              materials consisting of an  array of piezoceramic rods embedded in a polymer
              matrix. He will study   two main classes of such problems. The first is where
              the acoustic   wavelength is comparable with dimensions of the composite
              microstructure   (long wave approximation). Here he will attempt to find the
              dependence of   the quality of electromechanical power conversion on the
              frequency and the   volume fraction of the piezoceramic phase and explain
              theoretically existing  numerical data for the thickness-mode resonance. This
              includes the   "backing effect, i.e., the dependence of the resonance
              frequencies on the   stiffness of the backing medium. The second main class of
              problems that the   investigator will study  is the high-frequency regime when
              the acoustic   wavelength is comparable to the microstructure scale. The main
              effort here  is to extend homogenization ideas to the range of frequencies
              where the  composite material exhibits significant "cross-talk" between
              piezoceramic  rods. He will also study the transitional behavior between  these
              two  frequency regimes. The proposed work lies at the frontier   between
              mathematics and composites, and the investigator is planning to   support
              theoretical results by experimental and numerical data obtained at   the Penn
              State Materials Research Lab.  %%%   A composite material is a mixture of two
              or more single phase materials  (constituents) whose properties are far better
              than that of each constituent.  That is why composite materials are widely used
              in many areas of modern   technology and manufacturing.  In particular,
              piezocomposites are the   principal elements of modern acous tic transducers. 
              High-frequency   acoustic  transducers are used  for ultrasound medical imaging
               and non-destructive testing of damaged materials. Low-   frequency transducers
              are used for underwater acoustics (so-called   hydrophones) as well as for 
              finding  fish, tracking vessels and   deep-sea seismology. Rapid advances in
              mathematical sciences within the   last 30 years open the possibility of
              understanding the general principles   and relationships linking the overall
              properties of such composite   materials to the properties of their
              constituents. This in turn makes it   possible to design more efficient, lower
              cost transducers.   However, progress has been hampered by expensive and time
              consuming   experiments and  by the enormous complexity of the phenomena. Huge 
               improvements in the ability to measure the properties of composite   materials
              have led to better characterization of their properties. However,   this
              precision of measurement has not been matched by corresponding   improvements
              in the mathematical theory, which could guide the   experimental study and
              industrial design of the transducers. This project   will involve devising and
              improving mathematical techniques and methods   for the study and design of
              piezoceramic composites for transducer applications.   The investigator will
              attempt to use modern mathematical techniques and tools   to understand various
              types of resonances for wave propagation in   polymer piezoceramic composites.
              This study will provide practical   recommendations for increasing the
              sensitivity and resolution   range of the transducers.   ***
