Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Infinite Combinatorics and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9622579

Award Number: 9622579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Menachem Kojman kojman@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9622579  PI:  Menachem Kojman  Carnegie-Mellon University      Cantor's
              discovery of infinite cardinals and his study of their arithmetic  gave birth
              to axiomatic set theory, now accepted as a foundation to  mathematics. In spite
              of the dramatic effect the discovery of infinite  cardinals had on mathematics,
              some of the simplest questions regarding  their arithmetic remained unanswered,
              such as how large the continuum is.  The answer finally obtained to this
              question, by Godel and Cohen, was that  the cardinalities of powers of regular
              cardinals, in particular that of the  continuum, are independent of ZFC. The
              chaotic world-view which emerged  after Cohen's and Easton's independence
              results was challenged some years  later by Silver's theorem about powers of
              singulars, and eventually by  Shelah's work on cardinal arithmetic, which
              restored a dimension of order  and regularity to the arithmetic of singular
              cardinals.     The current project employs  set theoretic methods, especially
              those infinite combinatorics discovered in the context of cardinal arithmetic,
              to study a variety   of phenomena in infinite mathematical structures, such as
              embeddability and homogeneity.  Infinite sets come in different "sizes", called
               cardinals: for example,  the whole numbers and the real numbers are both
              infinite but the set of  real numbers has the greater cardinal.   Infinite
              cardinals have their own  arithmetic; one can add, multiply and take powers, as
              with ordinary arithmetic. Research in the arithmetic of cardinals led to the
              development of Axiomatic Set   Theory, which in turn has provided a 
              foundations for mathematics.  There are two kinds of infinite cardinals,
              Regular and Singular. The arithmetic of  Regular cardinals was studied first
              and shown to be chaotic.  The arithmetic of Singular cardinals turns   out to
              be better behaved.  In recent years a coherent theory has developed, called  
              "pcf theory" by its inventor, Saharon Shelah, bringing some order to the realm
              of cardinal arithmetic, order  which was conspicuous in its absence for almost
              a century. This project employs pcf theory to discover patterns and
              interrelations among other infinite mathematical structures, in order to
              classify these structures according to complexity, generality, and various
              symmetry properties.
