Title       : Structure, Generating, and Counting Problems in Combinatorial Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9622772

Award Number: 9622772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla D. Savage savage@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 9622772 Savage   Efficient generation and counting of combinatorial
              structures requires not only good algorithm design techniques, but also some
              insight into the mathematical structure of the combinatorial family involved.
              On the other hand, investigations in combinatorial mathematics are at times
              hampered because the objects get large so quickly that it is hard to view them
              or to gather any data about them. This investigation continues work on
              efficient combinatorial  generation and counting, with a new emphasis on
              classical problems  in combinatorics. Novel application of recursive
              decomposition  techniques have been the key to results in earlier phases of
              this  work. The results and techniques will be applied to address directly 
              some outstanding structural problems in related areas of  combinatorics, graph
              theory, and group theory. Specifically, the  investigator will address open
              problems in combinatorial Gray codes,  efficient listing algorithms for several
              combinatorial families,  efficient algorithms to count and tabulate
              combinatorial families,  Hamilton cycles in vertex transitive graphs and Cayley
              graphs,  asymptotic and bijective relationships between certain families of 
              integer partitions, and matchings and symmetric chain decompositions  in posets
              of partitions and permutations.  This research is in the general area of
              Combinatorics. One of  the goals of Combinatorics is to find efficient methods
              of  studying how discrete collections of objects can be arranged.  The behavior
              of discrete systems is extremely important to  modern communications. For
              example, the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone
              systems, and the design of  algorithms in computer science deal with discrete
              sets of  objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research.
