Title       : Research Planning Grant: Developing Test Problems for the General Integer
               Programming Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9622104

Award Number: 9622104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anito Joseph ajoseph@sba02.msmail.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9221,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Joseph  9622104   This research planning grant involves developing a new set of
              problems to be used as a testbed for general integer programming (IP) problems.
               Although many special case IP have been well studied, the general IP problem
              remains relatively unexplored.  Consequently test problems used in early
              exploration of general IP problems are still in use today and are insignificant
              in size when measured against modern computing power.  A novel technique for
              developing a modern testbed of general IP problems will be utilized which
              differs from conventional methods in several ways:  first, an optimal solution
              is  determined by solving a knapsack problem over a given solution area;
              second, constraints are constructed to maintain feasibility of this optimal
              solution and implicitly enforce specified bounds.   This approach provides a
              convenient mechanism by which the problem structure around a known solution can
              be changed, thereby expanding opportunities for study of the general IP problem
              and its characteristics.  This technique places no limit on problem size and
              should be able to generate problems of reasonable size.   The research planning
              grant activities include an in-depth study of a methodology for generation of
              test problems with known optimal solutions.  The results of this activity will
              lay the foundation for a joint effort undertaking a full project including the
              design of procedures for problem generation, software development and
              validation, statistical studies and analyses.  Development of a modern set of
              test problems for the general IP problem will fill an important gap and
              accelerate progress in IP research.  IP problems abound in manufacturing areas
              such as sequencing, scheduling, planning, facility layout and design.
