Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9622457

Award Number: 9622457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Kraus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9622457  Kraus  SUNY @ Buffalo    For discrete groups G, there is a close
              connection between approximation   properties of the group von Neumann algebra
              VN(G) and properties of G. In   particular, VN(G) is injective if and only if G
              is amenable. The proposer   and Uffe Haagerup have defined a property for
              locally compact groups   (called the approximation property, or AP) which is
              weaker than   amenability, and have shown that a discrete group G has the AP if
              and   only if VN(G) has the weak* operator approximation property (the weak*  
              OAP).  The weak* OAP is a normal matricial version (for dual operator   spaces)
              of the approximation property for Banach spaces. A dual operator   space has
              the weak* OAP if and only if it satisfies the slice map   property for
              arbitrary weak* closed subspaces of B(H), and so von Neumann   algebras with
              the weak* OAP behave well with respect to taking tensor   products with such
              subspaces. Notions of amenabilty have been defined for   homogeneous spaces,
              correspondences and Kac algebras. The proposer has   defined appropriate
              versions of the AP in each of these cases and during   this project will
              investigate a number of problems concerning the weak*   OAP and approximation
              properties for groups, homogeneous spaces,   correspondences and Kac algebras. 
                Von Neumann algebras are an important tool in the study of quantum  
              mechanics and quantum field theory, and also play an important role in   the
              study of group representations (which themselves are used in quantum  
              physics). The von Neumann algebras that arise in these applications are  
              usually infinite dimensional spaces. One way of obtaining information   about
              the structure and properties of such infinite dimensional objects   is to
              approximate them in an appropriate way by finite dimensional   objects. The
              approximation properties of von Neumann algebras that will   be investigated in
              this project are of this type. The weakest (least   restrictive) such property
              is weak enough that it is satisfied by a  large   class of von Neumann
              algebras, but strong enough that knowing it is valid   gives us important
              information about the von Neumann algebra. In the case   of discrete groups,
              much is known about the connection between properties   of the groups and
              approximation properties of the associated von Neumann   algebras. The theory
              of Kac algebras can be viewed as a generalization of   the theory of group
              representations. One of the goals of this project is   to investigate to what
              extent the results concerning approximation   properties for groups can be
              extended to the more general setting of    Kac algebras.
