Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Incompressible Euler Equations, the Vlasov-Poisson
               Equations, and Numerical Methods for Their Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9622958

Award Number: 9622958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Majda majda@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622958  Majda    The Vlasov-Poisson equations form the simplest system of
              equations which   describe the microscopic properties of a plasma.  Therefore,
              this system is   the starting point for any prediction about the microscopic
              properties of a   plasma.  The Vlasov-Poisson equations also play another very
              important   role. Recent research which involved the proposer demonstrated a
              close   relationship between the Vlasov-Poisson equations and the two
              dimensional   Euler equations in vorticity form.  The Vlasov-Poisson equations
              have a   simpler mathematical structure than the Euler equations which makes
              the   Vlasov-Poisson equations easier to analyze and solve numerically, and
              leads   to many explicit solutions.  Consequently, the Vlasov-Poisson equations
                form an excellent system of model equations to study before considering   any
              open problems for the two dimensional Euler equations.  The proposer   will
              consider some fundamental problems for the Vlasov-Poisson equations  
              pertaining to the lack of uniqueness and singularity formation for weak  
              solutions and to the theory of statistical equilibrium solutions.  Many (but  
              not all) of these problems are related to unsolved problems for the Euler  
              equations.  The proposer will also study some fundamental open problems   for
              the Euler equations with vortex sheet initial data, using Vlasov-Poisson  
              results to motivate and guide this work.  Finally, the proposer will study  
              some interesting issues regarding the numerical solution of both the Vlasov- 
              Poisson and Euler equations.    Fluid dynamics is the study of continuous media
              like air and water.    Scientists formulate problems in this field by applying
              the fundamental laws   of physics such as the conservation of mass, momentum
              and energy.  For   most problems this procedure leads to sets of mathematical
              equations which   are too complicated to solve.  Based on physical  and/or
              mathematical   intuition the scientist then tries to find a simplified
              formulation of the   original problem  which is simple enough to solve and
              sufficiently   complicated to  describe the essential features of the original
              problem.  The   mixing process between layers of fluid which have different
              densities, like   air and water, or layers of fluid moving at different
              velocities is very   complicated and occurs in a wide variety of important
              applications in fields   including aerodynamics, meteorology and oceanography. 
              For example, the   flow of air over an airplane is very complicated.  In order
              to predict the   trailing wake behind an airplane, or the mixing process in a
              fluid, scientists   often use a simplified model of a fluid called a vortex
              sheet.  This is the   simplest realistic description of this and many other
              problems.    Unfortunately, despite the wide-spread use of vortex sheet models
              in many   problems in fluid dynamics, many mathematical properties of vortex
              sheets   remain poorly understood.  The goal of this proposal is to provide 
              answers   to many of the fundamental questions about the mathematical
              properties of   vortex sheets.  Successful completion of the proposed work will
              lead to an   increased understanding of the strengths and limitations when
              using vortex   sheets to model complicated flows.  The starting point for this
              work is the   simplest set of equations which describe a plasma, a fluid in
              which the   microscopic properties of charged particles are modeled. 
              Therefore, this   study should also lead to an increased understanding of the
              properties of a   plasma containing a concentrated beam of electrons.
