Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computation, Optimization, Singularity, and Vibration
               Analysis of Polygonal Elastic Thin Plates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9622910

Award Number: 9622910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44258              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhonghai Ding dingz@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on computation, optimization, singularity and vibration 
              analysis of polygonal elastic thin plates. The following studies will be
              carried out:   (a) the analysis of singular behavior of polygonal thin plates
              near corners; (b) the  study of corner effects in boundary value problems for
              polygonal thin plates, and  associated numerical computations; (c) vibration
              and stabilization analysis of  polygonal thin plates; and (d) optimal boundary
              control for polygonal thin plates  with point sensors at corners.  The research
              utilizes layer potential techniques  for solutions of boundary value problems
              on Lipschitz domains, weighted  Sobolev spaces, microlocal Fourier analysis and
              boundary element methods.  %%%  Elastic thin plates of polygonal shape occur
              naturally in structural mechanics.  The presence of corners may result in
              corner effects such as singularities in  surface stresses and displacements,
              and the absence of certain modes of  vibration.  Such considerations are of
              great concern in the design and  manufacture of various mechanical systems and
              structures. For example, due  to singularities in stress concentrations at
              corners, repeated loading may cause  fatigue which can shorten the service life
              of certain structural components such  as those found in many aircraft.  This
              makes understanding, quantifying, and  controlling the behavior of
              singularities at corners of thin plates imperative.  This  research will build
              such a theoretical foundation as well as demonstrate through  numerical
              simulations the singular phenomena that can occur and how it may be 
              controlled.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
