Title       : Experimental and Analytical Comparison of Methods for DesignUnder Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9622056

Award Number: 9622056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efstratios Nikolaidis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harley H. Cudney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9622056  Nikolaidis   This award provides funds for an investigation into the
              relative merits of probability based design and fuzzy-set based design. The
              study will use three means for probing the differences and similarities of the
              two approaches. First, an examination of the underlying theories of probability
              analysis and fuzzy-set analysis will seek to identify fundamental differences.
              Second, numerical experiments will seek to provide insight   into the different
              design strategies embodied in the two approaches.  Finally, laboratory
              experiments will show how well designs obtained using the two approaches
              perform when built. It is expected that the amount of information on
              uncertainties available to the designer has a major effect on the utility of
              the two approaches. Therefore the study will be conducted for different levels
              of available information ranging from complete statistical knowledge to very
              vague measures of the uncertainties. The study will be reviewed periodically by
              experts in the two fields of probabilistic design and fuzzy-set design to help
              assure quality control.   If successful this study will lead to better
              understanding of the differences and similarities between probabilistic design
              and fuzzy-set design. Furthermore, it is expected that the study will identify
              conditions under which one approach is more appropriate than the other, so as
              to help designers select one method over the other depending on the amount of
              knowledge they have on the uncertainties.  Finally, it is expected that the
              study will help diffuse the intense rivalry between proponents of the two
              methods.  The end result should be an improvement in the ability of designers
              to produce designs that take explicitly into account uncertainty.
