Title       : COLLABORATIVE: Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics of Interfaces and Phase
               Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9622791

Award Number: 9622791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Alikakos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622791  Alikakos            The main goal of our research program is the
              development and analysis   of mathematical models of continua which admit phase
              transitions or structural  defects.  The mathematical  problems address the
              general questions:  How  do nonlinear systems relax to equilibrium?  How do
              interfaces and defects  form and how do they propagate?  These questions arise
              both for diffuse and  sharp interface models.  We also encounter interesting
              questions in  phase interface dynamics which are closely tied to interesting
              questions in  geometry.  We intend to obtain information on the qualitative
              behavior of  phase states predicted by several new models  as well as classical
              modelsfor  phase transition.  We will consider isothermal  solid-solid
              transitions  which occur without a change in the total amount of each species
              and we will  also study liquid-solid transformations where a heat equation is
              coupled to  that for the order parameter. There are natural situations where
              the  perimeter or the geometry of the interface, does not change significantly 
              during the evolution.  Then a reduction to a finite dimensional dynamical 
              system is often possible.  A good deal of our effort in these investigations 
              is spent towards  identifying and  understanding the underlying finite 
              dimensional  dynamics.  %%%  We investigate  certain physical phenomena where
              surface  tension  plays a role. Surface tension is responsible for the shape of
              planets, as  well as for the shape of rain drops.  It is also  the reason why
              skating on  ice is possible. Generally it is a second order effect.  However
              when the  other forces balance each other, surface tension can  become the
              determining  factor.  Here is anexample:  In the first stages of the space
              program  scientists were puzzled by the fact that as soon as the rocket was
              exiting  the earth's gravitiational  attraction  the engines would shut off as
              if they were running out of fuel.  Eventually they realized that in space the
              fuel in the tank forms into  s pherical shapes due to surface tension effects
              with many blobs staying away  from the walls of the container.  We are
              interested in phase change phenomena , for example those involving  ice and
              water (different phases of the same substance which can coexist near  the
              critical temperature of 32F).  Understanding the way certain phases mix  is
              important for determinig the properties of materials. Superconductivity  is a
              good example to which our work applies.  For  understanding all this, one, in
              principle, could start with  the basic  equations  of physics. The problem 
              with this approach is the enormous  complexity that one encounters  and the
              difficulty in the numerical  simulation. For dealing with this scientists are
              proposing  adhoc,  phenomenologically convincing models, which have the
              advantage of  great  simplicity.  Our work is of qualitative nature. It  aims
              to establish that  some of  these simple mathematical  models exhibit the
              wealth of behavior  making them capable of describing and predicting  the 
              phenomena that are  observed .  ***
