Title       : Hodge-Theoretical Invariants of Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9622724

Award Number: 9622724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andras Nemethi nemethi@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal contains two  sections. Both are concentrated on the  theory of
              variations of Hodge structures and singular germs of analytic maps.  The first
              section is a continuation of the work of the principal investigator and J.
              Steenbrink. They computed the spectral pairs associated with a curve 
              singularity with coefficients in a variation of Hodge structure with an 
              abelian monodromy group. The PI plans to generalize this result for arbitrary 
              dimension  and for more general variations (e.g. variations with solvable 
              monodromy group). As a first step, the PI plans to investigate the existence 
              of the limit mixed Hodge structure for such a variations. In the second  
              section, the PI studies a deformation of an isolated complete intersection 
              singularity whose discriminant is a divisor with  normal crossings.  He 
              constructs a limit mixed Hodge structure on the vanishing cohomology and 
              proves the local analogs of several results of Cattani, Kaplan and Schmid, 
              which correspond to the local analog of the "algebraic characterization"   of
              the Nilpotent Orbit Theorem. The PI proposes to find also the geometric  local
              analog of the classical (global) Nilpotent Orbit Theorem.             This
              research is in the field of algebraic geometry and singularity theory. 
              Algebraic geometry is  one of the oldest parts of the modern mathematics, but
              one which has had a revolutionary flowering in the last  thirty years. In its
              origin, it treated figures  that could be defined in the plane by the simplest
              equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays, the field makes use of methods not
              only from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding
              application in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer
              science, and robotics. Singularity theory studies the singular (exotic)  points
              of the figures  studied by the  algebraic geometry. Even elementary results of
              the theory have surprising  applications in physics, in the theory of dynamic
              systems, in chaos and catastrophe theory, and even  in psychology.
