Title       : Adsorption of Surfactant Mixtures at Solid-Liquid Interfaces: A Study of
               Interactions and Dynamics Using Spectroscopic, Electrokinetic, and Calorimetric
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9622781

Award Number: 9622781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622781  Somasundaran    Surfactants find use in several commercial processes
              but the inherent difficulty and excessive costs involved in preparing
              isomerically pure surfactants has necessitated the utilization of surfactant
              mixtures.  Moreover, the performance of mixtures of surfactants is far superior
              to that of the individual components which has resulted in the deliberate
              addition of surfactant mixtures in many products such as detergents and
              cosmetics.  The effectiveness of the surfactant in a majority of the
              application s depends upon the adsorption (or lack of it) as well as the
              microstructure of the adsorbed layers.  Much work has been done to understand
              the mechanisms involved in determining adsorption of surfactants but very
              little of it has been with mixtures of surfactants.  The key to the successful
              design of reagent combinations depends upon the understanding of the micro and
              nanostructural features of surfactant structures formed in solution and at
              solid-liquid interfaces coupled with the development of predictive models based
              upon the properties of individual components.    It is the goal of the proposed
              research to investigate the interactions between surfactants of different
              characteristics and the micro and nanostructures of the mixed adsorbed layers
              using a multi-pronged approach combining classical tools of adsorption,
              electrokinetics, wettability and microcalorimetry with modern spectroscopic
              techniques such fluorescence, electron spin resonance (ESR), fluorescence
              recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), and second harmonic generation (SHG). 
              Fluorescence and ESR spectroscopy will be used to determine the micropolarity,
              the microviscosity and aggregation numbers of the adsorbed layers; FRAP to
              probe the dynamics involved; SHG to probe the relative and absolute orientation
              of the molecules at the interface.  Effects of pH, surfactant structure,
              salinity, temperature and perturbations in these parameters will be determined
              to assist in elucidating the adsorption mechanisms and  associated dynamics. 
              In addition to the surfactants such as linear alkyl aryl and xylene sulfonates,
              novel sugar based environmentally friendly surfactants will be a focus of the
              study.  It is expected that the multi-pronged experimental and theoretical
              approach that has been successfully used for single surfactants will help in
              developing predictive useful models for adsorption of surfactant mixtures on
              solids.  ***
