Title       : Implicitization of Rational Surfaces with Base Points
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9622768

Award Number: 9622768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Sederberg tom@cs.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to investigate a new technique  for finding
              the implicit equation of a rational surface.  Standard implicitization
              techniques for rational surfaces are  based on resultants.  But resultants
              vanish in the presence of  base points.  Therefore, when base points are
              present, the  implicit equation can be recovered using resultants only by 
              carefully perturbing the parametric equations to eliminate the  base points. 
              But such perturbations generally introduce  extraneous factors, which then need
              to be painstakingly removed.  Thus base points seriously complicate
              implicitization using  resultants.  On the other hand, base points simplify the
              implicit  equation of a rational surface by lowering its degree.    Preliminary
              work has roughed out a new implicitization technique  based on algebraic
              "moving surfaces" that "follow" a rational  surface.  Not only is this new
              implicitization technique  impervious to base points, it also simplifies in the
              presence of  base points.  Moreover this new method generates a more compact 
              matrix representation for the implicit equation than methods  based on
              resultants.  Currently this new method is substantiated  only by several
              Mathematica examples and some preliminary  theorems.  It is proposed to develop
              the theoretical foundations  of the new method and then to apply the method to
              solve a variety  of practical problems in computer graphics, geometric
              modeling,  and symbolic computation.    A wide variety of additional problems
              in elimination theory might  also be attacked by these new techniques
              including, but not  limited to, inverting a rational map, computing the
              singular  locus of a rational surface, intersecting rational curves and 
              surfaces, and intersecting algebraic curves and surfaces.  ***
