Title       : Neuropeptide Analysis using Multidimensional Separation and Detection
               Methodology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9622663

Award Number: 9622663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Scheeline scheelin@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan V. Sweedler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0305010   Drug Abuse Effects Biol                 
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Urbana-Champaign  This project, directed by Assistant Professor Jonathan V.
              Sweedler of the   University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, is focused on
              identifying and   quantitatively measuring neuronal releasates and assaying the
              contents of   individual peptide vesicles.  Support is provided by the
              Analytical and   Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry and by 
               Neuroendocrinology in the Division of Integrative Biology and   Neuroscience. 
              The work will develop new wavelength resolved fluorescence   detection methods
              for microseparations that allow neuropeptides and   classical neurotransmitters
              to be identified and quantitatively measured   without the need for chemical
              derivitization, provide methods to assay   the contents of individual
              peptidergic vesicles, and develop a separation   approach which allows the time
              course of peptide release to be followed.    These measurements are all
              concerned with the dynamics of cellular   communication and the studies are
              designed to lead to improved   understanding of the nervous system.  The bag
              cell neurons of the marine   mollusk, Aplysia Californica, will serve as a
              model system.  An understanding of the chemical pathways involved in the
              transmission of   a nerve impulse is essential to our gaining full knowledge of
              how the   nervous system functions.  This work will explore such pathways by  
              developing the measurement techniques needed to follow peptide  
              neurotransmitters which are typically present in very low concentrations   and
              which are found in the presence of many other biological compounds.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
