Title       : Embeddings of Graphs in Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9622780

Award Number: 9622780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark N. Ellingham mne@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoya Zha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Ellingham  9622780   Graphs are abstract mathematical models of networks. It
              is natural to try to represent a graph by drawing, or embedding, it in a
              surface, in such a way that no edges of the graph cross. The natural surface in
              which to try to embed a graph is the plane, and embedding in the plane is
              equivalent to embedding in the surface of a sphere. Many graphs cannot be
              embedded in a sphere, but can be embedded in other surfaces obtained by
              attaching handles, or mathematical devices known as crosscaps, to a sphere. 
              This  investigation will deal with three facets of graph embeddings in
              surfaces.  (I) Certain embeddings of a graph in a surface are nicer than
              others. In particular, a desirable feature of an embedding is that each of the 
              regions into which the graph divides the surface, or faces, has no hole and
              touches no vertex more than once. Embeddings with this property are called 
              strong embeddings. The Strong Embedding Conjecture (SEC) says that any graph 
              satisfying a necessary condition (2-connectivity) has such an embedding.  This
              is closely related to another very important problem in graph theory,  the
              Cycle Double Cover Conjecture. The investigation will: first, extend the  range
              of graphs for which the SEC is known to be true; second, consider the  local
              structure of strong embeddings with a view to determining what makes  them
              possible, and third, examine other parameters of an embedding which may  be
              useful for changing other embeddings into strong ones.(II) In working  with
              embeddings on a surface, it would be very useful to be able to cut the  surface
              into smaller pieces and investigate embeddings of pieces of the  graph on these
              less complicated surfaces. The cut must follow edges of the  embedded graphs to
              be helpful; the edges of each cut form a separating  circuit of the embedded
              graph. This investigation will increase current  knowledge about the
              circumstances under which separating circuits exist. (III) A very important
              question in graph theory is whether it is poss ible to traverse a graph in such
              a way that every vertex is visited, under given restrictions. If the
              restrictions are first, to end up where the traversal began, and second, to
              visit no vertex no more than k times, the result is  called a k-walk in the
              graph. Knowing that a graph can be embedded in a particular surface can, in
              conjunction with other conditions, guarantee the  existence of a k-walk for
              certain values of k. The proposed research will determine conditions for the
              existence of k-walks in graphs embedded on surfaces, in particular surfaces of
              negative Euler characteristic, i.e.,  with at least 2 handles or 3 crosscaps.  
               This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
              Combinatorics is to find efficient methods to study how discrete collections of
              objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely 
              important to modern communications. For example, the design of large  networks,
              such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of  algorithms in
              computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
              combinatorial research.
