Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9622546

Award Number: 9622546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Ein ein@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EIN    Ein proposes to investigate the following and related problems in
              algebraic geometry.   (1)  Linear systems on higher dimensional varieties. One
              of the basic tools in investigating the geometry of an algebraic variety is to
              study the properties of the linear systems on the variety. Ein (jointly with R.
              Lazarsfeld) proved a conjecture of Fujita on the freeness of a large class of
              adjoint linear systems on threefolds. They would like to apply the new
              techniques developed in studying this conjecture to study singular divisors and
               the geometry of the special subvarieties. In particular they plan to study the
              singularities of the theta divisors on abelian varieties.  They would also like
              to extend their results on linear systems to higher dimensions and to study
              questions on very ampleness.  (2) Local positivity of ample line bundles and
              Seshadri constants.  The Seshadri constant is an important invariant that
              measures the local positivity of an ample line bundle.  Ein would like to work
              on the conjecture that the Seshadri constant is greater or equal to one for a
              general point x in our projective variety.  (3) Syzygies of algebraic
              varieties.  Ein would like to investigate the relation between the geometry of
              the variety and the syzygies of the coordinate ring of the variety while the
              variety is embedded by an adjoint linear system.   (4) Subvarieties  od generic
              complete intersections.  Ein has proved a result that all the subvarieties of a
              generic complete intersection of high degree are of general type. This result
              has recently been improved by Voisin.    Ein would like to extend the result to
              study the deformations of subvarieties of a generic complete intersection while
              the complete intersection variety is a Calabai-Yau manifold. These problems
              take on new significance because of their relations to  physics and mirror
              symmetry.  This is research in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic
              geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has
              had a revolutionary  flowering in the past quarter-century. In the origin, it
              treated figures that could be defined in the plne by the simplest equations,
              namesly polynomials. Nowadays, the field makes use of methods not only from
              algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding applicaton
              in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer science, and
              robotics.
