Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mammalian Distribution in the Late Cretaceous and
               Earliest Paleocene Western Interior of North America: Testing Provinciality
               Through Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9622771

Award Number: 9622771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3145               (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Clemens billc@ucmpl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9622771  CLEMENS  Floodplain and delta sediments of Late Cretaceous to earliest
              Paleocene (Tertiary) age (72-60 Million Years Ago), laid down as the Western
              Interior Seaway retreated across the North American continent, document an
              extraordinary period of mammalian evolution.  Mammals survived and rapidly
              diversified across the Cretaceous-Tertiary (K/T) boundary (66 MYA); many other
              groups of animals suffered mass extinctions at this boundary.  Many questions
              in the fields of evolutionary biology, paleoecology and biostratigraphy can be
              addressed through an understanding of the patterns of mammalian distribution
              during this time period.    Recent studies of fossil mammals preserved in these
              floodplain sediments indicate that during the Late Campanian (approximately 72
              MYA) there were distinct northern and southern faunas.  Did these faunas remain
              distinct in the 12-million year period following?  If not, in what respects did
              they change?  It has been difficult to identify basic patterns, partly because
              of the large and scattered amount of geographic information, and partly because
              the relationships among the animals in question are poorly understood.    Newly
              available computational tools will allow Anne Wiel, under the supervision of
              William Clemens, to address these questions quantitatively for the first time. 
              The first stage of the research will address questions of the phylogenetic
              relationships among the species of mammals identified in the fossil remains,
              including those among species that have not previously been considered.  New
              hypotheses are to be incorporated in a database compiled from fossil site data
              from throughout the Western Interior.  Using a Geographic Information System
              (GIS) to recognize spatial associations in this geographic, environmental, and
              taxonomic data, the investigators will apply different types of analyses
              commonly used to quantify faunal similarity or variation, and compare the
              results.    This project will benefit the scientific community in three ways:
              by cre ating a database that will be made available to other researchers;  by
              comparing different measures of faunal similarity; by creating a robust,
              testable, and accessible model of mammalian distribution across the K/T
              boundary.
