Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Advanced Computing and Mapping Facilities for
               Inverse Electrocardiography Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1996 
File        : a9622158

Award Number: 9622158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Throne rthrone1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Windle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lorraine G. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622158  Throne  Each year approximately 250,000 people succumb to potentially 
              lethal cardiac tachyarrhythmias (fast abnormal heart beats) in  the United
              States.  Of these, only 10% survive to undergo further  treatment.  Treatment
              options include drug therapy--which has  numerous side effects and often does
              not work--implantable  devices--which treat only the symptoms and incur
              significant  initial and follow-up costs or surgical removal of the source of 
              the arrhythmia.  Surgery is often the most effective treatment,  in that it is
              a cure for arrhythmia, but identifying the focal  site is difficult and
              time-consuming.  Systematic methods for  extrapolating electrical voltages
              measured on the body surface to  electrical voltages on the heart (the inverse
              problem of  electrocardiography) could greatly improve the ability to locate 
              the focus of the arrhythmia before surgery, lower the time in  surgery and
              provide a low-cost, noninvasive initial screening of  those patients likely to
              succumb to these arrhythmias.    The Departments of Electrical Engineering,
              Mechanical Engineering  and Internal Medicine (Section of Cardiology) at the
              University  of Nebraska will purchase an engineering workstation server and 
              mapping equipment which will be dedicated to support research in  biomedical
              engineering.  The equipment, which expands the  capabilities of existing
              facilities, will be used primarily for  research on inverse
              electrocardiography.  The ability to solve  the inverse problem of
              electrocardiography accurately, which is  the focus of the research, directly
              implies the ability to  noninvasively create an accurate picture of the
              electrical  activity of the heart.  This picture, in turn, makes it possible 
              to more accurately diagnose and treat heart conduction-related  illnesses.  The
              collaboration between theoretical engineering  scientists and practicing
              medical researchers/clinicians will  allow the study of methods from numerical
              theories through to  eventual clinical trials, giving the abilit y to improve
              patient  care in the near future.  ***
