Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Discrete Groups and Quasiconformal Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9622808

Award Number: 9622808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47861              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Gehring   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9622808  PI: Gehring    This project addresses problems
              concerning discrete groups of Mobius transformations, 3-manifolds and
              orbifolds, quasiconformal mappings, and function theoretic properties of plane
              domains.  For example, the Gehring plans to continue a joint study with G. J.
              Martin of the set of values which cannot be assumed by the trace of the
              commutator of pairs of elements of a nonelementary discrete group.  This study
              has already yielded a great deal of information about the minimum possible
              volumes of 3-manifolds and orbifolds and it should, in particular, allow one to
              prove that the orbifold associated with the 3-5-3 hyperbolic tetrahedral group
              has minimum volume among all 3-manifolds and orbifolds. The main tools for this
              study are: (1) complex iteration to identify big filled in Julia sets E for a
              special family P of polynomials, and (2) a covering argument using the family P
              and the filled in Julia sets E to obtain large regions D of excluded values for
              the traces of the commutators of pairs of elements.  The Gehring hopes also to
              study further the polynomial family P, an interesting collection of polynomials
              with one complex parameter which arise naturally in the study of Mobius groups.
                 Mathematics can be viewed as consisting of three main fields - algebra,
              analysis, and geometry - together with many other areas which are developments
              of the basic ideas in one or more of these fields.  Thus   algebra is the field
              which has developed from studying polynomial equations, analysis the field
              which has its roots in the calculus, and geometry the field that has developed
              from the ideas of Euclid and the Greeks.  It is particularly interesting and
              satisfying for mathematicians when ideas which belong to one of these fields
              can be used to solve problems in another.  This project concerns some problems
              which are   situated at a crossroads where all three of these fields meet.  In
              particular, one problem is to determine the smallest possible volume of certain
              g eometric objects using the theory of complex iteration and   Mandelbrot sets
              of analysis together with a polynomial family which arose from algebra. Work in
              such a part of mathematics can be quite fruitful since the solution of a
              crossroads problem usually has implications in all of the fields concerned.
