Title       : Open-Architecture Integration for Agile Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9622588

Award Number: 9622588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry H. Cheng hhcheng@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5223,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9622588  Cheng   This award funds research on open architecture horizontal and
              vertical system integration for agile manufacturing. A real-time open
              architecture "plug and play" integration environment for agile manufacturing
              will be developed.  A set of device drivers for mechatronic components such as
              actuators, force sensors, vision sensors, analog and digital input and output
              will be developed. A set of system dependent modules for robot manipulators,
              numerically controlled machines, and automatic assembly systems will also be
              developed.  Controllers and sensors of two commercial industrial robot
              manipulators   and one numerically controlled milling machine will be
              retrofitted with open architecture using the device drivers and system
              dependent modules. The robot manipulators and machine will be integrated under
              the new integration paradigm to form an open architecture automatic
              manufacturing workcell. This manufacturing workcell will be   linked with other
              information systems such as computer-aided design and the World Wide Web
              through the network. This manufacturing workcell will be made adaptive so that
              it can automatically adjust to changing work loads, conditions, and
              requirements by communication with other information systems. This
              experimentally tested "plug and play" manufacturing system and integration
              environment will be transferred for various  applications in industries through
              industrial partners.   If successful, this project will provide an improved
              understanding of fundamental problems underlying real-time open architecture
              system integration.  The new integration environment will be vendor
              independent, computer platform independent, mechatronic component independent,
              and manufacturing system independent, and will enable horizontal integration of
              manufacturing systems across different vendor's product lines.  The system
              should make manufacturing data, such as the status of work in progress and  
              real-time machine performance, readily available throughout organizations. 
              This   timely flow of information within and between enterprises through
              vertical integration is critical to the agility of the manufacturing
              enterprise. It could significantly reduce manufacturing costs and cycle time,
              and enable cost-effective production of both large and small lot sizes and
              customized products.
