Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Monge Problem and the Calculus of Variations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9622734

Award Number: 9622734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilfrid Gangbo gangbo@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Gangbo  9622734    In 1781 G. Monge formulated a question which occurs
              naturally in economics and   engineering: Given two equal masses at two
              locations X and Y, find the "best strategy" to move the mass from the first
              location to second one, where optimality is measured against a cost function.
              Monge conjectured that there exists a best strategy, i.e. the problem admits a
              minimizer and that there exists a scalar potential function u such that mass is
              transported from x in X to y in Y along the direction -Du(x). For about two
              hundred years, no rigorous proof of Monge's conjecture was given. Appell
              presented a formal   proof of the existence of the potential function u, where
              he introduced u as a Lagrange multiplier of Monge's problem. Kantorovich made
              Appell's proof rigorous by introducing a problem we call  the Monge-Kantorovich
              problem. The Monge-Kantorovich problem, which is a relaxation of the Monge
              problem, is based on a duality argument. In a work in progress with L.C. Evans,
              we study the original Monge problem and have great expectation that soon we
              will completely solve it. Recently, in a joint work with R. McCann, we proved
              that given a general cost function c(x-y) which is either strictly convex or
              astrictly concave function of the distance, the Monge-Kantorovich problem  
              admits a unique optimal solution which is a map, say T from X to Y. Among other
              things I would like to study the smoothness properties of the optimal map T for
              general cost functions. It is known that when the cost function is the square
              of the euclidian distance, the Monge-Kantorovich problem is obtained by
              discretizing the Euler equation of an ideal fluid. I expect to give existence
              results for the Euler equation in any dimensional space by   applying these
              techniques.    To illustrate the importance of the mass transport problem and
              the regularity of its solutions we consider two examples, the first one being
              related to environment. Here, the fluid we consider is water in motion in a
              lake, and we assume  that we know the state of the water at an initial time,
              say 0. We want to predict the state of the lake at a later time, say, 10
              knowing what evolution laws govern the water. The later state of the water will
              depend on factors like the wind. The water consists of particles which will
              move from one location to another and will naturally spend the least energy for
              this process. We say that the motion of particles is made in an optimal way.
              When the motion involving the least work is hard to determine at the final time
              10, one usually discretizes the problem by studying the state of the water at
              successive times, 1, 2, etc... 10. This discretization         corresponds to
              the Monge-Kantorovich problem. The smoothness of the solutions of the discrete
              problem will guarantee that a slight error of measurement of the initial state
              will not affect our prediction much. A second example we use to illustrate the
              importance of smothness of optimal strategies is in economics. Assume that we
              determine the cheapest way of transporting materials in a network between
              suppliers and customers. One of the issues  is to know if by removing one
              supplier and one customer we will be forced    to make a significant revision
              in our strategy of tranportation. If the know that the optimal strategy depends
              on the data in a smooth way then the revision needed would be slight.
