Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Models and Linearization for Freeness in Operator
               Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9622798

Award Number: 9622798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Hanlon hanlon@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandru Nica  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622798  Alexandru Nica        The problems addressed by the project are in free
              probability theory   - a line of research in operator algebras which parallels
              aspects of classical   probability, in a context where tensor products are
              replaced by free products,   and independent random variables are replaced by
              free random variables. The   proposed research reflects the interplay between
              two main directions in   the development of the theory, namely that: while (on
              one hand) studying   the parallelism between freeness and independence is of
              intrinsic interest,   we have (on the other hand) that free probability is a
              powerful tool for   attacking hard problems on free products of operator
              algebras. The main object   of study, called the  R-transform, is a free
              non-commutative  analog for   the logarithm of the Fourier  transform of a
              (multivariable) probability   distribution. In recent work, the multivariable
              R-transfopm has emerged as  an elegant and at the same time far-reaching
              instrument in the study of the  freeness phenomenon; we present problems that
              naturally come in the   continuation of this promising direction of research.
              Problems related to a  remarkable interpolation, depending on a parameter q in 
              0,1 , between the  R-transform and its commutative counterpart; and problems
              related to an  asymptotic model for freeness, based on random permutations, are
              also discussed.        The notion of random variable, and the concept of
              independence for random  variables are basic elements in the language of
              probability theory. Random  variables can be added and multiplied together, and
              built in their definition  is the fact that the product of two random variables
              f and g does not depend on   the order in which they are considered (always fg
              = gf). In the field of free  probability, the latter assumption is dropped, and
              the concept of independence   is replaced by the one of freeness - a condition
              originally inspired from the   study of certain algebras associated to free
              groups. While free pr obability   was started in the 80's as part of an effort
              to approach some long-standing   problems in operator algebras, it is at
              present clear that we have to do with   a fertile mathematical theory,
              connected to other branches of mathematics   and science; recent contributions
              in the field were made, e.g., by quantum   physicists and algebraic
              combinatorists. The present project is concerned with   topics from free
              harmonic analysis - the `free analog' for the Fourier   analysis methods
              classically used in the study of random variables.
