Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Modeling of Island Formation in Strained
               Semiconductor Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9622930

Award Number: 9622930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Spencer spencerb@math.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9162,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                9622930  Spencer    The objective of this research is to develop mathematical
              models to  predict and control morphology development in strained solid films, 
              which are of great technological importance in semiconductor device 
              applications.  The research project focuses on the consequences of the 
              stress-driven morphological instability which occurs during film  growth.  In
              particular, the formation of the "island" morphology will  be explained in
              terms of mathematical models for the morphological  instability.  The research
              program consists of two projects, one  focusing on single-component films, the
              second focusing on alloy  films.  In the first project, a "state of the art"
              model for the  formation of three-dimensional islands will be developed.  This
              model  will include a crucial treatment of the wetting layer between the film 
              and its underlying substrate.  In the second project, a basic model  will be
              developed for the more complicated problem of morphology  development in alloy
              films, where composition variations and stress  variations are coupled.  In
              both projects the mathematical models are  nonlinear free boundary problems for
              the shape of the film.  These  problems will be analyzed using applied
              mathematical techniques which  include analytical, asymptotic, and numerical
              methods.  In particular,  an asymptotic description for the island shape will
              be derived which  takes advantage of the fact that islands generally have a
              much smaller  height than width.  The results of the work will be compared to 
              observations of islands in strained film systems from both  collaborative
              research projects and published experimental results.  The models will be
              evaluated to determine the extent to which they can  be used to predict and
              control morphologies, as well as to determine  future directions for improving
              mathematical models of strained film  growth as part of a long-term research
              program.    %%%    The objective of this research is to develop mathematical
              models to  predict and control mo rphology development in strained solid films.
               Strained solid films are of great technological importance in  semiconductor
              device applications.  The strained films are grown from  a vapor through the
              deposition of the solid film onto an underlying  substrate of a different
              material.  Because of the bonding of the film  to the substrate, the film is
              grown in a state of stress.  During the  growth of these films, the stresses in
              the film can lead to the  formation of bumps, or "islands."  The presence of
              these islands has a  crucial effect on the electronic properties of the thin
              film device,  so a knowledge of what controls island formation enables a better
               control over the electronic properties of the strained film device.  The
              objective of this research is to describe island formation from 
              physically-derived mathematical models of the film growth process.  This
              mathematical model represents a complementary alternative to  traditional
              experiment-based research on strained films.  The primary  benefit of
              developing such a model is that it allows one to quickly  and easily determine
              how the growth of the film is affected by the  different material parameters
              and process parameters.  Thus, the model  has three main applications in the
              development and production of  strained solid films.  Firstly, by changing the
              parameters in the  model, the model can be used as a low-cost way to
              "experiment" with  different materials and growth configurations.  Secondly,
              the  mathematical model can be used to help engineer materials by  determining
              the necessary process inputs required to achieve a  strained solid film with
              specified physical and electronic properties.  Finally, the mathematical model
              can assist in the determination of  optimum and/or acceptable processing
              conditions for the manufacture of  strained films in industry.    ***
