Title       : Ergodic Theory and Symbolic Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9622866

Award Number: 9622866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79596              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Lind lind@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Selim Tuncel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT:  Lind/Tuncel    Lind will investigate various aspects of several
              dimensional actions, including zeta functions and directional entropies.
              Emphasis will be placed on the determination of the expansive sets, how the
              dynamics of one component of the expansive set may influence the dynamics in
              another, and how finite type assumptions may change the answers. He   will
              further probe the coincidence entropies of certain actions with the growth rate
              for spanning trees of related infinite graphs. He will also pursue a link with
              electrical networks suggested by his discovery of a new invariant for Markov
              shifts arising from consideration of spanning trees. Tuncel will work on
              two-dimensional shifts of finite type. He has observed that certain matrix
              equations determine the entropy whenever they have (positive) solutions, and
              that similar inequalities give bounds on entropy. He will pursue the
              characterization of conjugacy classes for which the equations have solutions,
              the   possibility of improving the bounds by state-splitting, and the use of
              the inequalities in coding algorithms related to holographic data storage. He
              will also continue his analysis of Markov chains and their classifications,
              with emphasis on the development of dynamical   invariants and coding methods
              for handling near-boundary constraints.     Traditional problems of encoding
              data have focused on one-dimensional sequences, such as those found on computer
              disk drives or (in spiral form) on compact audio discs. In such situations
              physical constraints mean that, for efficient encoding, arbitrary data must be
              encoded into data subject to constraints. For instance data on a compact audio
              disk must have the property that between consecutive 1's there are at least
              two, but no more that seven, 0's. Symbolic dynamics provides that mathematical
              framework for discovering and   investigating methods of encoding that have
              practical implications.  More recently both industrial and research
              mathematicians have been studying higher-dimen sional versions of these
              problems.  Industry is interested, for example, in holographic data storage
              where   information is spread over a three-dimensional cube. Research
              mathematicians have been discovering fascinating new phenomena in this area, in
              particular some rich connections with the seemingly unrelated fields of
              commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. The investigators will continue
              their work with the higher-dimensional theory, with   emphasis on ways of
              measuring information and a study of periodic structures.
