Title       : Bridge Structural Identification for Condition Assessment In Collaboration with
               Northeastern University & Tufts University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9622259

Award Number: 9622259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Helmicki ahelmicki@royal.fulff.ece.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmet E. Aktan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9622259  Aktan/Helmicki  This is a joint project with Tufts University and 
              Northeastern University focusing on exploring the role of  structural
              identification in transforming the current semi-  empirical practice to a
              rational knowledge-base, thereby  paving the way for effective and optimum
              infrastructure  designing operation and management.  Fundamental questions 
              pertaining to the use of structural identification for  bridge structures will
              be answered.  The research will be  primarily focused on structural
              identification in terms data  processing, quality assurance, damage evaluation,
              and  reliability evaluation.  The experimental and analytical  tools  that
              permit meaningful and practical applications of  structural identification are
              only presently emerging.  A  test bridge has already been instrumented  which
              is a 10  year old, 188ft long, three-span, two lane, integral  abutment,
              reinforced concrete-deck-on-steel-girders overpass  in the Cincinnati area to
              provide needed test data.  Another  bridge is under construction and is being
              instrumented  with  over 350 sensors.  Accelerations, displacements, rotations,
               strains, temperatures, truckloads and environmental  conditions  will be
              monitored over the long-term by  intelligent monitoring systems.  In addition
              to active and  passive sensors, photogrammetric image processing  technologies
              will be used.  The structural identification  experiments will include: modal
              testing by impact, modal  testing by multi-imput forced-excitation, geometry- 
              monitoring, traffic-inputs and operating responses,  environmental inputs and
              ambient responses, static proof-  level multiple truck-loading, etc.  A wide
              variety of  structural identification approaches and analytical tools  will be
              studied.
