Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Geometry of Optimal Transportation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1998   
File        : a9622997

Award Number: 9622997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76728              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert McCann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  McCann  9622997    This proposal focuses on the analysis of a
              long-standing problem which   arises in economics and operations research as
              well as probability and   statistics. Given two distributions (f and g) of mass
              over a Riemannian   manifold M, the problem is to determine the most efficient
              way to rearrange   the mass of the first distribution to yield the second.
              Efficiency is   measured against a function c(x,y) which specifies the cost per
              unit mass   for transporting material from x to y --- so the problem can be
              formulated   as a linear program. However,  when the cost function is related
              to the   metrical distance between pairs of points on M, then the problem has a
                rich structure and deep connections to geometry and non-linear partial  
              differential equations which have only begun to be explored. For costs   which
              are either convex or concave functions of this distance, the goal   would be to
              find a map from the manifold to itself which minimizes the   total
              transportation costs, among maps pushing the measure f forward   to g. Even on
              the line, this map can be intricate. Recent developments   in Euclidean space
              suggest some promising questions to explore: What   conditions guarantee
              existence and uniqueness of an optimal mapping?    What geometrical or analytic
              properties characterize the optimal maps?    Can this geometry be exploited
              fruitfully in applications?      The motivation for this research is
              illustrated by an example from   economics: Given a distribution of iron mines
              throughout the countryside,   and a distribution of factories which require
              iron ore, decide which mines   should supply ore to each factory in order to
              minimize the total   transportation costs. The mines and factories lie on a
              curved space M,    like the surface of the earth, but general enough to include
              barriers to   transportation such as lakes and mountain ranges; the cost per
              ton for   transporting ore from any mine to factory is determined by the
              distance   measured between them in thi s space.  Aside from industrial
              applications,    the solution to this problem should yield new understanding of
              existing   patterns in the economy, and may prove useful for infrastructure
              planning.   Because of its close relationship to several areas of pure
              mathematics, the   research promises to stimulate a fruitful exchange in two
              directions:   powerful mathematics will be brought to bear on problems from the
              real   word, while concrete solutions to those problems should provide new
              insight   into the mathematics.
