Title       : Signal Processing and Target Images in Bat Sonar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9622297

Award Number: 9622297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256905             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Simmons James_Simmons@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622297  Simmons  The general objective of the proposed research is to  identify
              activity in the brain that causes perceptual images  to have their particular
              content.  The specific question is  how specific numerical values for
              parameters of neural  responses manifest themselves in corresponding numerical 
              values for perceptual dimensions of images.  This project  uses target ranging
              in the biological sonar of the big brown  bat, Eptesicus fuscus, as a
              "test-bed" for addressing  questions about the formation and content of
              perceived  images.  Sonar and radar systems offer an especially well- 
              developed body of theory about signal-processing and display  of information
              that can be used to understand the mechanisms  of biological systems evolved
              for the same purpose.  Moreover, the exceptional real-time performance of
              biosonar  systems in well-defined tasks of target localization,  tracking, and
              classification make it obvious that there are  technological advantages to
              understanding how echolocating  animals achieve this performance.  The starting
              point for  the project is that bats have unusually good echo-delay  accuracy of
              10-15 ns and "two-point" echo-delay resolution  of s.  The initial problem is
              to account for this seemingly  implausible performance with neural responses,
              which from  physiological single-cell recording experiments appear to be  2-3
              orders of magnitude less precise.  New physiological  experiments in the bat's
              midbrain and auditory cortex reveal  that the "missing" high-precision temporal
              information is  carried by the latencies of multi-cell neural responses  using
              expanded time scales.    There are two prominent competing hypotheses about
              neural  substrates of perception which differ in the relative  importance of
              response-rate and response-timing for  determining image content.  These
              hypotheses yield widely-  divergent predictions from neural data for what bats
              should  be able to perceive about target range.  The combination of  behavioral
              and physiological data from Ep tesicus leads to  rejection of the hypothesis
              that relies exclusively on  response-rate to represent information in images,
              while  sustaining the hypothesis that response-timing may be "read  out"
              directly into perception.  The proposed research will  examine these competing
              hypotheses in more detail because  rejection of the response-rate model has
              widespread  implications for neuroscience and for bioengineering,  specifically
              for development of man-made systems that seek  to emulate animal sonar
              performance.  The proposed  experiments will use 3-D video reconstructions of
              the bat's  flight in sonar-guided interceptions to quantify how well  the bat
              can locate and recognize targets in complex multiple-  target sonar "scenes." 
              New psychophysical experiments using  electronically-simulated targets will
              measure the structure  of the bat's sonar images to determine whether specific 
              combinations of single and multiple overlapping echoes  delivered from
              different directions lead to predicted echo-  delay values appearing in the
              images.  New physiological  experiments will record and analyze the response in
              the  bat's inferior colliculus that carry fine echo-delay  information on
              expanded time scales to learn how these  responses are combined to form images.
               A large-scale  computational model of the bat's sonar will be used to 
              evaluate experimental data in the context of emulating the  bat's performance. 
              ***
