Title       : On-Line Monitoring of Weld Pool Depth with Laser Ultrasound
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1996  
File        : a9622277

Award Number: 9622277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193831             (Estimated)
Investigator: I. Charles Ume   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9163,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9622277  Ume   Pulsed laser generation is a thermoelastic process when the laser
              energy is below the ablation level. The laser deposits heat on the surface
              causing a local expansion and contraction which in turn results in ultrasonic
              stress waves. This principle has been successfully demonstrated by the
              investigators to simulated welds using phased array laser in a prior NSF funded
              research. Phased array was the novelty in the prior work which allowed for
              control of beam width, direction and focusing and the directionality of the
              emanating ultrasonic waves as well as generation of one type of wave motion,
              such as the surface (Raleigh) wave, shear wave, or longitudinal wave. In the
              detection of molten weld pool this last feature can be taken advantage by using
              the distinguishing feature of liquid, which can not carry shear waves unlike
              solids.  In the current research, the detection will be carried out by
              electromagnetic acoustic transducer. Weld pool depth during an actual gas metal
              arc welding process will be attempted by lining up the phased laser array and
              electromagnetic acoustic transducer behind the welding torch in a programmable
              automated welding system. In order to understand the process sufficiently to
              automate the on-line monitoring of welding, an analytical model will be
              developed for array sources and combined with published work on effects of
              ultrasound propagation through temperature gradients.   Industrial researchers
              with expertise in welding have come forward with the donation of an automated
              welding equipment system as well as shown a commitment  to provide on-site
              consulting. This kind of close working relationship between industrial
              researchers and academic faculty and students should be invaluable not only
              transferring the technology to the commercial sector but also in training the
              future engineers in a relevant customer pull manufacturing project. Current
              state of automation in welding is limited to open control by monitoring the
              weld quality as a post-processing step bec ause of the very aggressive
              environment (splattering of molten metals surrounded by hot gases) during the
              welding process. This research has the potential to make possible closed loop
              control whereby a very high quality of the weld could be achieved. Such a
              manufacturing process has far reaching consequences in the welding industry in
              terms product quality, rework reduction and thus lower process cost.
              Considering that welding is used extensively in a wide variety of manufacturing
              from ship building to construction, the impact on the national infrastructure
              could be enormous.
