Title       : A Reduced Basis Approach to the Design of Distributed Parameter Controllers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9622842

Award Number: 9622842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Belinda B. King   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622842  King  This focus of this project is the development of a reduced basis
              approach to controller  design for distributed parameter systems described by
              partial differential equations (PDEs).   The first step in the framework
              involves using distributed parameter control theory for PDE  control problems
              to obtain an explicit infinite dimensional control law.  The controller is 
              based on compensator design so that state estimates are used (requiring only a
              small  number of state measurements) as opposed to full-state feedback, in
              which the full  distributed state must be known.  The next step relies on
              obtaining integral  representations of feedback control operators in terms of
              feedback functional gains.  The  use of the special spatial structure of these
              functional gains allows for approximation  schemes which result in low-order
              controllers.  Moreover, analysis of local dynamics  motivated by such
              approximations will give insight into sensor placement and design.  This  work
              provides a framework for practical controller designs which are computationally
               efficient.  Moreover, it provides answers to questions regarding sensor
              design, specifically  regarding types and locations of sensors within a moving
              fluid.   %%%  This project will development a practical framework for the
              control of complicated systems  for which traditional approaches either are
              limited in scope or are impractical.  This  framework provides a
              computationally quick and efficient control design based on  fundamental
              mathematical concepts.  One of the principal applications of this research will
               be to the design and placement of control devices for the control of high
              performance  aircraft, through a better understanding of the interactions of
              the aircraft with the  surrounding fluid.  ***
