Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1998   
File        : a9622795

Award Number: 9622795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Sverak sverak@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Sverak  9622795    Sverak's will study a variety of questions from
              system of non-linear partial differential equations. These include: (1) The
              study of general multiple  variational integrals for vector valued functions,
              their Euler-Lagrange equations, the closely related Morrey's quasi-convexity
              condition and other notions of ellipticity, together with certain natural
              objects (semi-convex hulls) associated with these ellipticity conditions. These
              investigation should help to understand global properties of solutions of a
              number of non-linear systems.    (2) The study of Liouville-type theorems for
              the three-dimensional incompressible  Navier-Stokes equations and their
              applications to the study of (potential) singularities of solutions of these
              equations.    The motivation for the study of variational integrals comes from
              the very general and extremely important classical principle that many
              equations arising in engineering, physics, and also pure mathematics can be
              directly linked to minimization of (suitably defined) energy. For example, the
              basic equations describing deformations of materials under stress are very
              closely related to this principle. Although our mathematical understanding of  
              minimization is quite good in many important cases, there are also many
              situations of considerable practical importance where our understanding is
              rather poor. The above mentioned equations for deformations of materials give 
              a good example of such situation (except for the case when the stress in the
              material is relatively small).  I expect that the study of the first circle of
              problems proposed above will shed some light on open questions surrounding
              energy  minimization. It turns out that results related to these questions can
              also help to elucidate other mathematical problems which at first do not seem
              to be directly related to energy minimization (such as non-linear
              oscillations). However, a closer analysis shows that there are some unexpected 
              connections.  The understanding of mathematic al problems surrounding energy
              minimization is   also quite important from the practical point of view: if we
              simulate minimization on a computer, then non-trivial mathematical facts we
              know can potentially save us a considerable amount of computations we need to
              do. In fact, in many cases a good theoretical analysis can enable one to attack
              problems which at first seem out of reach of even the fastest computers. One
              can put forward similar arguments to explain the motivation behind the second
              circle of problems proposed above. In fact, in this case the need for good
              mathematical analysis is perhaps even more apparent: it is well known that in
              many cases of great practical importance, there is simplyno known method to
              reliably calculate  fluid flows (describedby the Navier-Stokes equations), even
              with the help of the fastest computers. I hope that the proposed investigations
              will increase our understanding of the behavior of solutions of  these
              equations.
