Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Equilvalence Relations Induced by Polish Group Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1998     
File        : a9622977

Award Number: 9622977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Hjorth greg@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS  9622977   Greg Hjorth, UCLA    The notion of group is a central one in
              modern mathematics, specifically  that of a group acting on a set.  This
              induces an orbit equivalence  relation : for the group G we have that the orbit
              of a point is the set of  all gx where g is in G . This in turn cues
              mathematicians to the abstract  study of the orbit equivalence relation, now
              isolated from the original  investigation of the action.  While work of some
              researchers on the edge of  ergodic theory illuminates the case when G is
              locally compact, the branch  of logic known as model theory is intimately
              concerned with the orbit  equivalence relations induced by the infinite
              symmetric group S of all  permutations of the countable set N, equipped with
              the topology of  pointwise convergence.  Hjorth's project is directed towards
              unifying these  very diverse areas under the study of continuous actions of
              separable  metrizable topological groups, commonly known as Polish groups. 
              This class  of groups includes some familiar topological groups which fail to
              be  locally compact, such as:  S,  the homeomorphism group of the unit 
              interval,  and the group of automorphisms of Hilbert space.      The notion of
              a group action can be understood by the following simple  analogy. Suppose  a
              fleck of sand is travelling through space, and we know  its position and
              velocity at a given time, call it t. In principle it  should be possible to
              calculate the position and velocity of the same fleck  at a later time, call it
              t + s. In this sense we can say that the real  number s "acts" on the
              collection of all possible positions and velocities.  From any position and
              velocity at time t, the number s produces the  position and velocity at time
              t+s.  All possible states reachable from a  specified starting point is what is
              called an orbit. The terminology  suggests an analogy: rather than looking at
              the position of a planet at one  fixed time, we look instead at the collection
              of all positions it can  occupy throughout its year: in  other words, its
              orbit. Hjorth's project  considers group actions and orbits in a very general
              context, with  particular focus on complicated groups which arise from logical 
              considerations.  Certain classifications are provided these group actions  and
              orbits, to give an understanding of when one is more complicated than  another.
              This research is foundational. A central goal  is  a deepened  understanding 
              of the subtle nature of  many  mathematical objects, such  as orbits of points
              in space.
