Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Aegean Conference in Operator Algebras and Application;
               August 17-27, 1996; Athens, Greece
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9622991

Award Number: 9622991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Muhly muhly@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622991  MUHLY    This is a request for travel support for junior investigators
              and graduate  students to attend the conference, Aegean Conference in Operator
              Algebras  and Applications, that is scheduled for the period, August 17, 1996,
              to  August 27, 1996, at the University of the Aegean.  With the advent of the 
              theory of operator spaces, also known as "quantized functional analysis", 
              general, not-necessarily-self-adjoint, operator algebras have achieved an 
              ontological status comparable to that held by the self-adjoint operator 
              algebras.  Although the non-self-adjoint theory is not yet as well developed, 
              from certain perspectives, the explosion of results that has taken place in 
              the last six years, or so, deserves to be exposed in a fashion that will  allow
              the uninitiated, particularly younger scholars, easy access to the  basics of
              the subject from the current perspective.  The objective of the  conference is
              to provide a series of short courses, that will be published,  designed to
              provide an overview of the theory of non-self-adjoint operator  algebras and
              its relation to other areas of operator algebra and modern  analysis.  The
              themes to be stressed are: non-self-adjoint operator  algebras, general theory;
              concrete operator algebras, particularly reflexive  algebras; multivariable
              operator theory and representations of function  algebras; metric variations on
              themes from algebra - Hilbert and operator  modules; operator spaces and their
              applications to Banach space theory and  harmonic analysis; operator algebraic
              approaches to quantum groups;  non-self-adjoint operator algebras and wavelets.
                  The theory of non-self-adjoint operator algebras plays a central role in
              the  mathematical underpinnings of a lot of mathematics applied to areas of 
              national need.  For example, in the area of signal processing, which is used 
              to transmit data and images involved in all fields of science - from space 
              observatories to tomographs of the brain - fundamental constructs, such as  the
              so-calle d Toeplitz matrices and wavelet transforms, obtain their deepest 
              significance and are most clearly revealed when viewed from the perspective  of
              operator algebra.  Operator algebra lays bare their basic algebraic  properties
              (how they are manipulated in practice) and metric properties as  well (how they
              are measured).  In oil exploration, which involves wavelets  and signal
              processing in a somewhat different fashion, operator algebraic  methods, known
              as commutant lifting play a fundamental role.  Also, in  control theory,
              particularly in the design of aircraft and noise abaters,  the mathematics
              involved is to a large extent operator algebra.  The  breakthrough that took
              place about six years ago, and alluded to above,  enables the practitioner of
              this field to bring to bare effectively the full  power of modern algebra to
              tackle the most basic and  fundamental structural  questions.  The advances in
              this field have been very exciting and more are  to come.  But it is time
              collect a summary of what is known, including  bibliographies, so that new
              people can enter this exciting, emerging field  of research.
