Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Flag Varieties and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1999   
File        : a9622887

Award Number: 9622887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shrawan Kumar kumar@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Abstract  Kumar  9622887      Kumar will continue work in the general area
              of lie theory and geometry. The first project involves studying a certain
              complex which arises from the parabolic analog of the BGG resolution for affine
              Kac-Moody Lie algebras.  Non-existence of certain irreducible components in the
              homology of this complex will lead to an interesting geometric definition of
              the fusion product for positive-level integrable representations of affine
              Kac-Moody algebras. Also, this will lead to a proof of the explicit dimension
              formula of Verlinde for arbitrary semisimple simply-connected groups (known so
              far for the classical groups and G2). The second project involves proving a
              well known problem on complete intersections of curves in the three dimensional
              projective space, which translates into a  problem about the affine flag
              variety associated to SL(2). Let C be a smooth affine algebraic curve and G a
              semisimple group. The third project is concerned with proving a weak homotopy
              equivalence between the space Alg(C,G) of all the algebraic maps from C to G
              and the corresponding space Cont(C,G) of all the continuous maps (from C to G).
              Since the rational homotopy groups of Cont(C,G) are known, in particular, this
              equivalence would determine the rational homotopy groups of Alg(C,G). Finally
              Kumar is writing lecture notes for a course on "affine Kac-Moody groups, their
              flag varieties and representation theory," which he intends to expand into a
              book covering the basic theory.     In several mathematical and physical
              phenomena (and similarly in many biological and chemical processes), symmetry
              plays an important role. To start with, the example of a sphere is
              illuminating. One basic property of any sphere is that it is a perfectly
              symmetrical object, in other words any two points on it "look" the same. This
              symmetry  was exploited  over a period of time to derive some rather intricate
              properties of spheres.  Similarly let us look at another example coming from
              physics (more precisely from  Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity).
              Einstein derived his very fundamental equations from the basic "invariance"
              postulate that "the laws of physics are the same in all coordinate systems
              which move uniformly relative to one another" (together with the invariance of
              the velocity of light). Various projects, which Kumar is proposing to work on,
              have one common theme: Exploit the symmetry underlying the problem at hand to
              find the solution of the problem. More precisely expressed, Kumar is trying to
              use the "automorphism groups" to solve different mathematical problems, which
              in turn will have important consequences in theoretical physics, particularly
              Quantum Field Theory.
