Title       : Examining Graduate Education in Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9622599

Award Number: 9622599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Milkey milkey@aas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Strom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzan Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Astronomical Soc
	      2000 Florida Ave N.W.
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/659-0134

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9622599  Milkey                                       The   American 
              Astronomical  Society  (AAS)  will  lead   its  membership in an examination of
              the goals for graduate  education  in  astronomy.  The scientific community is
              entering  an  era  in  which public investment in basic research and higher
              education is  projected  to decrease significantly.  As a result, opportunities
               for  new PhDs to follow traditional academic research careers are  also 
              expected  to decrease. Given these realities,  it  is  both  essential  and
              timely to re-examine the role of graduate  schools  in  serving  our
              discipline, our students, and the society  which  supports  the discipline of
              astronomy. Central to the  discussion  are the questions: (1) What should be
              the goals, and content,  of  an  astronomy  graduate education in view of (a)
              the discipline's  need  to  continue  a  tradition  of  carrying  out  world 
              class  research,   and   (b)   our   nation's  need   for   imaginative, 
              scientifically capable and adaptable young people,  both  in  the  technical
              workforce and as teachers in the nation's schools?   2)  Should  we  consider 
              changing academic institutions'  admissions  policies,  graduate  curricula, 
              funding  patterns  or   academic  culture to meet the needs of (a) the
              discipline of astronomy, and  (b)  the  nation?  The AAS will open this dialog
              at the  upcoming  bi-annual  AAS  meeting.  The AAS will 1) conduct three 
              regional  workshops during 1996 with astronomy department chairs,  selected 
              graduate   students,  invited  members  of  the   education   and  industrial 
              communities,  and representatives  from  the  physics  community  involved in
              similar self-examination; 2)  publish  and  disseminate  a  report  summarizing
               the  discussions,  outlining  possible   models  for  restructuring  graduate 
              curricula,   and  suggesting changes in funding patterns to stimulate or
              facilitate  restructuring;  and  3)  design an employment  database  to  help 
              graduate students make realistic and  informed career choices, and  to  help 
              graduate  departments guide  admissions,  funding,  and  curricular policies. 
              ***
