Title       : Linear and Semilinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9622942

Award Number: 9622942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66351              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel I. Tataru   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Tataru  9622942    The proposed research focuses on three
              interconnecting subjects, namely (i) unique continuation for solutions to 
              nonelliptic  partial differential equations, (ii)  semilinear (mostly
              hyperbolic) partial differential equations and (iii)  hyperbolic mixed
              initial-boundary value problems. The research in unique continuation is
              oriented towards semilinear problems and problems with unbounded potentials. 
              In the area of semilinear hyperbolic equations, the main effort will be
              directed towards the study of a class of weighted Sobolev spaces attached to
              (mostly) hyperbolic partial differential operators. These spaces adapted to the
              hyperbolic operator seem to be the natural setting for the study of semilinear
              equations; it appears that they are the key to further progress in the field. 
              A main goal is to understand the multiplicative structure of these spaces,
              including  null forms estimates.  The first aim of the research on hyperbolic
              boundary value problems  is to complete the ongoing PI's study of the trace
              regularity properties for solutions to such problems. This is a key step for
              the second part, whose goal is to  understand the Strichartz type estimates for
              solutions to hyperbolic boundary value problems, and subsequently, to use this
              in the study of semilinear hyperbolic  boundary value problems.  It is the PI's
              hope that in the long run this research program could also lead to progress in
              the study of quasilinear hyperbolic equations.    A partial differential
              equation is an equation which describes the relation between rates of change of
              quantities which depend on more than one variable.  Such equations are used to 
              model many phenomenas in physics, economics, etc. The aim of this project is to
              investigate some specific properties of solutions to certain partial
              differential equations.  Part of the work is motivated by problems arising in
              control theory and in inverse problems; there one tries to reconstruct
              information about either the state of a system or th e equations governing the
              system, based on partial observations. Another goal of the project is to reach
              a better understanding of some fundamental equations which insofar have proved
              extremely difficult to study; for instance, Einstein's equations, which
              describe  the structure of the relativistic space-time.
