Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Hyperbolic Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9622875

Award Number: 9622875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66824              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hart F. Smith hart@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT  Smith  9622875    Smith will continue his research into the
              propagation of waves   in nonhomogeneous mediums with ``rough'' sound speeds.
              The aim is to   establish minimal differentiability assumptions on the metric
              determining   the sound speed under which certain bounds on the solutions,
              known as the   Strichartz estimates, hold. Under previous NSF funding, the
              investigator   has shown that these bounds hold if the second order derivatives
              of the   metric coefficients are bounded, and that this is the best possible 
              condition of its sort that insures the validity of the Strichartz estimates.  
              The proposed research includes replacing this condition by sharper,  
              geometrically intrinsic ones. It is anticipated that the optimal condition   is
              that the metric posess one bounded derivative, and in addition that the  
              coefficients of the curvature tensor (certain combinations of second order  
              derivatives) be bounded. The investigator is also continuing research into  
              the development of function spaces adapted to oscillatory integral and  
              hyperbolic problems. Previous NSF funding supported the development of a  
              family of Hardy spaces adapted to fixed-time estimates for solutions of the  
              wave equation. The proposed research includes developing similar spaces  
              adapted to controlling time-averaged norms of solutions.      The study of
              waves travelling in media with rough sound speeds (that is,   where the speed
              may vary sharply from one point to another) is of both   theoretical and
              practical significance. The theoretical interest comes from   nonlinear
              equations, such as the Einstein equations for gravitation, in   which the wave
              speed depends on the solution under consideration. Since   rough solutions
              arise naturally, one needs to understand how waves travel   in rough media to
              show that solutions exist, and to understand their   properties. Physics
              predicts that energy should travel along geodesics,   curves that represent the
              shortest path between points. Our research is   sh owing that this is true even
              for rough sound speeds, under essentially   the weakest assumptions that assure
              that geodesics exist and are well   defined. The practical significance is that
              our research yields a   mathematical construction for solving the wave
              equation, which is valid  for rough sound speeds and stable under perturbations
              of the medium. It is   clear that a computational algorithm based on such a
              construction will be   inherently more stable than one requiring more
              restrictive conditions on   the media. Our research would help establish that
              such algorithms are both   stable and convergent.
