Title       : Spectral and Asymptotoc Problems of Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1998   
File        : a9622730

Award Number: 9622730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evans M. Harrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Harrell  9622730    This project is concerned with the mathematical
              analysis of several problems in spectral theory of differential operators
              arising in quantum physics and reaction-diffusion.  It is hoped that the
              results will be of real use to physicists, while remaining in the realm of
              rigorous and original functional analysis or differential-equations theory. 
              Many of the particular issues have to do with resonances and metastability, or
              with connections among geometry, operator algebra, and spectra.  The first
              specific topic in the proposal concerns the eigenvalues of Schroedinger
              operators where the potential energy involves curvature.  This sounds abstract,
              but it actually originates in the analysis of the shapes of phase regions of
              bistable metallic alloys.  The second topic looks at certain purely algebraic
              identities recently discovered by Harrell and Stubbe, which turn out to apply,
              sharply, to the partition function (= trace of the heat kernel), among other
              spectral expressions.  The third topic has to do with semiclassical analysis,
              an area in which Harrell has worked for several years, but new features include
              magnetic fields and time-dependent interactions.  The final topic has to do
              with local properties of eigenfunctions, such as their nodes, and some inverse
              problems involving them.  Mathematical machinery to be called upon ncludes
              perturbation theory, asymptotics, and variational analysis.         This
              project is concerned with the mathematical analysis of several problems in
              physics, especially the physics of atoms, molecules, semiconductors, and
              metallic alloys.  Many of the particular problems have to do with resonances
              and with metastable (slowly changing) phenomena, and others have to do with the
              role of geometry in these areas of physics.  The goal of the research is to
              produce something new and useful to working physicists and at the same time to
              elucidate the mathematical structure which the physical theory relies on. The
              first specific topic in the proposa l is to make estimates of the "normal
              modes"   of an equation like those in quantum mechanics, but where the
              potential energy involves curvature.  This sounds like an abstract mathematical
              problem, but it actually originates in the analysis of metallic regions with
              two different stable phases, when one tries to find the shapes of the regions
              with one or other phase.  The second topic looks at certain purely algebraic
              identities recently discovered by Harrell and Stubbe, which turn out to apply
              to one of the central functions of statistical mechanics.  The third topic has
              to do with the   differences between the theory of quantum mechanics and the
              theory of classical physics,   which applies to our world on a larger scale. 
              Harrell has worked in this area for several years; new innovations include
              incorporating magnetism.  The final topic has to do with some poorly understood
              local properties of quantum mechanical wavefunctions, and how measuring them
              might establish what sorts of forces are present.  The methods used come from
              both pure and applied mathematics, and physics.
