Title       : ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: A Combined Fluorescence Optical
               Microscope/Non-Contact Atomic Force Microscope for Monolayer and Multilayer
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9622506

Award Number: 9622506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Zasadzinski gorilla@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622506  Zasadzinski     New modes of imaging with scanning probe microscopes -
              non-contact, tapping, and friction or lateral force modes - have made it
              possible to image a variety of surfaces that had previously been difficult or
              impossible to OseeO.  These new imaging modes take advantage of variations in
              surface chemistry, friction, compliance, charge, etc. to develop image contrast
              in addition to simple surface topography.  For many of these modes, the AFM tip
              is either not in contact with or is gently tapped on the sample surface. 
              Hence, much softer surfaces can be imaged than with conventional contact mode
              AFM and there is less tendency to rearrange loosely supported materials.  It is
              proposed to upgrade the current contact mode AFM by purchasing a Nanoscope
              Multimode AFM and the necessary accessories to do non-contact and tapping mode
              imaging.  These new imaging modalities will be applied to the ongoing studies
              of self-assembly and pattern formation in surfactant, lipid and proteins. 
              These new imaging modes are proving to be extremely useful in examining complex
              fluid interfaces, surfactant, protein, and polymer adsorption, lateral phase
              separation in membranes, protein localization and diffusion, the kinetics and
              structures of self-assembled films, etc.  This new apparatus will also allow us
              to characterize more realistic model membrane surfaces for force measurements
              with the Surface Forces Apparatus.   To fully implement the new imaging modes,
              it is necessary to identify areas of interest on the surface prior to engaging
              the AFM.  The best way to do this is by coupling the AFM to a high resolution
              optical microscope capable of fluorescence imaging.  Fluorescence microscopy is
              one of the best ways of identifying lipid domains, specific proteins (via
              antibody labeling), adsorption etc. at the micron level.  It would be a major
              advance to directly correlate the fluorescence images with molecular resolution
              AFM images.  A custom fluorescence  microscope has recently been built for
              examin ing monolayers at the air-water interface.  A very similar instrument
              can be constructed to examine thin films on substrates prior to and during AFM
              imaging.  With this combined capability, the principal investigator should be
              able to localize proteins, phase boundaries, etc. and correlate them with their
              macroscopic effects on bilayer properties.  The transfer of the spontaneous
              patterns formed by various lipid mixtures at the air-water interface to
              substrates to be used as lithographic-style templates, the patterns formed by
              competitive self-assembly of mixtures of adsorbing species, and the initial
              stages of mineralization of surfaces, can also be studied.  ***
