Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On the Classification of the Simple, Stably Finite,
               Separable, Amenable C-Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  2000  
File        : a9622250

Award Number: 9622250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Akemann                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guihua Gong ggong@upracd.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cornel Pasnicu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      P.O. Box 21926
	      San Juan, PR  009311926    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9622250  PI:  Gong           The ASH algebras (or AH algebras, respectively)
               are the C*-algebras      arising as   inductive limits of direct sums of
              subalgebras (or corner      subalgebras, respectively)  of matrix algebras over
              commutative      C*-algebras. These  algebras play an essential  role in the
              Elliott       program for the classification of separable amenable 
              C*-algebras. The       investigators propose to construct  ASH (or AH)
              inductive limit      decompositions for C*-algebras with certain general
              properties --- and,     in particular, to prove the conjecture that any simple
              separable amenable      C*-algebra of real rank zero and stable rank one is an
              AH algebra. They      also propose to classify  arbitrary simple ASH algebras
              in terms of the      K-theory and tracial state space invariants (used, in
              special cases, by     Elliott and others including the investigators).         
                   The passage from a finite to an infinite number of degrees of freedom     
              in quantum physics led to the mathematical  theory of certain infinite     
              dimensional algebras, called operator algebras. A complete enumeration (or    
              classification) of a special class of operator algebras, called (amenable)     
              von Neumann algebras, was eiven by A. Connes  in his    Fields Medal winning   
                work of 1975. (The Fields Medal is the equivalent  of the  Nobel Prize in    
               mathematics.) More recently,  V. F. R. Jones  has applied the theory of    
              von Neumann algebras to study  ordinary knots.  This work, which also won     a
              Fields Medal, has shed light on quantum physics, and on the structure of    
              DNA. The investigators propose to work on a complete enumeration (or     
              classification) of another important class of operator algebras, called     
              amenable C*-algebras. The successful classification of such C*-algebras     
              will be essential  for us to understand the infinite dimensional world of    
              quantum physics.
