Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Motives and Motivic Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1998     
File        : a9622995

Award Number: 9622995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Lichtenbaum Stephen_Lichtenbaum@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lichtenbaum        The investigator continues his researcn in the closely
              related areas  of motives and motivic cohomology.  Having given a definition of
              mixed m  otives over an algebraically closed field, he extends this definition
              to  motives over an  arbitrary base scheme.  He then studies the relationship 
              between the motive of X relative to Y, the motive of Y relative to Z, and  the
              motive of X relative to Z.  Using his definition of motivic cohomology  in
              terms of motives, the investigator searches for a proof that this  definition
              satisfies most, if not all, of the "axioms" proposed by  Beilinson and himself.
               In particular, the Kummer axiom and the "finite  dimensionality" axiom seem to
              be accessible.  Finally, having already  defined for each variety a homology
              motive in the category of mixed  motives,the investigator studies possible
              definitions of motives  corresponding to cohomology, Borel-Moore homology, and
              cohomology with  compact supports, and explicitly computes these motives in the
              case of  curves.  The investigator also studies Poincare and Alexander duality
              for  motives.         This proposal constitutes fundamental research into the
              basic  structures of algebraic geometry.  Algebraic geometry is one of the
              oldest  parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary 
              flowering in the past quarter-century.  In its origin, it treated curves in 
              the plane that could be defined by polynomial equations, generalizing the 
              classic conic sections known to the Greeks.  Nowadays the field makes use  of
              methods not only from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and  conversely
              is finding application in those fields as well as physics,  theoretical
              computer science, and robotics.
