Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Analog Neural Networks and Delay Equations".
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9622722

Award Number: 9622722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomas Gedeon gedeon@math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gedeon  9622722       Analog neural networks admit stationary, periodic and 
              chaotic solutions.  So far the stationary solutions have received  most
              attention of researchers.  However, in recent years the  importance of
              non-stationary patterns in brain became clear.  The  investigator studies
              networks which admit periodic orbits and  addresses the apparent discrepancy
              between discrete and  continuous time networks of this type.  While in
              continuous  networks one expects generally a convergence to a periodic orbit, 
              in discrete time networks there are stable stationary solutions.  The project
              investigates chaotic behaviour of a class of networks  with step-function
              nonlinearities.  These can be viewed as a  limiting case of a steep sigmoid
              nonlinearities and are easier to  handle analytically.  The delay in synaptic
              response of a neuron  is a recognized fact; if one wants to account for its
              affect the  appropriate model must be expressed in terms of delay  differential
              equation.  The investigator studies the  discretization of this equation and
              shows that this  finite-dimensional approximation captures the essential
              features  of the dynamics of the delay equation.       Artificial neural
              networks is an area on a crossroads  between artificial inteligence and
              neurobiology.  Mathematical  models play an important role in this area. 
              Neural networks try  to model some basic functions of brain (learning,
              recognizing  trained patterns) without trying to understand the intricate 
              details of how the neurons work on a chemical or physiological  level.  Neural
              networks are used today in many areas of apllied  science and engineering.  The
              network can be trained to recognize  a certain pattern, given slightly
              perturbed data.  This pattern  must be stationary, i.e. fixed in time.  On the
              other hand, there  is hardly any process in the brain which is stationary, and
              most  processes are periodic.  The investigator studies networks that  admit
              periodic patterns, to understand the relationship between  differen t models
              and see which one is the most suitable for  applications.  If one were able to
              train the networks to recognize  complicated patterns (in space and time), that
              would have an  immediate impact on robotics and artificial inteligence.
