Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research on Representing Measures and Boundary Behavior
               in Potential Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1998      
File        : a9622454

Award Number: 9622454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93330              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Loeb loeb@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1262      MODERN ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Author:  loeb@math.uni-frankfurt.de at NOTE  Date:    3/5/96  4:43 AM  Priority:
              Normal  TO: jjenkins at nsf11  Subject:   -------------------------------
              Message Contents -------------------------------  This e-mail letter is sent by
              Peter A. Loeb from   Frankfurt, Germany where he is a visitor for the month of
              March.      Abstract of Peter A. Loeb's project      The proposed research will
              continue Professor Peter Loeb's work   on representing measures and ideal
              boundaries in potential theory.   In particular, Loeb plans to continue
              research on a Martin-like boundary   which is regular almost everywhere with
              respect to harmonic measure.   An important tool in this research is the
              technique developed with   J. Bliedtner that reduces the production of
              Radon-Nikodym derivatives   as limits to a special case. This reduction casts
              new light on   the martingale convergence theorem and significantly simplifies 
               measure differentiation theorems as well as the treatment of   fine limit
              theorems in probability and potential theory.   A major consequence is the
              existence of simple boundary approach   neighborhood systems which, after
              fixing a suitable normalization,   are the "best" possible in terms of
              producing Radon-Nikodym derivatives   as limits at the boundary. The existence
              of such "best" systems had not   been known even for harmonic functions on the
              unit disk. Indeed,   previous results in the literature suggested that no such
              system   could exist. In related, ongoing research, Loeb has improved the  
              celebrated Besicovitch and Morse  covering theorems from geometric   measure
              theory by strengthening the results and simplifying the proofs,   including a
              demonstration that for any norm, the best constant   (in terms of all known
              proofs) for the Besicovitch result is a   packing constant. In all of his
              research, Professor Loeb will continue   to employ nonstandard models. These
              are mathematical structures with   infinitely large and infinitely small
              numbers. Even when the use of   such structures  is removed from the final
              proofs of results, they are   extremely helpful in the discovery process. Loeb
              has recently used   nonstandard models to optimize the coverings of
              Besicovitch's theorem,   and with Bliedtner he is now using these methods to
              extend the  notion   of radial limits to general potential theoretic settings. 
                The results of this research that have been obtained to date,   and the
              results that will be established in the proposed research   all lie at the
              heart of mathematical analysis and probability theory.   These are fundamental
              areas of mathematics used by scientists and   engineers to form the conceptual
              models of the phenomena with which they   work. The thought process itself can
              only be couched in terms of   mathematics, and the mathematics being used in
              turn yields new insight   into the phenomena being studied. Therefore, the
              simplification and   extension of the basic mathematical tools achieved by the
              proposed   research will resonate in all of the areas of science and
              engineering   that use these tools. Of particular importance for future
              developments   will be the successful employment of mathematical structures
              with   infinitely large and infinitely small numbers. These structures have   a
              great deal to offer in all areas of science and engineering because of   the
              simplicity and power inherent in their use. An important construction  
              associated with these structures are measure spaces, now called   "Loeb spaces"
              in the literature, which allow the treatment of infinite   probability
              phenomena using methods appropriate for finite sets.   Researchers including
              Loeb have obtained new results with these methods   in areas such as the study
              of partial differential equations,   probability theory, research in economics,
              and the study in physics   of laws governing the motion of gases.
