Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9622925

Award Number: 9622925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64668              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir N. Temlyakov temlyak@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-962292  PI: Temlyakov     Approximation theory is a
              rapidly changing area of mathematics. The core problem of approximation
              continues to be the development of efficient methods for replacing general
              functions by simpler functions. Some methods were invented long ago (methods
              based on Fourier sums, Taylor polynomials, best approximations by trigonometric
               or algebraic polynomials, etc.). More recently however, driven by several
              numerical applications, the directions of approximation theory have moved
              toward nonlinear and multivariate approximation. This includes the
              comparatively new subject of nonlinear m- term approximation, wavelets,
              approximation by ridge functions, bilinear approximation, etc. These have found
              applications in numerical integration, numerical solution of integral
              equations, image compression, design of neural networks, and so on. The purpose
              of this proposed research is to continue the investigations of several areas of
              multivariate approximation. Emphasis will be placed on nonlinear methods of
              approximation such as best m-term approximation, metric entropy, and bilinear,
              as well as their interaction with other fields of mathematics and applications.
              Keeping in mind the applications of nonlinear approximation in numerical
              analysis, Temlyakov will study some nonlinear algorithms of approximation, for
              instance, "greedy" algorithms.     Approximation theory seeks ways to replace
              complicated object by simpler objects. This idea has proved to be fruitful in
              many applications to the real world problems. Among these applications are
              signal processing, image compression, analysis of contaminant flow, finance
              problems (for instance collateralized mortgage obligation), and many other. As
              one of the model problems, consider image compression. Take for example an
              image (picture) on a TV screen. Why should we approximate it?  In many cases we
              cannot afford to transmit (or store in a computer memory) the whole information
              of an image, perhaps because of a high cost  for transmission of a bit of
              information or limited channel capacity. This is exactly the  point where an
              application of approximation theory can be fruitful. Clearly, when we replace
              an image by its approximant we lose the quality of picture: the more
              information we keep the better approximation to the original image we have. As
              a result we have an interplay between the reduction of information and the
              quality of approximation. We try to find the best (optimal) solution to this
              problem. The purpose of the proposed research is to continue the investigations
              of methods of approximation of multivariate functions which are motivated by
              these types of types of applications.
