Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Study of Pulse Propagation in Birefringent Nonlinear
               Optical Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9622802

Award Number: 9622802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianke Yang jyang@emba.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622802  Yang        The objective of this project is to study the propagation
              and   interaction of optical pulses in birefringent nonlinear optical fibers. 
              In such fibers, nonlinearity, dispersion and birefringence all play an 
              important role, and the pulse evolution can be modelled mathematically   by two
              coupled nonlinear Schroedinger equations. In this project, we   will study the
              propagation of such pulses by examining the solution   properties of these
              coupled equations. In particular, we will thoroughly   investigate the internal
              oscillations, radiation and interaction of these   pulses. A combination of
              analytical and numerical methods will be used.   The analytical methods include
              Hirota's method and the perturbation methods.   Hirota's method will be used to
              study the interaction behaviors of the   optical pulses. The perturbation
              methods will be used to study their   internal oscillations and radiation. The
              numerical methods will be used to   check the analytical results as well as to
              deal with cases where analytical   methods are not appropriate. The proposed
              research will provide theoretical   guidance to the design of the fast-speed
              fiber-optic telecommunication   systems. In addition, it will develop new
              analytical methods for studying   non-integrable wave systems.     %%%       
              This project will study the propagation and interaction of optical   pulses in
              birefringent nonlinear optical fibers. It is motivated by the  ongoing
              experiments on high-speed fiber-optic telecommunication systems using 
              solitonian pulses as information bits. It will address some basic theoretical  
              questions arising in the design of such telecommunication systems. For 
              instance, it will study the stability and degradation of pulse signals 
              travelling along the optical fibers. Its results will contribute to the  
              realization of the underlying new communication systems which could  
              revolutionize the whole field of long-distance information transmission.   ***
