Title       : Dynamics of Compressible Vortex Rings and Circular Jets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9622302

Award Number: 9622302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fazle Hussain FHussain@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Davinder Virk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Number: CTS-9622302  Principal Investigator: Virk/Hussain  
                 This is a project to carry out numerical simulations of circular turbulent
              jets in both the incompressible and compressible flow regimes.  The aim is to
              study vortical structures first in incompressible jets and then extend this to
              the study of the role of compressibility in flow development.  Vortex rings are
              the canonical coherent structures in turbulent jets.  Their transition and
              interactions are the primary cause of entrainment and mixing in turbulent jets.
               The issues of interest in this study are the vorticity topology during
              non-linear evolution and transition, and the post transition structure.  The
              complex helical wave decomposition will be used to reveal the separation of
              vorticity packets that lead to transition.     A numerical data base will be
              developed that will allow the study of transition mechanisms, controllability
              using inflow perturbations, the dynamics of far field coherent structures and
              shock vortex interactions.  A finite-volume code will be developed to initiate
              systematic studies of spatially evolving 3D jets.  Low Mach number simulations
              of a single frequency perturbation will be used to determine the vortex
              dynamics responsible for the experimentally observed periodic/chaotic
              transitional flow regimes.  The results of this effort will be used to improve
              low-dimensional dynamic models that will enable flow control.  Axisymmetric
              simulations of supersonic jets will be used to determine the effects of
              shock-cell structure on coherent structure roll-up and interactions.  This will
              be extended to the study of fully 3D, spatially evolving, supersonic jets in
              terms of vortex dynamics to understand the effects of shocks on coherent
              structure dynamics and their transition, as well as the evolutionary dynamics
              of the far field coherent structures.   Compressible turbulent flows are
              technologically important.  This study will provide insight that will lead to
              computational models that will be c apable of taking into account the effect of
              compressibility on flow instability and will lay the foundations for the
              development of flow control methods.
