Title       : Solid State Chalcogenides From Intermediate Temperatures. Exploratory Synthesis
               in Molten Salts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1998   
File        : a9622025

Award Number: 9622025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Kannewurf crkps@eecs.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9622025  Kannewurf    This research is concerned with the use of molten 
              polychalcogenide salts as reactive media to explore the  synthesis of new
              chalcogenide materials at low and  intermediate temperatures (200-500  C).
              Various A2QX salts  (A=alkali cation, Q=S, Se, Te) will be used in reactions 
              with late transition metals and main-group elements.  Emphasis will be given in
              the stabilization of quaternary  phases. Three kinds of quaternary compounds
              will be explored  in this stage. One kind involves the mixed-metal system 
              A/M/M'/Q (M=late transition metal, M'=lanthanide, actinide).  The second
              involves the mixed-chalcogen system A/M/S/Te. The  synthetic approach will use
              binary alloy compounds as  starting materials and mixed fluxes such as mixed
              A2TexSy.  The third kind involves the use of the thio- and seleno-  phosphate
              fluxes in materials synthesis. These fluxes are  new and are designed to yield
              novel thiophosphate and  selenophosphate solids containing the  PxQy n-
              polyanions  (where Q=S, Se). The physical properties of the new  compounds,
              such as spectroscopic, thermal and magnetic will  be studied as a function of
              temperature. In order to probe  for unusual electronic phenomena, the charge
              transport  properties of the new compounds will be studied in detail  via
              variable temperature four-probe resistivity and  thermoelectric power (Seebeck)
              measurements on single  crystals.  %%%  This research is concerned with new
              methodologies to  discover new solid state materials having various 
              technologically important properties. Promising materials  will be studied
              further and their potential for applications  will be evaluated. The subject of
              this proposal is  performing reactions using molten salts as solvents. Molten 
              salts have been employed for well over 100 years for high  temperature single
              crystal growth.  Although many salts are  high melting species, eutectic
              combinations of binary salts  and salts of polyatomic species often have
              melting points  well below the temperatures of class ical solid-state 
              synthesis, making possible their use in the exploration of  new chemistry at
              intermediate temperatures. In some cases,  such salts act not only as solvents,
              but also as reactants,  providing species which can be incorporated into the
              final  product. Such studies are important because polysulfide  ligands have
              been implicated in the hydrodesulfurization of  crude oil, where they are
              thought to be present at the  surface of metal sulfide catalysts.
              Polychalcogenide glasses  also are important as materials for non-linear
              optics, IR  wave guides, optical switching, and optical information  storage,
              but the structure/property relationships have not  been well determined due to
              the amorphous nature of the  compounds.
