Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Fluid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9622735

Award Number: 9622735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30004              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Renardy renardym@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9622735  Renardy    The proposer will study a number of issues in fluid
              dynamics, which lead  to mathematical problems in partial differential
              equations, dynamical  systems, asymptotic analysis and numerical analysis.
              Specific topics   include the study of corner singularities and high
              Weissenberg number  asymptotics in viscoelastic flows, the development of a
              basic existence theory  for degenerate parabolic-hyperbolic systems arising in
              surfactant spreading,  instabilities in ocean currents, the numerical treatment
              of outflow   boundaries, and Takens-Bodganov bifurcations with symmetry which
              arise  in double layer convection.  %%%  Part of the work is motivated by
              problems which are encountered in the   numerical simulation of flows of
              polymeric fluids. Such simulations are  important in predicting fluid behavior
              in industrial processes and in  evaluating theories of material behavior.
              Geometries with corners are  frequently encountered, and the singular behavior
              arising from such   corners has led to considerable difficulties in numerical
              simulation,   which have not been adequately resolved. Another numerical
              difficulty  has arisen from the formation of sharp boundary layers in highly
              elastic  flows. In both cases, progress hinges crucially on clarifying the  
              analytical nature of the solution, and the proposed research aims at doing 
              that. Another important topic in numerical simulation of fluid flows is  the
              truncation of the flow domain for numerical purposes. Here, the   proposed
              research is concerned with providing the reasons why certain  procedures work.
              Surfactant spreading on thin films is important in   biological and medical
              problems. Mathematically, it leads into a new  type of partial differential
              equations, which does not seem to have   analyzed previously. The proposed
              research aims at understanding   fundamental issues related to these equations.
              Fluid dynamics is rife  with instabilities and formation of new flow patterns.
              Flows with a high  degree of symmetry, such as conv ection between parallel
              plates, are known  to allow a rich variety of patterns. The inclusion of a
              second fluid layer  leads to additional possibilities, which the proposed
              research will   explore.  ***
