Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Homogeneous Space Properties of Moduli Spaces: With
               Applications to Theta Functions and Finite Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9622928

Award Number: 9622928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Fried mfried@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modular curves are moduli spaces for structures on elliptic  curves. Modular
              functions come from the homogeneous space  structure-through SL(2,R) action- on
              an affine subset of the  modular curve. This award provides funds for an
              investigation  that applies modular curve thinking to moduli spaces that have
              no  homogeneous space structure. The key definition is a Modular  Tower
              attached to the data coming from any finite group G and a  prime p dividing the
              order of G. The investigation will cover  applications to the following topics.
              (a) Invariants attached to  theta functions of specific types of curves. (b)
              Curves over  finite fields with special relations among their zeta function 
              zeros. (c) Structured conclusions on the inverse Galois  problem.  (d) A
              program for analyzing properties of the Grothendieck-  Teichmuller group using
              projective systems of real points on a  modular  tower. The objective is to
              show that modular towers  produce solutions to classical problems not
              previously benefiting  from analogs of modular functions. This award also
              supports an  investigation by postdoctoral student Y. Kopeliovich. Kopeliovich 
              will continue using theta functions with characteristic for  giving detailed
              degree bounds on maps from modular curves to the  sphere.  This research falls
              into the general mathematical field  of Number Theory.  Number theory has its
              historical roots in the  study of the whole numbers,  addressing such questions
              as those  dealing with the divisibility of one  whole number by another. It  is
              among the oldest branches of mathematics and  was pursued for  many centuries
              for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within  the  last half century it has
              become an indispensable tool in diverse   applications in areas such as data
              transmission and processing,  and  communication systems. This particular
              proposal has  applications to cryptography, through the classification and 
              production of polynomial functions, called exceptional,  specifically suited
              for encoding data.
