Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Constructions in Extremal Graph Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9622091

Award Number: 9622091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Woldar woldar@ucis.vill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Felix Lazebnik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Woldar, Lazebnik 9622091  It is often very difficult to construct families
              of graphs of large girth, which simultaneously possess other quantitative
              properties such as large size (many edges), small order (few vertices), small
              diameter, or large expansion. Very often the most important constructions come
              from other areas of mathematics; e.g., number theory, algebra, geometry, or
              design theory. This award supports an investigation based on the development
              and application of algebraic techniques to investigate certain problems in
              extremal graph theory. These techniques involve the theory of groups,  group
              geometries, affine root systems, and  supplemented with novel  geometric and
              combinatorial ideas, have already resulted in some of the best-known
              constructions in extremal graph theory. The investigators  believe that the
              full potential of these methods has only begun to be  realized. The objectives
              of this investigation include the following:  (1) constructing graphs of
              largest known size subject to having large girth,  (2) constructing graphs of
              smallest known order having large girth,  (3) improving the upper bounds for
              the order of cages,  (4) constructing graphs of large girth and small diameter,
              and  (5) constructing families of expanders--perhaps Ramanujan graphs.  This
              research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
              Combinatorics is to find efficient methods to study how discrete collections of
              objects can be arranged and what relations among the objects are  possible. 
              The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
              communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as those
              occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in computer
              science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial
              research.
