Title       : Workshop on Monitoring for Climate Change Detection in the Americas, Vina del
               Mar, Chile, December 5-8, 1995,
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9622505

Award Number: 9622505
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Diaz hfd@cdc.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NOAA-Environ Research Lab
	      325 Broadway
	      Boulder, CO  803033328    /   -

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9622505  Diaz       This workshop will evaluate the capability of the 
              meteorological observing networks of the Americas to address the  following
              World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) questions:  Is  the climate warming? 
              Is the hydrologic cycle changing?  Is the  atmospheric circulation changing? 
              Is the climate becoming more  variable or extreme?         While meteorological
              observing networks are equipped to  monitor weather, most are not designed to
              address questions of  climate, including baselines, measurement uncertainty,
              and model  validation.  This workshop is designed to bring together the 
              appropriate members of the weather monitoring and climate research  communities
              in the Americas in order to identify the needs for a  climate monitoring
              system.  These needs include observational, data  management, and data
              distribution aspects (including the  identification of the critical climate
              variables to be included in  such a system).  This workshop will contribute to
              the effort of the  Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) community in
              evaluating the  observational needs for a global integrated climate observing 
              system.       This workshop will provide an excellent opportunity for the 
              directors of national meteorological services and climate  researchers to
              evaluate the current state of the weather data  collection systems and their
              capacity to contribute to future  climate research in the Americas.        
              This workshop is being co-sponsored by three organizations:   the Global
              Climate Observing System (GCOS) Program of the World  Meteorological
              Organization (WMO), the National Oceanographic  committee of Chile, and the
              National Science Foundation (NSF) on  behalf of the Inter-American Institute
              for Global Change Research  (IAI).  The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate
              cooperative  research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
               of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the U.S.  Government
              agency designated by the White House to carry out U.S.  resp onsibilities
              within the IAI.  ***
