Title       : Combinatorial Representation Theory: Constructive and Integral
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9622458

Award Number: 9622458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Liebler liebler@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Liebler    This award supports an investigation into a variety of  detailed
              research programs, including cyclic and non-abelian  difference sets,
              Williamson matrices, finite geometries from  special p-groups, cyclotomic
              association schemes and integral  Hecke algebras. Although each is of
              substantial interest in  its own right, further study of each of these topics
              will  also contribute to the broader goal of development of an  integral
              representation theory for association scheme-like  structures that can be used
              constructively. This investigation  is computation-intensive, relying heavily
              on the high-level  computer software packages. This award also supports guest 
              speakers at an interstate Algebraic Combinatorics Seminar. The  biweekly
              seminar benefits students and faculty from  universities  along the front range
              of Colorado and Wyoming.    This research is in the general area of
              Combinatorics. One of  the goals of Combinatorics is to find efficient methods
              of  studying how discrete collections of objects can be arranged.  The behavior
              of discrete systems is extremely important to  modern communications. For
              example, the design of large networks,  such as those occurring in telephone
              systems, and the design of   algorithms in computer science deal with discrete
              sets of  objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research. The broad  
              goal of this research is to narrow the gap between the known   examples and
              theoretical limits on certain types of highly   symmetric discrete systems.
