Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Function and Operator Theory on Holomorphic Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9622890

Award Number: 9622890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47344              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhijian Wu zwu@euler.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9622890  PI:  Zhijian Wu  University of Alabama @ Tuscaloosa    In the past
              several years, the principal investigator has mainly focused  his research on
              function and operator theory on analytic (one or several  variables) or
              monogenic function spaces. The operators include Hankel,   Toeplitz,
              commutators, multipliers, bilinear forms, approximation and atomic 
              decomposition. The spaces (analytic or harmonic) are Bergman, Hardy, Dirichlet 
              and the scale of capacity related spaces which includes the Bloch space  and
              the space of bounded mean oscillation functions. The study also involves 
              differential operators such as d-bar, Laplacian, Div, Curl and Dirac operators.
               The principal investigator proposes to continue his ongoing study, to explore 
              more connections and applications of function and operator theory to other 
              areas. Although there are many problems related to the study which arise in 
              nature, the principal investigator plans to focus specifically on the 
              aforementioned operators on potential related function spaces, the function 
              theory of these spaces, Nehari type problems in Dirichlet spaces, minimum 
              solution operators to some differential systems and Clifford analysis in the 
              theory of compensated compactness. He will use function and operator  
              theoretical tools and techniques in harmonic analysis, together with new  
              ideas and methods in his investigation.       Beside their own charm in pure
              mathematics, problems in this project have  rich connections and applications
              to many fields of applied sciences. For  example Hankel operators (or more
              generally commutators and bilinear forms) are  very popular in various aspects
              of engineering design and system science. Their  behavior provides important
              information to automatic control, navigation   systems and robust
              stabilization. The study of Hankel and related operators   in various
              underlying spaces will provide effective ways to deal with control   problems
              in different situations. Another good example is the recent discover   o f the
              connection between Clifford analysis and the compensated compactness  
              phenomenon in non-linear partial differential equations of multi-variable  
              spaces. Experience and previous achievement indicate that the principal  
              investigator has the potential to accomplish his goal.
