Title       : Circle Packing: Discrete Conformal Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9622803

Award Number: 9622803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45188              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Stephenson KENS@MATH.UTK.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-962280  PI: Stephenson    Stephenson proposes to study
              fundamental properties of circle packings and the geometric structures they  
              induce. Circle packings are configurations of circles with prescribed patterns
              of tangency. Until recently Stephenson has concentrated on the development of
              connections with classical analytic functions, contributing to what is now a
              very comprehensive and geometrically faithful "discrete" analytic function
              theory. His attention has now turned in other directions --- partly in towards
              the geometric foundations and partly out towards applications. The current
              proposal concentrates on three main issues: (1) existence and uniqueness of
              branched packings on the sphere (equivalently, of branched hyperbolic polyhedra
              in the ball); (2) properties of and uses for tailored random walks on circle
              packings; and (3) circle induced geometries in combinatoric settings, such as
              combinatorial Riemann mapping, Grothendieck dessins, knot projections,
              hyperbolic groups, and graph embedding. Of particular note is the effort by the
              Stephenson and his collaborators to introduce "inversive distances" into circle
              packing. Also, he continues numerical and experimental  approaches to
              investigating phenomena in circle packing through use of a sophisticated
              software package, "test bench".     Circle packing is a relatively new topic in
              mathematics which involves the study of configurations of circles with
              specified patterns of tangency. It seems an odd and artificial topic at first,
              but turns out to be surprisingly rich. Without giving technical details, one
              can say that in a circle packing the local combinatoric information about
              contacts between circles turns into rigid global geometric information on the
              overall configuration. The unique value in this approach lies in the fact that
              these packings turn out to carry in "discreet" packets much of the key
              geometric information normally described via "continuous" equations and
              formulas. This is especially important as we  move towards the more discrete
              model of the world required by computers. Among the important areas of study
              are analytic and harmonic function theory -- crucial, for instance, in modeling
              of fluid flow, electrical circuits, diffusion processes, and so forth. Results
              are now being proven using circle packing which could not be established or
              were even unanticipated in the classical theories. Moreover, circle packing
              gives opportunities for new results and insights because it permits computer
              experimentation. Applications have begun to emerge in diverse areas of
              mathematics and in computer science; for instance, circle packings are good for
              graph embedding and for various computer visualization tasks, such as 3-D
              modeling.  And the classical and discrete mathematical theory which underlies
              these advances is of importance.
