Title       : Real Time Studies of the Evolution of Structural, Optical, and Electronic
               Properties in Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9622774

Award Number: 9622774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Collins RWC6@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9622774 
              Collins    Real   time  spectroscopic  ellipsometry  (SE)  and  polarimetry, 
              combined with microstructural analysis by direct techniques  will  be  applied 
              to  characterize  the nucleation,  coalescence,  and  growth processes as well
              as the optical properties of thin films.  The  SE  techniques applied here are
              unique in their  ability  to  determine  the  optical properties and electronic
              structure  with  monolayer  sensitivity as a continuous function of thickness 
              for  films  fabricated  by methods employed widely  in  industry,  for 
              example,  plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition and magnetron  sputtering. 
              The research is divided into two projects:  (I)  the  preparation of
              semiconductor films and the study of size  effects  in   these  films  as  they
               evolve  from  clusters  through  the  coalescence stage to continuous growth,
              and (ii) the role of  gas  composition, substrate material, and substrate
              temperature on the  evolution  of  bonding  and  structure  in  diamond  films.
                The  materials  systems studied have a wide range of  applications  in  thin 
              film  photovoltaic devices, photon  and  electron  emission  devices,  and 
              optical  and mechanical  coatings.  As  a  result,  synergistic  relationships 
              will  be  established  between   this  program and other programs with industry
              for the transfer of  new  instrument designs, materials technologies, and human
              resources.  %%%  The growth of thin films under vacuum from vapor sources will 
              be  studied  as they are formed, atomic layer-by-layer. Such  studies  will 
              make  use of novel, high-speed measurement techniques  that  involve  directing
              a polarized white light beam into the reactor,  reflecting it from the surface
              of the growing film, and detecting  the  change  in  polarization upon
              reflection.  These  techniques  provide  the thickness of the film with atomic
              layer sensitivity,  the  growth  rate  of the film, and its optical 
              properties,  t he  latter   including  the  index  of  refraction   and  
              absorption  coefficient.  The  films  to  be studied  include  amorphous  and 
              crystalline  semiconductors,  with applications  in  optical  and  electronic
              devices such as solar cells and light-emitting diodes,  and   diamond  with 
              applications  as  optical,  mechanical,  and  electron-emitting  coatings.  The
              program  has  four  goals:  (i)  developing   high   sensitivity  optical 
              instrumentation,   (ii)  obtaining  a  better understanding of how thin films
              grow,  (iii)  optimizing  thin films for specific applications  based  on  this
               understanding,  and  (iv) establishing synergistic  relationships  between 
              this  program and other programs with industry  for  the  transfer  of new
              instrument designs, materials technologies,  and  human resources.  ***
