Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Automorphic L-functions and Interwining Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9622585

Award Number: 9622585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Freydoon Shahidi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shahidi    In the next three years, the investigator will study the following
              problems in Automorphic Forms and Representation Theory. As his first problem,
              the investigator wants to show that the poles of the standard intertwining
              operators for parabolically induced representations of a quasisplit group over
              a local field are among those of certain Langlands L-functions.  This will have
              important consequences in the theory of Eisenstein series and global liftings.
              In particular, he plans to prove a definitive reducibility criterion for
              representations induced from irreducible quasi-tempered generic representations
              of Levi subgroups of these groups in terms of L-functions. This is a
              consequence of another problem to be studied by him which extends a result of
              Vogan to p-adic groups. It states that the standard modules whose Langlands
              quotients are generic are irreducible. These are parts of a joint project with
              W. Casselman. As his second and third problems, he will continue his work on
              the tempered spectrum of classical groups (with D. Goldberg) and their residual
              spectrum (with H. Kim). He also plans to prove the equality of certain
              coefficients defined by two different methods (Rankin-Selberg and
              Langlands-Shahidi) as well as the study of different approaches to
              understanding poles of L-functions using the second method. He will also try to
              establish certain identities satisfied by normalized intertwining operators,
              extending his results from the tempered case to the non-tempered ones. Finally,
              he plans to further study the symmetric cube L-function of a cusp form on GL(2)
              and its twists with arbitrary cusp forms with the hope of better understanding
              the symmetric cube lift from GL(2) to GL(4).    The research falls in the
              general mathematical area of the Langlands program.The Langlands program is
              part of Number Theory, which is the study of the  properties of the whole
              numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the beginning problems in
              number theory have  furnished a driving forc e in creating new mathematics in
              other  diverse parts of the discipline.  The Langlands program is a  general
              philosophy that connects number theory with calculus;  it  embodies the modern
              approach to the study of whole numbers.  Modern number theory is very technical
              and deep, but it has had  astonishing applications in areas like theoretical
              computer science and coding theory.
