Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Chaotic Attractors and Repellers: Rigorous Results
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9622547

Award Number: 9622547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45124              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai Chernov chernov@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Chernov    The project  is devoted  to chaotic  dynamical  systems. It
               focuses  on nonequilibrium  statistical physics, chaotic attractors, and 
              repellers.  A major goal of  this project  is to find  effective bounds  on
              correlation  functions  for continuous-time  hyperbolic dynamical systems  with
              singularities, such as periodic Lorentz  gas.  This  will  make  it possible 
              to derive rigorously transport  laws   for  related  models  of nonequilibrium
              thermodynamics.  These include Ohm's law, the  Einstein relation  and the
              Green-Kubo  formula for a charged particle  in the periodic Lorentz gas subject
              to  a small  electrical  and magnetic field. These also include Newton's law 
              for shear viscosity for the model of two hard disks  on the torus.  Another
              major goal is the  study  of repellers  and  conditionally  invariant measures 
              for  smooth  chaotic  maps with  small  holes. This aims  at chaotic  billiard
              tables with pockets and then  solving the Pianigiani-Yorke  conjecture  of
              1979. The project  includes certain  numerical experiments on nonequilibrium 
              dynamics  of hard disks  in a box  with the  so-called  Maxwell demon  boundary
              conditions.     The mathematical  theory  of chaos and  dynamical systems has
              grown dramatically over the past 40 years. It started with   foundations  of 
              statistical  physics  created  by Boltzmann, Maxwell in  the XIX-th century. It
              has covered basic biological models (dynamics of population), various problems
              in engineering,  earthquake prediction,  traffic   control,  neural networks 
              for computer  data  processing, optimization  of manufacturing and management
              tasks,  and has countless other applications where long-time behavior   of
              complex systems is in question.  Universal features of chaos exhibited by
              various processes in nature and society make it possible  to describe and
              predict  such phenomena   by the means of one theory.  In particular,  the
              concepts of attractors  and repellers  (as structures  or patterns determining 
              long-time ev olution  of complex systems) are basic  categories  in  the theory
              of chaos.  Mathematical theory of chaotic attractors  and repellers is still
              very young and quite different from the old, classical mathematics.   This  is
              one  of the areas  where mathematical research is currently not only most
              active but  serves the direct needs of other modern sciences and human
              activities.
