Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Recursion Theoretic Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9622290

Award Number: 9622290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo A. Harrington leo@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-96-22290   Harrington, U. Cal-Berkeley            This project studies the
              recursively enumerable (re) sets of  integers, in a way which is independent of
              their enumeration and  independent of how integers are viewed as coding
              information. It is  the study of re sets purely in relation to each other. The
              main  ingredients of this study are: automorphisms of the collection of re 
              sets - the symmetries that exist among re sets; and invariant sets -  the walls
              that prevent symmetries. These two ingredients naturally go  hand-in-hand.  The
              main method used in this field is called `priority  arguments'. This is a
              technique for performing computable  constructions that ensure appropriate
              non-computable properties. A  current guiding problem is: if an invariant set
              has non-trivial  minimum information content then each of its members must have
              maximum  information content. It is known that settling this would involve an 
              extension of current automorphism techniques.             A set is "re"
              (recursively enumerable) if it can be  computably listed. For example, the set
              of all possible theorems of  mathematics (deduced from the usual axioms) is re.
              This project  studies the re sets themselves. Penrose, in his book The
              Emperor's New  Mind, suggests an analogy between computing and consciousness.
              This  projects seeks possibilities in the more strained analogy between re 
              sets (independent of their enumeration) and the timeless aspects of 
              consciousness. There are existing results which can be seen as  indicative of
              this direction. The main method used in this field is  called "priority
              arguments". This is a method whereby a common purpose  can be achieved by
              establishing an extensive field of "world views",  all working towards the
              common goal in their own separate ways, most  of which are conflicting. One
              interesting feature of the method is  that all reasonable world views must be
              allowed, including those that  deny the common purpose (those world views do
              their jobs by working  towards their own ne gations). Success in this project
              would strengthen  the potentially profound implications of the analogy linking 
              consciousness with a priority argument -like universe.
