Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Square Summable Power Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9622445

Award Number: 9622445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis de Branges   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              deBranges  9622445    In 1984 the present investigator obtained a proof of a
              conjecture, made in 1916  by Ludwig Bieberbach, estimating the coefficients of
              power series which  represent injective analytic functions in the unit disk.
              The proof was included  in a manuscript on square summable power series which
              motivated the argument  and prepared the way for applications. The verification
              on the argument  required an extensive visit to the then Soviet Union during
              which the proof was  separated from its original context. A dim perception of
              the proof was conveyed  which was insufficient as a guide for further research.
              The need for such  research was even obscured by the commonly accepted view
              that an era had come  to a close. The research opportunities generated by the
              proof were  underestimated. The need of an improved treatment of the theory of
              square  summable power series became evident. The research required for such a 
              treatment is the aim of the present project.    The significance of mathematics
              for the global economy is difficult to assess  because it proceeds through
              intermediaries in science and engineering. Square  summable power series are an
              aspect of complex analysis, and also of functional  analysis, which is most
              closely related to engineering through the theory of  linear systems. The
              interplay is seen in proofs of the Bieberbach conjecture  which appear in
              engineering journals. An interplay at a higher level is seen in  proofs of the
              Bieberbach conjecture which appear in advanced mathematical  texts. The
              technical and scientific community has in this way expressed its  need for
              information about the proof. But it has at the same time exposed the 
              inadequacy of existing knowledge of the proof even among experts. A substantial
               effort is required from the author of the proof to surmount these
              difficulties.
