Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differenial Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9622305

Award Number: 9622305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Phillips phillips@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622305  Phillips       This project is a study of differential equations from
              two  areas, the   Ginzburg--Landau equations as they apply to superconductivity
              and  the  calculus of variations related to nonlinear elasticity. Features  of 
               solutions to the Ginzburg--Landau equations are to be studied.  Experimental  
              evidence for the materials they model and numerical simulations  for the  
              equations themselves indicate that stable solutions contain  coherent pattern  
              formations (vortex arrays). It is proposed to analyze solutions  for simple  
              geometries (e.g. cylindrical rods and thin films). The principal  investigator 
               seeks to establish the existence of these patterns and to  understand the  
              mechanisms that bring them about. He also seeks to determine how  one can 
              control the patterns (pin the vortex distributions). Doing this  will lead  to
              a better understanding of the models and to estimates for the  effectiveness  
              of a material to carry a supercurrent when subjected to an  applied current or 
              a magnetic field. The second part of the proposal deals with the  regularity of
                solutions to variational problems related to nonlinear  elasticity. P. Bauman
               and the principal investigator have established that solutions to  certain  
              boundary value problems from two dimensional elasticity are  locally Lipschitz 
               continuous homeomorphisms. It is proposed to investigate whether  or not these
                solutions have singularities. Analytically this is to ask if the  solutions
              are   differentiable everywhere.  %%%       Scientists describe how a given
              material can conduct an  electric current  or how an elastic body can be
              twisted and bent by expressing such  phenomena as   solutions to mathematical
              equations (called partial differential  equations)   based on the underlying
              physics in each instance. The principal  investigator   studies the features of
              these solutions. For example in the case  of a   superconducting material (a
              material that can conduct electricity  very   efficiently) it is observ ed that
              the current naturally circulates  around a   symmetric array of points called
              vorticies. It is also observed  that if the   current is sufficiently strong
              the array begins to drift causing  the current   to die off and
              superconductivity is lost. Pattern formation and  the onset of   instability
              are features that can be investigated through the  solutions.  Understanding
              and being able to predict these features is  important both for   theory and
              engineering applications.  ***
