Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Development of an Asynchronous Transfer Mode
               (ATM) Based Clustered Platform for Integrated Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1996      
File        : a9622314

Award Number: 9622314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83719              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina L. Bloebaum clb@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick W. Dowd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This award will provide funding for networking and computing equipment that
              will be dedicated to support research in engineering.  Equipment includes
              Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) hardware (three switches along with the
              appropriate set of workstation network interface cards), as well as computer
              workstations.  This hardware will enable researchers to establish an ATM-based
              cluster computing platform on an isolated subnet of the university network.  A
              laboratory will be developed for the study of cluster-based computing and its
              application to multidisciplinary design problems.  The equipment will be used
              for collaborative research projects that will contribute to the advancement and
              expansion of the knowledge and technology based in the emerging area of
              Integration Engineering (IE), particularly with respect to development of
              ATM-based cluster networking strategies for Concurrent Design.       ATM is
              becoming the defacto standard for multimedia communications for Wide Area
              Networks and will be crucial for the success of the Information Superhighway. 
              The ATM-based cluster computing platform will create an industrial microcosm in
              which integrated, concurrent engineering design strategies and unique
              networking protocols will be developed and tested.  This laboratory will be
              used for: (1) development of an ATM-based networking framework for Integrated
              Design that supports Collaborative Design and Decision-making; (2) development
              of design strategies to reduce integrated system complexities (system reduction
              strategies); (3) development and testing of decomposition-based strategies that
              accommodate discrete as well as continuous variables for optimal system design;
              (4) improvement of infrastructure modularity through incorporation of embedded
              expert systems capabilities; (5) implementation and verification of transport
              and network level protocols for the IE environment; and (6) further development
              and testing of the design strategies and communication protocols for industry
              applications.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
