Title       : Radon Transforms and Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9622947

Award Number: 9622947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Todd Quinto equinto@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Quinto    Professor Quinto will pursue problems in tomography and
              the mathematical analysis of Radon transforms.  Professor Quinto will develop
              algorithms for limited data tomography.  He will continue refining his own
              algorithm (ERA) for the exterior Radon transform.  His tests on real data from
              industrial objects have been encouraging, but refinements are needed to detect
              certain specific defects.  He plans to develop a hybrid algorithm using his ERA
              and a singularity detection algorithm.  He will test these on rockets. 
              Professor Quinto will continue his research on finding effective dose plans for
              cancer radiation   therapy.  His algorithm will utilize inversion of a dual
              Radon transform and either projection onto convex sets or optimization. This
              applied research uses ideas from Professor Quinto's pure mathematical expertise
              as well as numerical methods.  Using   techniques including microlocal
              analysis, he will prove limited data theorems for transforms with real analytic
              measures on real analytic submanifolds including transforms on curves and
              surfaces in Euclidean space and on geodesic spheres and general hypersurfaces
              in manifolds. He will use these results to prove theorems in approximation
              theory, PDE, and complex analysis.    Computed tomography is used to detect
              defects in industrial objects.  Professor Quinto will develop and refine
              algorithms for industrial computed tomography and test them on real CT data of
              rockets.  The goal is to detect cracks in rocket bodies, air pockets in rocket
              fuel, and delaminations in rocket exit cones. His current algorithm works quite
              well but it does not detect some types of rocket defects well enough.  So, he
              will develop other   algorithms that will work in conjunction with his
              algorithm to get optimal reconstructions.  He will develop pure mathematics
              that will show how well the algorithms work and where their limitations could
              show up.  These pure mathematical underpinnings are required to   ensure that
              his (or any other) reconstruct ions are correct and are not lucky guesses.  In
              cancer radiation therapy, doctors irradiate tumors with radiation from
              different directions.  Professor Quinto will continue developing mathematical
              algorithms that will tell doctors how to irradiate tumors, depending on their
              location and other medical constraints.  Here, too, pure mathematics will be
              used to help determine good plans.  This same pure mathematics that provides
              the underpinnings of tomography is intriguing in its own   right, and the
              principal investigator will pursue some pure mathematical questions for their
              theoretical importance.  Such pure research has led to new insights about
              applied problems.
