Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Behavior of Large Combinatorial Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1998   
File        : a9622966

Award Number: 9622966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry N. Kahn jkahn@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9217,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding for a project concerned primarily  with long range
              behavior of various types of combinatorial  systems, especially graphs,
              hypergraphs of fixed edge size, and  matroids. A common theme is that such
              behavior is surprisingly  nice in important ways, and that this is often
              because there is a  substantial amount of approximate independence in
              appropriate  probability spaces associated with the system in question. The 
              project thus seeks to understand both properties of said  probability spaces
              and their consequences for combinatorial  problems.The heart of the  project is
              concerned with asymptotic  normality and related issues. Roughly, the
              investigator seeks to  show that various combinatorially-defined  random
              variables are  always approximately normally distributed in the  absence of 
              trivial obstructions to such behavior. Recent work of the   investigator
              suggests the possibility of such a phenomenon in  some  surprisingly general
              and unstructured situations. It is  hoped that  satisfactory answers to some of
              these questions,  involving so-called "canonical" or "hard-core" distributions,
               will support new directions in the development of the powerful  probabilistic
              method of combinatorics,  which seeks to apply  probabilistic ideas to resolve
              non-random combinatorial problems.  This work also opens new possibilities for
              the interplay between  probability and questions about the relation between
              integer  programming problems and their associated linear relaxations. We  may
              take asymptotic agreement of integer and linear optima as a  definition of nice
              "long range behavior" since linear programming  problems are computationally
              tractable and integer programs are  generally intractable. Then, very roughly,
              a good solution to the  linear version of a problem gives a  "canonical
              distribution"  which can be used to randomly generate or prove  existence of a 
              good solution to the original problem. This idea is thought to  have
              considerable potential.    This research is in t he general  area of
              Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to  find efficient methods
              to study how discrete collections of  objects can be arranged. The behavior of
              discrete systems is  extremely  important to modern communications. For
              example, the  design of large  networks, such as those occurring in telephone 
              systems, and the design of  algorithms in computer science deal  with discrete
              sets of objects, and this makes use of  combinatorial research.
