Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Large-eddy Simulation & Mathematical Analysis of
               Non-equilibrium & Non-linear Processes in Mantle Convection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9622889

Award Number: 9622889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Balachandar s-bala@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Yuen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Balachandar  9622889       The investigator and his colleague develop numerical
              methods  to study problems of mantle convection.  The main thrust of this 
              collaborative effort between the areas of computational  mathematics, fluid
              dynamics and geophysics is investigating a  class of challenging problems in
              mantle dynamics, which involves  the application of several modern mathematical
              and computational  techniques to large-scale numerical simulation,
              data-processing,  and scientific visualization.  The geophysical problems they 
              investigate entail the exploration of convection in the high  Rayleigh number
              regime.  Particular interest is in the  investigation of various transitions
              the flow undergoes under  non-equilibrium conditions as the system evolves from
              its initial  state of very high Rayleigh number and as the convective vigor of 
              the system decreases over time due to cooling.  Among these  transitions are
              (1) the flush instabilities induced by phase  transitions, and (2) the
              appearance of enhanced toroidal surface  velocity fields in variable viscosity
              three-dimensional  convection.  A large eddy simulation methodology is
              developed and  implemented to accurately simulate the very high Rayleigh number
               complex dynamics of the young Earth.  Mathematical tools that the 
              investigators develop, adapt and employ in these problems include  iterative
              techniques based on Krylov subspace for treating the  variable viscosity
              convection in the context of spectral  transform method, domain decomposition
              methodology for efficient  spatial resolution, and proper orthogonal
              decomposition and  wavelet transform techniques for efficient post-processing
              of the  results.       An important question that has arisen in the last few
              years  is the possibility of global gravitational instability that  develops in
              the Earth's interior due to internal phase  transition.  This instability
              results in episodic eruption of  superplumes from the lower mantle and
              associated intense volcanic  activity at the surface.  Th ere are increasing
              evidences from  correlation between past trench sites and cold anomalies in the
               lower mantle, inferred from seismic tomography, that such  instabilities on
              global scale could have occurred in the past 100  million years.  This provides
              a possible explanation for the  extinction of the dinosaurs, but there are many
              aspects of this  gravitational instability still needs to be explored.  Recent 
              large-scale high performance simulations have also revealed that  localized
              patches of concentrated shear and rotation about a  vertical axis can be
              generated with variable viscosity under  vigorous convection.  This is an
              important step towards a  self-consistent explanation of the interaction
              between the  surface plates and mantle.  This project extends these recent 
              findings under idealized equilibrium conditions to more realistic 
              non-equilibrium conditions, as the vigorously convecting young  Earth cools
              over time.  Incorporation of modern numerical  techniques and recent
              developments in mathematical methods are  essential for the successful
              investigation of these complex  phenomena.  Finally, it is of interest to
              investigate what the  effects of these instabilities are on the long-term
              thermal  evolution of the Earth and Earth-like planets.
