Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Quasiconformal Maps and Nonsmooth Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9622844

Award Number: 9622844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100651             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juha M. Heinonen juha@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9622844  PI: Heinonen    The proposal has three parts.
              Part I is the most significant. In Part I, Heinonen outlines a program of study
              of quasiconformal maps in metric spaces with little smoothness.  The goal of
              the project, joint with   Pekka Koskela, is to systematically develop a theory
              of quasiconformal maps on metric spaces that possess certain quantitative
              bounds on their mass and geometry. The motivation to  develop such a theory
              comes  partly from geometry and combinatorial group theory, where it is
              important to understand quasiconformal maps on boundaries of negatively curved
              spaces. Heinonen and Koskela have discovered that the validity of a  Poincare
              type inequality in a space is practically tantamount to the validity of a
              working quasiconformal theory. In Part II, Heinonen proposes  problems on the
              lower dimensional absolute  continuity properties of quasiconformal maps in
              Euclidean space. He has established that a quasiconformal map, defined on the
              unit ball of Euclidean space of any dimension larger than two, but not equal to
              four, has absolutely continuous boundary values if the boundary of the image
              domain has tangents almost everywhere with respect to the surface measure. The
              sharpness of this result is discussed, as well as the redundancy of the
              dimensional restriction. In Part III, Heinonen proposes problems, jointly with
              Seppo Rickman, related to the  structure of the branch set of a quasiregular
              map. Heinonen suggests a way to construct quasiregular maps with complicated
              branch set.     The proposal presents a shift from analysis to geometry via
              discrete methods in the theory of quasiconformal mappings. Here the word
              "analysis" means  the branch of mathematics that developed out of the Calculus;
              it is the study of continuous changes in infinitesimal data, from which  one
              wants to predict global conclusions. Geometry, perhaps the most fundamental
              part of all mathematics, is the study of space, its many forms and varieties,
              in many possible dimensions.  Discrete methods mean the opposite to continuous,
              or calculus methods, and involve more finite, "counting" ideas, such as those
              done by a computer, albeit in this work still of analytic and geometric flavor.
              The concept of quasiconformality enters the discussion in the most subtle way:
              it allows the space and its formation to be singular at times and in places,
              but not everywhere and not all the time. There is a certain control in the
              distortion, which perhaps looked  artificial to mathematicians 40 years ago
              when the research first in the field was conducted. Now quasiconformality is a
              ubiquitous phenomenon in mathematics. From work in the late  seventies we know
              that every space that locally looks like a flat space of Euclid has
              quasiconformal structure, albeit not a smooth structure in general; and that
              this is true in every dimension but four. Nevertheless, also in dimension four,
              it is conjectured that there is an infinity of spaces where one cannot do
              ordinary, smooth analysis, or calculus, but where one can do quasiconformal,
              nonsmooth analysis. The proposal addresses the need to develop more techniques,
              and more understanding, of this new calculus.
