Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Structure of Algebraic Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9622394

Award Number: 9622394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209641             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janos Kollar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622394    The principal investigator aims to study log varieties. These can be
              thought of as a pair consisting of a variety and a divisor on it. These objects
              arise in the study of several questions, for instance minimal model theory,
              moduli problems and the birational classification of rationally connected
              varieties.     To a log variety one can associate various numerical invariants
              (for instance discrepancies and selfintersection numbers), and these invariants
              exhibit very interesting behaviour. For ordinary varieties these invariants are
              integers, but for log varieties they are rational numbers. In many cases not
              all rational numbers arise this way, and it is crucial to understand the set of
              rational numbers that arise. Even in dimension two this is a hard question,and
              the answer has immediate and deep applications to the moduli of surfaces
              (Alexeev, Koll\'ar,Mori), birational trasformations of Fano fiber spaces
              (Corti) and to diophantine geometry (Hassett).     The principal investigator 
              also aims to further explore recent  applications of these and related ideas to
              the theoretical aspects of  high-performance computing  (joint work with Babai
              et al).     The principal investigator aims to conduct research in the field of
              algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of 
              mathematics, but  one which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past
              quarter-century. In its origin,  it treated figures that could be defined  in
              the plane by the simplest equations, like lines, circles, ellipses. Nowadays
              the field makes use of methods not only from algebra and geometry,  but from
              analysis and topology, and conversely is finding  application in those fields
              as well as in physics, theoretical computer science, and robotics.
