Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1996      
File        : a9622695

Award Number: 9622695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68856              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Rosay jrosay@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9622695  PI: Rosay.    Rosay plans to work on
              several topics in function theory; more specifically, in several complex
              variables and in partial differential equations.  He is presently working with
              E.L. Stout on the basic question of boundary values in the sense of
              hyperfunctions, trying to develop a very concrete local intrinsic theory. He is
              extremely interested in questions related to uniqueness in the Cauchy problem,
              especially for the Lewy operator and its perturbations. This has of course a
              link with the study of abstract CR structures. Several   questions concerning
              automorphisms of C^n, and polynomial convexity will also be studied, in
              particular in collaboration with F. Forstneric.  He is presently working on the
              problem of separating (reducible) analytic sets, in connection with embeddings
              problems.    The field of several complex variables has applications to many
              areas of mathematics: approximation theory, Fourier analysis, and, most
              importantly,  partial differential equations. This latter area of partial
              differential equations is of central importance in physics  and engineering. In
              fact, partial differential equations are the natural tool for the study of many
              processes in physics and engineering; prediction and understanding in physics
              and design in engineering are often based on partial differential equations.  
              It is thus of great importance to have incisive knowledge of this area. There
              are many approaches to the study of partial differential equations, but one of
              the most important approaches is via several complex variables. The cultivation
              of several complex variables is thus important. The research proposed by Rosay
              will clarify several issues in several complex variables, and thereby advance
              partial differential equations. The applications of several complex variables
              are not as direct and immediate as those of some areas of mathematics. The
              history of mathematics, however, is replete with examples of mathematical
              results whose utilitarian valu e was recognized only many years after their
              basic development. In fact, this is often the case with the best
              mathematics--mathematics that avoids the esoteric and the frivolous, but is
              grounded in reality and persistently asks and attempts to answer the most basic
              and fundamental questions. It is for this reason that mathematics must be
              regarded as a long term investment.
