Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Invariant Theory and Applications to Representation
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9622916

Award Number: 9622916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270816             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Howe howe@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Howe  9622916    The primary aspect of this project is to  
              investigate aspects of invariant theory related to multiplicity-   free
              actions, and actions on flag manifolds. Work of the proposer   with J. Horvath
              describing isotropy groups of actions of GLn on   products of flag manifolds
              associated to tame quivers will be used   to study the occurrence of dense
              orbits in actions associated to   wild quivers.Instances of the First
              Fundamental Theorem of Invariant  Theory for some low dimensional reducible
              actions analyzable by means   of multiplicity-free actions will be
              investigated. A major goal  will be an investigation of certain rings important
              for understan-   ding tensor products and related questions. It has been proved
              in some   cases, and is suspected in others, that these rings may be free as  
              modules over certain natural polynomial subrings. The description of   nice
              bases for these free modules may provide insight into the  
              Littlewood-Richardson Rule and related formulas. As time permits,  
              investigations of the ordinary geometric import of geometric invariant  
              theory, and of the Plancherel Theorem of  p-adic groups via Hecke   algebras,
              may also be undertaken.      Expository Abstract: In mathematics, one is often
              interested in   objects which may be different, but may be equivalent for some 
               purposes. Thus, in elementary geometry there is the notion of   congruence:
              two triangles, or other figures, are congruent if one   may be moved so as to
              fit exactly over the other. In an industrial   context, congruence is the idea
              underlying interchangeable parts.   The idea of invariant theory is to provide
              numerical criteria for   two objects to be equivalent, with respect to whatever
              is the   relevant notion of equivalence. Thus, two triangles are congruent  
              exactly when the lengths of their sides are the same triple of   numbers. The
              numbers which may be used to determine whether or not   two objects are
              equivalent are called *invariants(it)*. Invariant   theory seeks to f ind
              invariants for geometric configurations. This   project seeks to apply
              invariant theory in new directions. It will  look for systems of invariants for
              some new classes of configurations,   and it will also attempt to find some new
              structure in some of the most   important systems of invariants. Symmetry will
              be heavily exploited,   and systems whose structure is very strongly determined
               by symmetries will form the central objects of investigation.
