Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Mathematical Topics Related to Fluid Instabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9622563

Award Number: 9622563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66099              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Friedlander susan@math.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9622563  Friedlander     S.Friedlander in collaboration with M.M.Vishik will
              continue  her investigation into mathematical problems that arise in fluid
              motion.  It is proposed to study the spectrum of small oscillations of an ideal
               fluid about a given steady flow: this leads to the study of the spectrum  of a
              degenerate non-elliptic differential operator. The exact location of  the
              unstable continuous spectrum will be determined purely in terms of  dynamical
              systems quantities. Examples of fluid instability due to the  discrete part of
              the spectrum will be studied analytically and numerically.  It was recently
              proved that,under certain assumptions, linear instability  of a steady inviscid
              flow implies nonlinear (Lyapunov) instability. It is  proposed to extend the
              range of applicability of this result.Another line  of research is the study of
              instabilities for the augmented system of   fluid equations that govern
              magnetohydrodynamics. A sufficient condition  for instability has been derived
              in terms of a system of local PDE. It  is proposed to apply this criterion to
              demonstrate instability of certain  astrophysical models.  %%%   All fluid
              motions are continually subject to small disturbances  ( eg, think of a tank of
              water in a laboratory that is "disturbed" by a  truck driving by outside ). A
              natural question arises as to whether the  the effect of the disturbance dies
              away leaving the fluid  in the same state as before --this is called stable--or
              the effect of the  disturbance is to change the configuration of the
              fluid--this is called  unstable. The question of fluid stability/instability is
              a classical one  that has received much attention in the scientific literature
              for more  than a century.It is fundamental to studies in meteorology,
              oceanography,  geophysics and astrophysics ; in particular, instabilities at
              the air/sea  interface are significant to any study of the global change of the
               environment. The mathematics of fluid instabilities is governed by a  system
              of partial differ ential equations that are remarkably challenging  and
              interesting. Despite a century of study there are many open  mathematical
              questions connected with these equations. This proposal will  continue to
              address some of these open problems.  ***
