Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Gene Targeting of RBCS18in Arabidopsis
               thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9622319

Award Number: 9622319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51050              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Jelesko   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilhelm Gruissem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622319  Jelesko    This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. John 
              Jelesko, a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of  California Berkeley Plant
              Biology Department, with Dr.  Masaki Furuya, at the Hitachi Advanced Research
              Laboratory  (HARL) in Japan, in order to develop a tractable approach to 
              generate specific gene targeting (gene knockout) events in  plants.  Project
              funding will allow Dr. Jelesko to participate in a  six month research
              collaboration in Dr. Furuya's laboratory.  During this time, Dr. Jelesko will
              use single photon  counting video imaging equipment to measure in vivo 
              luciferase activity in transgenic plants which have  undergone a specific gene
              targeting event.  Successful  development of a gene targeting technology will
              provide Dr.  Jelesko and Dr. Furuya with a powerful genetic technique to 
              dissect the role of individual members of highly homologous  plant multigene
              families.    This proposal brings together research scientists from the  USA
              and Japan working in the area of plant molecular  genetics.  The US scientist
              will have an opportunity to  become familiar with research techniques,
              equipment, and  facilities unique to HARL as well as contributing to the 
              overall research efforts of Dr. Furuya.  Therefore, this  proposal fulfills the
              objectives of the Program in its  exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge
              through  international collaboration.  ***
