Title       : Ordered Arrays of Metals with Polynitrile or Cyanide Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9622589

Award Number: 9622589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim R. Dunbar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides support for research on synthesis of   organonitrile-bridged
              transition metal compounds by Dr. Kim R. Dunbar of   the Chemistry Department,
              Michigan State University.  Chain, layered and   three-dimensional assemblies
              will be constructed and crystallized, and   their magnetic and conducting
              properties determined.   Acetonitrile   compounds undergo facile substitution
              reactions so that a variety of   ligands can be added to moderate properties. 
              Solubility for extended   arrays will be enhanced by varying charge on metal
              precursors, varying   substituents on organic groups, and varying outer sphere
              ions present in   extended networks.   Compounds will be of two main types. 
              One type of   compound will contain transition metals sigma-bonded to the
              nitrogen atom   lone pairs of polynitrile acceptors.  Species such as
              tetracyanoethylene   (TCNE) will be used.  In these systems, paramagnetic metal
              centers are   assembled into the organic radical network.  The second type of
              compound   consists of transition metal cyanide complexes reacted to form
              extended   arrays of ferro- or ferrimangnetically coupled chains or
              two-dimensional   networks.   In this research, synthesis of transition metal
              nitrile compounds will be   controlled so that pure crystals of one-, two-, or
              three-dimensional   arrays will be formed.  The arrays are expected to exhibit
              unusual   magnetic properties which will be able to be correlated with
              structural   arrangement.  By manipulating the organic groups attached to the
              metals,   the solubility of the compounds will be controlled in order to build 
               specific types of molecular arrangements and crystal growth.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
