Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Reactive Ion Etcher and Annealer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9622134

Award Number: 9622134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Berger   (Principal Investigator current)
              James Kolodzey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johnson O. Olowolafe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Van der Weide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622134  Berger  The Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
              Delaware propose the purchase Reactive Ion Etching and Rapid Thermal Annealing
              equipment which will be dedicated to support research in engineering.  The
              equipment will be used for several research project including in particular:   
                  1.  Optoelectronic device fabrication.      2.  Si-Ge-C semiconductor alloy
              structures,      3.  VLSI circuit metallization,      4.  Terahertz electronic
              circuits,      5.  Micromachined near-field scanning tips.     These research
              projects are important because they are considered by colleagues to be on the
              verge of technical breakthroughs which will promote basic knowledge and build
              the national engineering infrastructure.   The Reactive Ion Etcher (RIE) is a
              "dry processing" instrument for the fabrication of smaller devices with higher
              resolution than with the "wet chemistry" (acids and solvents) that we presently
              use.   The Rapid Thermal Annealer (RTA) is a fast, controlled heater to alloy
              ohmic contacts and anneal crystal damage (from prior process steps) quickly so
              that dopants and regions of different composition will not have time to
              interdiffuse.  Presently we use a furnace tube with a slow response time which
              was modified from liquid phase epitaxy equipment.  This equipment is becoming
              an industry standard.   For example, recently IBM Corp.  approached our
              Department with job openings for students familiar with RIE instruments. 
              Unfortunately, our students stand at a disadvantage because we lack an RIE
              on-campus.   These new instruments will give us the capability to attract
              funding for research on advanced devices and circuits, and allow use to train
              students on timely processing techniques.  ***
