Title       : Cryogenic Electrorheological Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9622525

Award Number: 9622525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rongjia Tao   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert N. Zitter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tian-Jie Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xuesong Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1022,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9622525  Tao 
                This project will investigate a new class of materials, cryogenic 
              electrorheological (ER) fluids. The research will  determine  the  effective  
              viscosity,  shear  stress,  response   time,   column  formation,  and 
              structure  of these  fluids.  The  program  will  examine  the  dynamic process
              of field-induced solidification  an  explore  electro- and magneto-rheological
              properties of cryogenic  ER fluids made of superconducting particles. The
              experimental and  concurrent  theoretical  investigation  is  aimed  at 
              addressing  fundamental  science  of ER fluids: the physical  mechanisms  and 
              rheological   and  electrical  properties  of   ER   fluids.   If  successful, 
              the results will form the basis for  new  technology  employing cryogenic ER
              materials.  %%%  Electrorheological  (ER)  fluids  are  often   referred   to  
              as  intelligent fluids: Their rheological properties can  be  rapidly  changed 
              by  an  electric field. Hence, ER  fluids  have  a  wide  variety  of 
              applications,  such as shock  absorbers,  suspension  systems, and clutches.
              This project will investigate cryogenic ER  fluids  which  consist  of fine
              dielectric  particles,  including  superconducting particles, suspended in
              liquid nitrogen or liquid  helium.  The  research will determine physical and 
              a  mechanical  properties  of  the  cryogenic ER fluids  and  dynamic 
              structure  formation.  The  comparison between cryogenic ER  fluids  and  ER 
              fluids   at   room  temperature  will  provide  significant   new  information 
              about  the fundamental physics  of  the  ER  effect.  Moreover,  the  project
              may potentially establish the  foundation  for  a low temperature technology
              based on ER phenomena and  lead  to practical applications in fluids
              engineering.  ***
