Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Ergodic Theory and Applications in Combinatorial Number
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9622974

Award Number: 9622974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Boshernitzan michael@math.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9215,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Boshernitzan    The central subject in this proposal is  diophantine
              properties of iet's (interval exchange transformations).  Boshernitan's
              approach in the study of iet's,  contrary to the 'global' approaches  of others
              (H.Masur,  W.Veech  etc.),  makes special emphasis on the way   diophantine and
              algebraic properties of the parameters involved may affect the dynamical
              properties of an iet. Many results in  analytical number theory are extendable
              to iet's.  For example, Boshernitzan's recent result, joint with  C.Carroll, 
              that minimal iet's over a quadratic field must be pseudo-Anosof  (self-similar)
               can be viewed as an extension of the classical  Lagrange's result on the
              periodicity of the continued  fraction representations of quadratic
              irrationals.  Perhaps the most outstanding conjecture in this direction  is 
              obtained from an  attempt to extend  to iet's  the famous Roth's theorem on the
              rate algebraic irrationals can be approximated  by the  rationals. (The
              analogue of the corresponding  Liouville's theorem is true.)  One of the tools
              at  Boshernitzan's disposal in tackling the above problems is his recent
              discovery of a connection between the rate of recurrence of  typical orbits in
              dynamical systems and the Hausdorff dimension of the   space  (quantitative
              version of  Poincare recurrence theorem).  For iet's, this connection works
              both directions. The same is true in many other situations  (Y.Peres,
              D.Ornstein, B.Weiss). The list of other Boshernitzan's interests includes
              number theory, billiards in polygons, ergodic theorems along subsequences of
              integers, Hardy fields  (joint   projects  with  M.Wierdl, D.Berend,
              G.Kolesnik, I.Kornfeld and  V.Bergelson).    Because of the basic nature of the
              present research proposal,  it is hard at this point to assess accurately the
              fields of possible applications.  Among the subject which may benefit from our
              research I  would only mention the possibility  of creation of new code  
              compression schemes useful  in computer technology   ( related to our discovery
              of quantitative version of Poincare recurrence  theorem)  and  possible
              applications to laser technology  (research  with  I. Kornfeld  on interval
              translation maps).
