Title       : Research in Kleinian Groups and Conformal Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9622965

Award Number: 9622965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Keen linda@alpha.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Keen    The  proposed research is in three different areas: first,
              hyperbolic density in special families of meromorphic functions; second, the
              definition of moduli for quasi-conformal deformation spaces of Kleinian groups;
              and third, discreteness in a one parameter family of   2-generator Kleinian
              groups.   i - One of the outstanding problems in conformal dynamical systems is
              to  prove that, for a given family, the hyperbolic systems are dense.  We   
              propose to extend our result that the functions in the family {f(z,c) = c 
              tan(z)} are dense to other finite dimensional families of meromorphic 
              functions; in particular, to families with no critical points and  finitely
              many asymptotic values.  ii - We shall extend our definition of Pleating
              Coordinates from one and  two dimensional spaces of Kleinian groups to
              arbitrary spaces of Kleinian  groups.  The advantage of pleating coordinates is
              that they give a direct  relation between the geometry of the  hyperbolic
              3-manifold determined by  the group and complex analytic trace moduli for the
              group.   iii - We consider a family of two generator subgroups of PSL(2,C) with
               one fixed parabolic generator and one parabolic generator depending on a 
              single complex parameter c.  We propose to extend the kind of analysis we  have
              used in our work on pleating coordinates to find necessary and  sufficient
              conditions on c for the groups to be discrete.     Research is proposed in
              three different areas.  The first involves extending previous work in the area
              of conformal dynamical systems. Such systems arise as models of various
              physical, economic and social phenomena.  A dynamical system may be described
              by a family of functions, f(z,c), depending on two variables. For each fixed
              value of c we are   interested in the orbits of a given point z; that is, we
              consider the set of points z, f(c,z), f(f(c,z)), and so on.  If a small change
              in the input data, z, changes the orbit only slightly, we say the system is
              stable, or predictable.  If a small change  in z, on the other hand, causes a
              drastic change in the orbit, we say the system is chaotic.  If the orbits
              satisfy   a certain technical condition, the system is called hyperbolic.  It
              would seem that hyperbolic behavior is the norm, but this is often difficult to
              prove.  We have proved that it is for a special class of functions and propose
              to extend this work to a larger class.  The second area of research involves
              studying a class of 3 dimensional objects called hyperbolic 3-manifolds.  They
              are so-called because they are endowed with a non-Euclidean geometry called a
              hyperbolic geometry. In such a geometry the sum of the angles in a triangle is
              less than a straight angle.  The hyperbolic 3-manifold may be varied so that
              the geometry changes, but remains hyperbolic.  In previous work, based on 
              careful analysis of examples generated by sophisticated computer programs, we
              found a good way to describe one and two parameter families of hyperbolic
              3-manifolds.  We propose to extend this work to families depending on a
              arbitrary number of parameters.   In the course of our work on 3-manifolds we
              encountered a class of algebraic objects called groups.  These groups arise in
              a number of different areas of mathematics and have been studied by many
              researchers. There are, however, still a number of open questions concerning
              them and for our third area of research we propose to extend our previous
              analysis of these groups to answer some of these questions.
