Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Estimates for Boundary- Value Problems in
               Linear and Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9622748

Award Number: 9622748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelius O. Horgan coh8p@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9622748  Horgan  The asymptotic behavior of solutions in continuum mechanics is
              a broad  topic of considerable mathematical and technological interest.  For
              the  specific geometries of a three-dimensional cylinder or a two-dimensional 
              rectangle, the spatial decay of solutions of elliptic partial differential 
              equations (or systems of equations) arises in consideration of the classic 
              Saint-Venant principle in elasticity theory.  Such problems also arise in 
              entry flows for viscous incompressible fluids.  Generalizations to   include
              principles of Phragmen- Lindelof type are also of interest.  In this proposal,
              it is planned to analytically investigate a sequence of  boundary-value
              problems for second-order and fourth-order elliptic partial  differential
              equations.  Both linear and nonlinear, isotropic and   anisotropic problems are
              considered.  The results of such investigations have widespread technological
              impact.  In particular, rigorously obtained asymptotic estimates for the rate
              of   decay of solutions of continuum mechanics problems are immediately
              applicable  in engineering analysis and design.  The problems to be
              investigated  involve mathematical models for advanced composite materials and
              structures.   %%%    Structures of technological interest such as automotive
              and aircraft parts,  rocket casings, helicopter blades, hollow shafts and
              containment vessels,  are often constructed of layers of anisotropic, filament
              or fiber-reinforced   materials which must be designed to remain elastic.  The
              proper analysis   of such structures in current high-performance technology
              requires careful  mathematical analysis of basic issues.  It is proposed to
              study the safe  and efficient performance of these  structures using results
              from the theory   of partial differential equations.  In particular,
              simplified,  cost-effective asymptotic methods will be used.  The scope of the 
              investigation will include both linear and nonlinear problems, and one of  the
              underlying goals is that of efficient use of  materials.  It is known, for 
              example, that considerations of nonlinear effects in composites often lead  to
              striking differences from predictions of linearized theories.  In view   of the
              rapid utilization of advanced composite materials in current   technology,
              mathematical studies on large deformations of such materials  promise to have
              widespread impact on the mechanics and materials knowledge  and technology
              base.  Applications to specific composite architectures  of interest, for
              example, to the Boeing Company and NASA will be made.    ***
