Title       : Algebraic Cohomolgy and Deformation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9622931

Award Number: 9622931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary Cornell                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48663              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Schack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              July 2, 199619602105  Jones  Description:  This proposal requests support  for a
              new research  collaboration in ecological studies entitled  "Seasonal Variation
               in the Limnology of Subtropical Lakes in Nepal  as Controlled by  Monsoon
              Climate."  The PIs are Dr.J.Jones of  the University of  Missouri (MU) and
              Drs.J.McEachern/T.B.Shrestha  of the World  Conservation Union (IUCN),
              Kathmandu.  The PIs  will conduct a two-year limnological study of  warm
              monomictic and warm polymictic lakes in  Nepal located in differing land-use
              regimes.  Seasonal variability in trophic state, ionic  salinity, nutrient
              limitation, phytoplankton  composition and biomass, and algal toxins will  be
              measured.  The attributes of cyanobacteria  will be related to limnological
              features to  determine seasonal patterns.  This research  will advance our
              understanding of how the  monsoon climate influences lakes and will  contribute
              to the modest data base on lake  seasonality in Nepal.   Scope:  This project
              will be conducted under a  Momorandum of Understanding between the MU and  the
              IUCN-Nepal which is leading a national  effort for conservation and management
              of  wetlands.  Included is a reconnaissance survey  of water chemistry, fauna
              and flora, and an  electronic database of wetlands throughout the  country. 
              The IUCN will share costs for field  collections, MU will process water samples
              for  data on water quality and algal toxins.  The  research findings will be
              jointly published.          ***                                                
                                      Pakistan and is the next step in developing a 
              relationship between scientists who are doing  research in this field.  s area
              of research.   ngoing relationship in the exchange of  information foin
              developing .  The  International Conference on Non-Accelerator  Particle
              Physics will convene in Bangalore,  India from January 2-9, 1994.  Gaurang B.
              Yodh,  University of California, Irvine and R. Cowsik,  Tata Institute of
              Fundamental Research and  Director, Ind ian Institute of Astrophysics, 
              Bangalore are the organizers.  This conference  is dedicated to the discussion
              of the  fundamental physics that emerges from diverse  areas of non-accelerator
              particle physics such  as: Solar Neutrino Astronomy, Cosmic Rays,  Particle
              Physics, Neutrino Physics and the  Detection of Dark Matter.  Substantial
              progress  has been made in these fields during the past  five years and it is
              widely thought that  definitive answers to several questions of  Physics beyond
              the Standard Model can now come  from Non-Accelerator methods of inquiry.  The 
              conferees will review recent developments in  the various aspects of Particle
              Physics, their  implications in astrophysical situations,  experimental
              detection of dark matter,  theoretical interpretation and empirical and 
              physical models of the large scale structure of  the Universe.     Scope:  This
              conference will precede a major  interdisciplinary research program between the
               Indian Institute of Astrophysics and the  University of California, Irvine. 
              As  considerable research is going on in the US in  all fields to be discussed
              at this conference,  it will be important for the US researchers to  present
              their work to an international body of  some of the most   respected scientists
              from all over the world.    ***
