Title       : A Hybrid Computer-Intelligent and User-Interactive Process Planning System for
               Four-Axis Computer Numerical Control Turning Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1997  
File        : a9622530

Award Number: 9622530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dharmaraj Veeramani raj@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This grant provides funding for research on computer-aided process planning for
              four-axis computer numerical control (CNC) turning centers.  The presence of
              multiple-turrets and spindles in this new generation of CNC machines introduces
              process planning considerations and complexities that are non-existent in
              earlier machine tools.  The goal of this research is to investigate a hybrid
              process planning framework that integrates computer-intelligent decision-making
              along with interactive expert user input at various levels so that an optimal
              process plan can be identified quickly in a large combinatorial solution space.
               This research will be done in close collaboration with industry and will
              entail: (1) formulation and development of representation schemes, algorithms
              and methods for process plan generation and optimization, and (2) demonstration
              and validation of the process planning technology by application on real
              industry data.  The process plan optimization problem that arises in the
              context of four-axis CNC turning centers is unique and does not match classical
              optimization problems.  A Tabu Search based optimization approach will be used.
                Because of the lack of process planning systems for four-axis CNC turning
              centers, these highly flexible machines are being used in industry typically as
              dedicated machines for mass production of one or two parts.  The successful
              completion of this project could lead to the availability of a process planning
              system that would make it convenient to process a large variety of parts and
              thereby increase the acceptance and use of these machines in industry.  This in
              turn could enable companies to reduce their manufacturing lead times and
              enhance their responsiveness to customers and thereby become more competitive
              in the global marketplace.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
