Title       : CRB: Molecular Identification of Threatened Species: Does Theory Predict the
               Utility of Nuclear vs. Mitochondrial Sequences?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9622182

Award Number: 9622182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Palumbi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9622182  Palumbi  Most species are comprised on interacting populations, and
              describing these interactions are understanding their consequences remains one
              of the greatest challenges in conservation biology. To date, metapopulation
              modeling and demographic description of interacting populations have been
              matched by technical advances in the detection of genetic differences within
              and between populations. However, a comprehensive melding of demographic,
              modeling and genetic approaches to metapopulations has yet to be achieved. When
              is an ecological population identifiable as a genetic population? When do
              differences in genetics correctly predict results of metapopulation models?
              These questions need to be answered to bring genetic and ecological approaches
              to metapopulations together. This research seeks to understand the processes by
              which populations become genetically distinct from one another. Such genetic
              distinctions are at the heart of recent definitions of evolutionarily
              significant units for conservation management which depend on reciprocal
              monophyly of populations at some genetic locus. Previously, much attention has
              been placed on mitochondrial DNA because these loci become monophyletic
              rapidly. However, mtDNA can not be used to parameterize ecological models of
              population structure because mtDNA only tracks maternal inheritance patterns.
              How useful are nuclear loci in discriminating populations genetically? This
              depends on the rate of development of monophyly of nuclear genes compared to
              mitochondrial genes. Population genetic theory predicts a simple relationship
              between these two rates, but this prediction depends on many assumptions that
              have never been tested in any animal system.   This conservation biology
              research will investigate the development of reciprocal monophyly in
              mitochondrial and nuclear loci in a set of defined species of whales and
              dolphins. This study will have direct application to the rate at which
              populations become distinguishable genetically and ecologically . This is a
              central questions when dealing with populations of endangered species. In
              addition, the genetic markers developed in this research will have important
              practical applications for monitoring whale and dolphin populations.
