Title       : Existence of Quasiconformal Maps and Strongly Uniform Domains in Space, and
               Conformal Invariants of Domains and Integrability of Conformal Maps in the
               Plane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9622650

Award Number: 9622650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70892              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shanshuang Yang syang@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9622650  PI: Yang    This proposal is concerned with two
              types of problems.  One deals with the problems of characterizing domains
              (and/or their boundaries) in spaces on which certain quasiconformal maps exist.
              Examples include quasiconformal balls, quasiconformal reflection domains and
              fixed point sets of periodic   quasiconformal maps. The study of these problems
              will lead to better understandings of the general problem regarding where
              exactly quasiconformal maps fit as an intermediate class of maps lying between
              homeomorphisms and diffeomorphisms, an interesting subject across several
              branches of mathematics   including analysis, topology and differential
              geometry.  The methods that will be employed include the usage of the newly
              introduced concept of strong uniformity in both homotopy and homology
              categories. This project will also involve research to explore more properties
              and applications of strongly uniform domains. Another type of problems deals
              with some conformal invariants of planar domains related to quasiconformal maps
              and the integrability of derivatives of conformal maps of the unit disk.
              Existing results indicate that there are close connections between these
              problems and the theory of quasiconformal maps in the plane. It is Yang's
              intention to explore more connections of this type.  The study of these
              problems will shed new lights on how quasiconformal mapping theory can be
              applied to classical complex analysis.    The major theme of this proposal is
              the investigation of the interplay between the geometry and topology of
              geometric figures and the analysis of various mappings living on those
              geometric figures. We study how the geometric shapes of domains, curves, or
              surfaces affect the analytic properties of certain functions defined on those
              objects and vise versa. This may lead to better understandings of the geometric
              and analytic structures of objects such as domains, curves, and surfaces that
              relate to the physical world.
