Title       : Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Investigation of a Long-Term Culture in
               the Falemme (Upper Senegal Region) A.D. 1000-1900
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9622777

Award Number: 9622777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. McIntosh skmci@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Mr. Ibrahima Thiaw will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will focus on a ca. 50 kilometer-long segment
              of the Falemme River Valley in Senegal and conduct both archaeological survey
              and excavation. Although economically marginal today, in the past the region
              had important trade links with both Northern Africa and the Atlantic coast. The
              research is designed to recover information on changes in subsistence,
              technology, trade and material culture over the last thousand years. Mr. Thiaw
              will conduct an extensive foot survey of the study area to recover reliable
              data on the number, chronology and location of archaeological sites to
              determine distribution, chronological relationships and functional variability.
              In addition he will carry out controlled stratigraphic excavation at three
              second millennium sites discovered in the course of a previous reconnaissance.
              Recovered local and imported artifacts and paleoeconomic data will be combined
              with information on context and chronology to permit the establishment of a
              regional chronological sequence and to provide insight into change through time
              in subsistence economy, technology and participation in trade networks.  The
              research is directed at two important anthropological questions. The first
              concerns the boundary between history and prehistory. One school contends that
              prehistoric cultures functioned as basically independent agencies unaffected by
              larger scale geographic interactions and can be studied as isolated units. Only
              with the onset of history did this situation significantly change. Thus,
              according to this argument, there is a clear divide between historic and
              prehistoric periods and it is extremely difficult to use historic patterns to
              project back into the prehistoric past. Another group of anthropologists sees
              the prehistoric period as changing and dynamic and not significantly different
              than its later historic counterpart. Because Mr. Thiaw's research will
              encompass significant periods on both sides of this gap, he will be able to
              examine this issue directly. Secondly, Mr. Thiaw's research will also provide
              important information on the rise of complex societies in sub-Saharan Africa
              and help to determine the extent to which trans-Saharan trade played a role in
              the rise of African kingdoms.  This research is important for several reasons.
              It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will contribute
              significantly to the development of archaeological methodology and will assist
              in the training of a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
