Title       : MPWG: Introduction to FEMME Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1993    
File        : a9353784

Award Number: 9353784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74498              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Kebbekus kebbekus@admin.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Kimmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353784    Kebbekus    The twelve months New Jersey Institute of Technology
              Introduction to FEMME Program will  is designed to offer post fourth and fifth
              grade high-potential girls from Newark, Irvington and  East Orange school
              districts an opportunity which will improve their science and mathematics 
              achievement, promote healthy self-esteem and self confidence, and inspire
              feelings of  competency while challenging fear of failure.  The non-residential
              program will introduce  students to science, engineering, and  mathematics
              (SEM) careers, while encouraging them to  attain their academic potential
              through hands-on SEM activities.  Monthly spring semester  workshops, a four
              week summer camp component, and a follow-up fall workshop will be held  to
              provide participants with positive learning experiences, exposure to
              appropriate role models,  and activities inspiring teamwork and cooperation.   
              Instruction will be provided in science, math and engineering, and oral and
              written  communication skills, as well as field trips to the Pocono
              Environmental Education Center in  Dingmans Ferry, Pennsylvania, the Marine
              Science Consortium in sandy Hook, New Jersey, the  Franklin Institute in
              Philadelphia and the Liberty Science Center in Jersey City.  In addition, 
              students will receive academic and career counseling and will be exposed to
              formal and informal  interaction with female professionals, faculty and
              students already engaged in SEM careers.   Participants will be involved in
              daily structured athletic events to encourage teamwork and  cooperative
              efforts.  Study groups will be formed to investigate scientific, math and
              engineering  concepts to teach and promote cooperative learning habits. 
              Elementary and secondary teachers  will form teams to work with the students,
              under the leadership of NJIT faculty.  The partners  in this project are the
              Newark, Irvington, and East Orange school districts, the New Jersey  Marine
              Science Consortium, and the Liberty Science Center.  Additionally, all
              participa nts will  be provided information and applications for existing
              precollege enrichment programs in SEM  during summers following students'
              initial participation.  The activities will promote students'  skills and
              motivate them toward attainment of academic skills necessary for college
              preparatory  courses in middle and high school, thus giving them the option to
              continue with post-secondary  education.  ***
