Title       : Field Institutes for Elementary School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1999  
File        : a9353350

Award Number: 9353350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $825748             (Estimated)
Investigator: LeRoy R. Lee lrlee@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Meredith E. Ostrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wisc Acad of Sci Arts
	      
	      Madison, WI  53705    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              60        Life Sciences                           
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This 4-year Leadership project will target five                                
              geographically distributed districts in Wisconsin, and is                      
              designed to (1) increase participant knowledge of Wisconsin                    
              geology and ecology; (2) increase the amount of field-based                    
              science used in the classroom; (3) develop participant                         
              understanding of the research base of teaching and learning                    
              as well as the application of that knowledge; (4) develop                      
              participant leadership skills and apply those skills in                        
              community and professional activities; and (5) develop a                       
              professional support network.  The project will also select                    
              teams of two teachers per school; provide sessions for                         
              principals that engage them in field-based activities;                         
              actively work with the teachers in their schools to                            
              implement a field-based program; utilize a Materials                           
              Resource Center developed through a present NSF project for                    
              earth science teachers; and use the experience of the                          
              Wisconsin Elementary Science Teachers (WEST) to work with                      
              participants in the development of quality workshops for                       
              other elementary teachers in the district as well as across                    
              the state.  Twenty-seven days of scheduled activities, most                    
              of which are in the field, will be held.  A resource Center                    
              will provide an overview of available field-based materials                    
              as well as a source of activities.                                             
                                                                                             
              This proposal is appropriate for teacher enhancement because                   
              it plans a strong Leadership project designed to increase                      
              the amount of field-based science used in the classroom, and                   
              to develop participant understanding of the research base of                   
              teaching and learning as well as the application of that                       
              knowledge.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately 38% of the amount                        
              requested from NSF.
