Title       : Chicago Public Schools Science & Mathematics Education Self-Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1994   
File        : a9353310

Award Number: 9353310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Madeleine J. Long                       
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Argie K. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Daley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago Public Schools
	      125 South Clark Street
	      Chicago, IL  606034013    312/890-7976

NSF Program : 7358      URBAN SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9353310  Daley                               This project will impact the
              total MST education enterprise,  including finance; governance and management;
              content, pedagogy,  and delivery; community partnerships; teaching, learning
              and  assessment; and opportunities to learn. Representatives of various 
              stakeholder populations will assist in designing the self-study  process.
              School staffs will address the condition of MST education  in the school and
              indicate needed changes. All school staff  (including custodial and lunchroom
              staff) will complete  questionnaires.     Questionnaires and brainstorming
              sessions will be used to solicit  information regarding the state of MST
              education in Chicago, the  changes needed, and contributions that can be
              expected from  stakeholders. During these sessions local teachers will discuss 
              current conditions and explore strategies for improvement. Local  school
              councils (LSC) members will assist in gaining input from  parents and react to
              the statements from stakeholder groups and   all school staff, including
              custodial staff and cafeteria workers.    Input from various stakeholder groups
              will be presented to the  Coordinating Committee who will develop a final
              report. Based on  the information and data from this report, a subgroups of 
              stakeholders will write a comprehensive MST education  implementation proposal.
                  The Department of Research, Evaluation and Planning will develop  and
              implement an evaluation design. Evaluation will address the  effectiveness with
              which the needs in MST are identified and the  relationship of the proposal to
              the identified needs. Evaluation  will also measure the quantity and quality of
              involvement in the  self-study process.
