Title       : CRCM: Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities in Mississippi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9353219

Award Number: 9353219
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Betty Ruth Jones                        
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdul K. Mohamed   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 1548      COMP REGIONAL CENTERS FOR MINO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9249,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9353219  Mohamed, Abdul K.  Jackson State University  Jackson, MS     
              "Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities in Mississippi"    One of the
              most important goals of the nation's education system is  to produce students
              who are first in the World in science and  mathematics achievement by the 2000.
               Recent reports indicate that  the gap between United States and other
              industrialized nations in  these areas is abysmally widening.  The gravity of
              the problem is  even more conspicuous in the case of minority students, where
              they  are significantly under-represented in science, mathematics and 
              engineering.  Minority students must be provided, from the time  each enters
              school, and intellectually stimulating and academically  enriched learning
              environment.    The Mississippi Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network 
              Alliance is a partnership among a plethora of  colleges/universities, school
              districts, community organizations  and other constituencies which will address
              the need to increase  and enhance educational opportunities for minority
              children and  youth in Mississippi.  The Alliance is the only organization of
              its  kind in the state and given the successful experiences of programs  of
              similar kind in the past it will be highly successful in  implementing this
              project.    This project has five components: (i) Pre-college Outreach (Summer 
              residential academies, Saturday academies and Teacher Enhancement);  (ii)
              Special Support Services: (iii) Family Math-Science; (iv)  Dissemination; and
              (v) Evaluation.  The Pre-college component  exposes and provides middle school
              students with challenging  approaches to science, mathematics, communication
              skills and  computer science learning.  Students in grades 6-8 will participate
               in the residential summer academy each year.  Other activities in  the
              pre-college component include: role-modeling, field trips,  demonstrations by
              college faculty, cross-tutoring by college  students, science fairs, parental
              involvement, etc.  Special  Support  Services component provides family
              involvement and  Business/Industry/Government interface with the pre-college 
              component.  Linkages, additional networks and partnerships with  major agencies
              and stakeholders in education will be encourage to  leverage support and
              resources.  The teacher enhancement component  will target middle school
              teachers.  The primary goal is to  strengthen their content knowledge and
              teaching skills to enable  them to develop and implement a plan for improving
              math and science  instruction at their school site.  The achievements of this
              project  will be disseminated throughout the state and the nation.        The
              strength of this proposal is native to its design which has  been worked out by
              building from past experiences.  This project  will impact the whole state of
              Mississippi and may become the  vehicle for revitalizing pre-college education
              in science and  mathematics in the state of Mississippi.    Expected outcomes
              include; (i) Greater interest in careers related  to Math and Science (ii) High
              achievement in Math and Science  courses; (iii) Increased enrollment in Math
              and Science courses;  (iv) Increased enrollment in Pre-algebra; Algebra and
              Geometry; (v)  More schools offering Pre-algebra, Algebra and Geometry; (vi) 
              Increased number of teachers trained in these subjects; and (vii)  Increased
              time devoted to Math and Science in the classroom.
