Title       : American Astronomical Society Teacher Resource Agents (A-ASTRA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1997    
File        : a9353377

Award Number: 9353377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1669527            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Kay Hemenway   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Milkey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Boyce  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Astronomical Soc
	      2000 Florida Ave N.W.
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/659-0134

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353377  Hemenway    The A-ASTRA (American Astronomical Society Teacher Resource
               Agents) program will prepare teachers to be astronomy resource  agents in
              their geographic regions following a four-week summer  institute.  The
              objectives of the A-ASTRA project are:  to  enhance the teaching of astronomy
              in elementary and secondary  schools, to provide astronomy workshops to
              elementary and  secondary teachers using hands-on astronomy activities, to 
              encourage the professionalism of the participants, and to  increase
              interactions among professional astronomers, science  educators, and
              elementary/secondary school teachers.    For each of three summers, twenty-five
              participants at each of  three geographical diverse sites will interact with
              the primary  instructional staff of professional astronomers, astronomy 
              educators, and master teachers.  The institute will use  instructional
              materials (many of which were developed with NSF  funds) to model the teaching
              of hands-on astronomy concepts, will  offer instruction in workshop
              presentations skills, and provide  astronomical research or educational
              experiences unique to each  site.  These activities may include presentation of
              current  research topics by area astronomers, field trips, and various 
              observing/research experiences.  The sites (and site directors)  are:  Loyola
              University of Chicago (David Slavsky), Northern  Arizona University (Kathleen
              DeGioia-Eastwood), and the  University of Maryland (John Trasco).  Each site
              will have a  leadership team consisting of the site director and two teachers 
              from previous NSF astronomy programs.  These teacher consultants  will share
              their experiences in presenting workshops and  classroom applications of the
              materials.  Concerns about  identifying topics suitable for different ages and
              presenting  workshops to teachers of various grade levels will be addressed.  
              Thematic instructional materials that relate concepts from  several science
              fields (integrated science) to astronomy provide  the core of the su mmer
              institute.    An advisory board consists of the nine members of the AAS 
              Education Advisory Board and two elementary/secondary teachers.   Publicity
              about the program, selection of candidates, general  program organization, and
              evaluation will be coordinated at the  national level through the AAS Education
              Office.  The PI will be  involved not only in program organization, but also in
              the  instruction phase at each site, especially in the methodology of 
              workshops.    Following their participation, the teachers will become associate
               members of the AAS and attend an AAS meeting in the following  summer.  At the
              meeting, they will report on their own  experiences, both in the classroom and
              in the peer-led workshops  they presented.  They will attend sessions
              especially designed       for them to learn about the latest research in
              astronomy and will  have the opportunity to exchange ideas with many
              astronomers at  the meeting.    An outside evaluation team will assess the
              program through  examination of instructional materials, interviews with  
              participants, sampling of those attending peer-led workshops, and  written
              evaluation instruments.  Members of the instructional  team will attend a
              sample of the peer-led workshops in order to  access their content and
              pedagogical integrity.    The participating teachers will each present at least
              four  workshops which are expected to attract 6,000 teachers of 180,000 
              children per year.  ***
