Title       : The Connecticut Museum Collaborative for Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1996 
File        : a9353561

Award Number: 9353561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lowell J. Bethel                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1963176            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Malkin malkin@discoverymuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Snow  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Discovery Museum
	      4450 Park Avenue
	      Bridgeport, CT  066041015    914/253-3077

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9353561  Snow    "The Connecticut Museum Collaborative for Science
              Education" is teacher enhancement program that will serve approximately 5,000
              middle school teachers (and their students) from throughout Connecticut over a
              three-year program period.  The proposed program has been developed
              cooperatively by four of Connecticut's Science Museums and Centers (The
              Discovery Museum, The Maritime Center at Norwalk, Mystic Marinelife Aquarium,
              and Talcott Mountain Science Center), in consultation with the school districts
              they serve and the Connecticut Academy for Education in Mathematics, Science,
              and Technology, the State's leadership organization solely devoted to enhancing
              education in mathematics, science, and technology.    The Collaborative seeks
              to enliven and enhance the teaching of science, mathematics, and technology by
              drawing upon the resources of Connecticut's science-rich institutions and
              related businesses and industry.    The proposed project will provide direct
              services to a core group of 72 middle school teachers and their students in
              eight urban and suburban school districts at the four participating museums and
              in their classrooms, as well as teacher training, curriculum development, and
              networking activities.  Larger numbers of teachers and their students will be
              served through a planned series of interactive video teleconferences.    A
              theme-based approach will be followed in which the unifying theme of "Earth
              Resource Monitoring" will serve to connect the activities at the four
              cooperating museums.  The central concept of the project is collaboration among
              museums throughout the state to provide a bridge between science-rich
              institutions and the schools for teacher enhancement, curriculum improvement,
              and student enrichment.  Special program components involve the participation
              of business and industry through "Video Field Trips", and parents through a
              "Family Science" activity.    The involvement of the Connecticut Academy for
              Education in Mathematics, Science and Technolo gy as a member of the
              "Connecticut Collaborative" provides a direct link for integration of project
              activities into Connecticut's NSF-funded Statewide Systemic Initiative.
