Title       : PMSA: Environments for Excellence: A Model for Increasing Science & Mathematics
               Enrollment in an Inner-Suburban Minority District
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9353597

Award Number: 9353597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2195884            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dave Hoefakker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Normandy School District
	      7837 Natural Bridge Road
	      St. Louis, MO  631214625    314/389-8005

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9248,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9353597  Coleman, Rose and Hoefakker, Dave  Normandy School District  St.
              Louis, MO    "Environments for Excellence: A Model for Increasing Science &
              Mathematics Enrollment  in an Inner-Suburban Minority District."     Normandy
              School District in suburban St. Louis County Missouri has experienced dramatic 
              change.  Today, enrollment is 95% black.  A generation ago it was 80% white.
              student  performance by most measures is fair to poor, with most nationally
              normed test revealing most  Normandy students as "below average."  Recently,
              however, the district has made important  strides toward improvement.  A
              strategic planning process helped residents and staff focus on  critical areas.
               Partnerships with local businesses and the University of Missouri-St. Louis
              have  resulted in significant improvements and nationally recognized programs. 
              The percent of  graduating students going on to further education has
              increased.  Today, as the district prepares  to mark its centennial, it is
              proposing the Environments for Excellence program as the platform  for
              fundamental science and mathematics curriculum change that will result in
              substantially more  minority students completing a four year
              science/mathematics high school curriculum to prepare  for higher education and
              careers in science, engineering and mathematics.    The goals of Environments
              for Excellence are: 1) to have more than half of all students enter  9th grade
              having successfully completed algebra at the end of the fourth and fifth years
              of the  project; 2) to double the number of high school students enrolling in a
              four-year science and/or  mathematics sequence by the end of the third program
              year and to achieve a further fifty percent  increase by the end of the fifth
              year; 3) to develop, implement and assess a "major investigation"  exit
              competency for students.  Specific intervention strategies include curriculum
              reform, teacher  enhancement and student enrichment programs.  Objectives
              include: 1) extensive staff  development for hands -on lessons and action
              research teams, 2) expanded enrichment activities,  3) a new middle school
              experiential transition unit, 4) a new K-12 science/math Buddy System  which
              links students at all levels including the university, 5) new Independent Study
              curriculum  modules for high school students leading to an exit competency
              based on Project 2061 concepts,  and 6) and Essential Friends volunteer corps
              of community and university guest teachers who  can demonstrate practical
              applications of schooling.    The project is a teacher-driven, staff
              development oriented model.  In partnership with the  Network for Educational
              Development and the university, summer workshops and collaborative  action
              research teams will provide on-going development opportunities to Normandy
              teachers  with a focus on improved teaching strategies and methodologies.  The
              staff will implement a  thematic, "beyond the classroom" 2-week transition
              experience at the start of each school year  for all middle school students to
              improve science and mathematics learning readiness.  This will  be accomplished
              in partnership with Camp Wyman, a respected local outdoor education  program,
              and University.  The present award-winning science/math enhancement programs 
              (University partnership) will be expanded to all schools in the district.  A
              new link between the  middle and high school enhancement components will be
              implemented.     The five year program is designed to reach directly over 800
              minority middle and high school  students each year - and through teaching
              strategies and methods for hands-on science, over  3000 minority elementary
              students.  Evaluation will be designed and guided by the University  of
              Missouri - St. Louis.
