Title       : SSC: Science Summer Camp - (Camp Promise)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1993 
File        : a9353251

Award Number: 9353251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Iozzi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daulat Husain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9353251  Rutgers University Busch Campus  New Brunswick, NJ  Iozzi, Louis,
              Husain, Daulat and Johnson, Patricia    "Science Summer Camp - (CAMP PROMISE)  
               This camp will act as a feeder to the college bound programs as  well as
              initiate a consolidated and coordinated effort to effect  minority
              participation in science and science education.    The goals set by this
              project are to significantly increase the  participation and commitment of
              minority students in the sciences,  and to heighten the level of awareness of
              students with potential  careers in science and mathematics, including school
              teaching.    Forty eight minority students from underrepresented and 
              disadvantages groups, who have completed their 7th and 8th grades,  will be
              eligible to attend the camp.  Recruitment will be from the  state of New
              Jersey, based on "need" and interest in the field of  science, mathematics and
              engineering.    The summer session of Camp PROMISE will be the key component,
              and  consist of three inter-related components: a) an enrichment 
              apprenticeship component, where students will be assigned as  apprentices to
              faculty/scientists for a week at a time; b) a  remedial academic component
              which will offer classes in mathematics  and English) a cultural resident
              component where participants will  room and board on campus during the week. 
              The program will  operation weekdays only.  The academic year component will
              have two  follow-up meeting, one in Fall 1993 and the other in Spring 1994.   
              Portfolio assessment of students' progress using lab books, and  other daily
              lesson plan data will be primarily anecdotal and  qualitative.  However,
              student attitude test will be analyzed and  the progress of the student
              monitored by selected teachers.    A broad range of participatory activities,
              not experienced in  school classrooms, will help bring the "wonder" of science
              and  encourage students to select science courses at high school.  The 
              ultimate aim is to influence minority students to make academic  preparat ions
              in middle and high school so as to be able to make  career choices in the are
              of science, engineering and mathematics.   Funding for this program is
              therefore solicited.
