Title       : PMSA: Accessing Accelerated Achievement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9353645

Award Number: 9353645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2902765            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse B. Register register_j@hcde.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula B. Potter  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kenneth W. Shepard  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sandra Black  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward E. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Harry J. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Hamilton County Department
	      1161 West 40th Street
	      Chattanooga, TN  374091317    615/825-7341

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9248,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9353645  Potter, Paula/Reynolds, Harry and Greene, Edward   Chattanooga
              Public Schools  Chattanooga, TN    "Accessing Accelerated Achievement"   
              Accessing Accelerated Achievement in Science and Mathematics for Minority
              Students (AAA)  is a five-year teacher development and student support program
              designed to increase the number  of minority students who pursue upper-level
              secondary and college level studies in the areas of  science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology.,  The project is a joint venture between the 
              chattanooga Public Schools, Ventures in Education, the National Paideia Center,
              the Southeast  Consortium for Minorities in Engineering (SECME), the University
              of Tennessee at  Chattanooga, the Lawrence hall of Science's Project Equals,
              and others.  AAA aims to increase  student participation in the math and
              sciences by increasing the level of expectation for all  students, while
              simultaneously redefining the teaching and learning equation in elementary, 
              middle, and high school classrooms.  Included in the redefinition of math and
              science are:  interdisciplinary planning teams, the Socratic seminar,
              cooperative learning, Hawaii Algebra and  hawaii Geometry, science/technology
              exhibitions, and the implementation of authentic student  assessment processes.
               Strong emphasis has been placed on incorporating reading and writing  to learn
              strategies in mathematics and science classrooms at all grade levels. 
              Implementation  of the many classroom innovations will be facilitated by the
              project's three full-time lead  teachers.    Beyond the reform of teaching and
              learning at the classroom level, a number of intervention  programs have been
              selected to enhance minority student performance and attitudes as well as 
              parental participation.  These include student visits to regional university
              campuses, Family Math  and Family Science, SAT/PSAT preparation courses, SECME
              programs, and science camps.   Project monitoring and evaluation will be
              facilitated through the implementation of Hall  and  Hord's Concerns-Based
              Adoption Model and the use of numerous traditional and alternative  modes of
              student and teacher assessment.
