Title       : CRCM: Northeastern University Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9353129

Award Number: 9353129
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1641580            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Blackman blackman@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1548      COMP REGIONAL CENTERS FOR MINO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9249,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9353129  Blackman, David and Gilmore, Maurice  Northeastern University 
              Boston, MA      "Northeastern University Comprehensive Regional Center For 
              Minorities"    This proposal describes a plan to establish the Northeastern 
              University Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities in science, 
              engineering, and mathematics, bringing together academic,  community, and
              industry resources in a coalition committed to  increasing the number of
              minorities in technical and scientific  professions, by providing students with
              the continuity and support  they need as they progress through the pipeline
              from grades K-12.   The Center will serve both as a sponsor of its own
              activities and  as a coordinating body for external projects, providing
              funding,  resources, and access to expertise.  The initial consortium will 
              consist of Northeastern University, the Boston Public School System  then
              adding Cambridge schools and other area institutions, and  business and
              community groups; the initial target population will  be elementary school
              children participating in after-school and  summer math and science enrichment
              programs, and middle and high  schools students and teachers from selected
              Boston schools.  The  number of schools, students, parents, and teachers will
              be  increased each year.  The NUCRCM's goal is to at least triple the  number
              of minority students taking and successfully completing SEM  courses in the
              first 5 years.  Long-term objectives are to  establish working coalitions among
              existing programs, develop and  implement new programs and curriculum,
              coordinate efforts to ensure  that students successfully complete algebra by
              the end of 8th grade  and pre-calculus by the end of high school, provided
              teachers with  extensive in-service training, and get parents involved in the 
              education of their children.  Our strategy is to funnel more and  more students
              into already-existing programs such as the Explorers  Club and MassPEP, new
              programs such as SteppingStones and COSMOS  II, and programs to b e developed. 
              Over time the evaluation process  will identify those programs which are
              successful and should be  expanded and those that need to be modified or even
              dropped from  Center sponsorship.  The Center Staff will consist of a full-time
               Director, a full-time Program Coordinator; a Senior Co-Investigator  and Math
              Coordinator; Co-Investigators in chemistry, physics, and  biology; a Senior
              Evaluator; Advisory Board; and Industry Pane.
