Title       : MPWG: An Intervention Model Program for Girls Using Laboratory Activities in
               Science, Math and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9353746

Award Number: 9353746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Holland nholland@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lola Boyce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen Oujesky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353746  Holland    The purpose of this project is to develop an Intervention
              Model Program that will enhance the  probability that girls will eventually
              choose careers in science, engineering, and math (SEM).   The program is to be
              developed jointly between Texas A&M University (TAMU) and the  University of
              Texas at San Antonio (UTSA).  UTSA is a subcontractor to TAMU.  The  developed
              program will be replicated at junior colleges across the state.    This project
              is designed to place 120 girls entering the seventh grade in a university
              residence  setting (TAMU) and allow them the opportunity to have a successful
              "hands-on" laboratory  experience with complex (to them) scientific equipment. 
              The program is designed to enhance  their self confidence at a crucial
              transition period between elementary and middle school.  The  laboratory
              activities include introductions to microscopy, electronics, strain, material
              testing,  computer-aided design, chromatography, and chemical reactions.  A
              field trip to the TAMU  School of Veterinary Medicine is planned since many of
              the girls at this age express a desire to  be a veterinarian.  This experience
              has proven to be a motivator in the past.    The participants will be selected
              from the Expanding Your Horizons (EYH) Conferences held  at TAMU and UTSA. 
              Participation in the EYH Conference demonstrates an initial interest in  SEM. 
              The UTSA participants are for the most part Hispanic with several physically
              disabled.   The TAMU participants are well distributed.    The participants
              will be evaluated before and after the summer session to determine if their 
              interests and perceptions of themselves having careers in SEM have changed or
              increased.  The  girls will be followed through high school by the TAMU Center
              for Academic Enhancement to  evaluate the long term effectiveness of the
              program.    In addition to publications and presentations, a workshop will be
              held for primary and secondary  teachers and junior college professors to
              introduce the model and enc ourage them to spread the  program across the state
              using the materials provided at the workshop.
