Title       : Aspects of Tertiary Volcanism in the Basin & Range: Thermal Modeling of
               Magmetism in Eastern Nevada and IsotopicAnalysis of Rhyolites in Southeastern
               Oregon (Earth Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1993       
File        : a9353106

Award Number: 9353106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anita L. Grunder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1573,
Abstract    :
              9353106  Grunder  Dr. Anita Grunder will spend six months at the University of 
              Washington in the Department of Geological Sciences.  She will use  the
              radiogenic isotope facilities to obtain reconnaissance Nd, Sr,  and Pb isotope
              date for rhyolites from the northern margin of the  Basin and Range Province in
              southeastern Oregon.  In conjunction  with ongoing work, these data will
              provide insight into the nature  of the continental crust and the relationship
              between rhyolites and  contemporaneous basalts.  Geochemical and
              thermal/physical aspects  of magmatism will be integrated.  In particular,
              well-studied and  voluminous middle Tertiary volcanic rocks of eastern Nevada
              will be  used as a case study.  Chemical models will be refined and tested 
              using Ghiorso's MELTS computer program and the temporal, volume,  and
              compositional constraints will be used as input for a thermal  and physical
              model (with Bergantz) of basalt injection and  progressive melting of the
              middle crust.    Interactive activities at the host institution include:  
              teaching  a volcanology course, and organizing a workshop on graduate 
              education and geoscience careers for undergraduate women (with the  assistance
              of the Northwest Center for Research in Women).  Dr.  Grunder will also give a
              lecture on her research, and participate  in faculty meetings.    This project
              furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to  provide opportunities for
              women to advance their careers in  engineering and in the disciplines of
              science supported by NSF and  (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in
              science and engineering  by providing greater visibility for women scientists
              and engineers  employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By
               encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable 
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.  ***
