Title       : Rural Minority Teacher Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9353657

Award Number: 9353657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Huray  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Durig  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome D. Odom odom@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              93-53657    Durig  Rural Minority Teacher Research Program  The South Carolina
              EPSCoR Program proposes to implement a Minority Teacher Research  Program
              through the NSF/EPSCoR Experimental Systematic Initiative Program.  Sixteen
              high  school teachers selected from rural, minority schools will be selected to
              participate in  EPSCoR-related research projects for six weeks during the
              summer at the University of South  Carolina and Clemson University.  Activities
              include team or individual research projects,  weekly seminars, development of
              instructional materials and experiments to take back to the  classroom, and
              oral presentation of their research results at a mini-symposium.    The
              research projects offered through the Rural Minority Teacher Research Program
              will be  directly related to the research projects of the ninety-seven
              NSF/EPSCoR Research Cluster  faculty.  Systemic and potential long term impacts
              include the transfer of new knowledge to the  classroom; the potential for
              recertification or graduate degree credit; access to curriculum   materials and
              other resources and information provided by the universities; and the interface
              to  the funded South Carolina AMP Program and the (pending) South Carolina
              Statewide Systemic   Initiative.    A plan for monitoring and assessing the
              Program is described.  Dissemination will occur via a  mini-symposium, AP press
              releases, and the South Carolina EPSCoR Newsletter distributed to  South
              Carolina's twelve public colleges and universities, twenty-one private and
              professional  colleges, sixteen technical colleges, school district offices,
              selected elementary and secondary  schools, and the South Carolina Department
              of Education.
