Title       : Nevada's Systemic Improvement Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9353227

Award Number: 9353227
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7540000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Farley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jeffrey R. Seemann  (Principal Investigator former)
              Dale W. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ&Comm Col Sys Las Vega
	      Box 451046
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541046    702/784-4022

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              93-53227   Bishop  Nevada's Systemic Improvement Plan  The University and
              Community College System of Nevada (UCCSN) proposes systemic  improvement (SI)
              activities that will allow the university research institutions to be
              successful  in nationally competitive research grant programs.  These
              activities and plans focus around  several themes that are remaining barriers
              to research: space and facilities; equipment;  organizational structure;
              personnel (faculty, students, staff); and visibility.  Nevada's SI plan is 
              multi-level in terms of its organization.  SI activities will be and are taking
              place at the state  level, at the cluster level, and at the level of individual
              faculty.    At the statewide level, activities have been designed to provide
              permanent improvements in the  research structure and organization of the
              UCCSN.  The three research institutions, DRI, UNLV  and UNR, have created and
              filled positions for Vice President for Research (VPR).  The VPRs  are working
              together to reorganize the university system infrastructure in ways that foster
              and  encourage research activities.  The State EPSCoR Committee is being
              reorganized, moving from  governance to outreach.  Communication between state
              government, business and the university  is being facilitated and enhanced by
              the formation of a not-for-profit public-private partnership  called Nevada
              Industry, Science, Engineering and Technology, Inc.    At the research cluster
              level, SI activities will fund equipment for important research facilities, 
              and allow the hiring of new faculty, postdocs and graduate students for the
              cluster programs.   Three research clusters have been armed around several
              research themes: bridge engineering,  chemical physics and plant responses to
              rising CO2 and temperature (plant biology).  These  clusters have been chosen
              because they represent the three groups for which a relatively small  amount of
              SI will provide a very large benefit.  Two important research facilities are
              currently  near completion: the Brid ge Engineering Laboratory and the Great
              Basin Environmental  Research Laboratory (GBERL).  In both cases, equipment
              requested in this proposal will  essentially complete the laboratories.  When
              the GBERL is complete, it will be one of the best  plant growth facilities in
              the world, capable of doing, for the first time, full plant-canopy gas 
              exchange experiments under precisely controlled conditions.  The bridge
              engineering laboratory  will be one of the ten or twenty best large scale
              structure labs in the country.    At the level of individual faculty, SI
              activities will be aimed at three areas: departmental/  programmatic review,
              proposal development enhancement and individual research enhancement.   These
              activities will be coordinated and/or conducted by the new Director of the
              Nevada  EPSCoR program.  The review process will be directed towards the
              identification and  preparation of new research groups that are nearly ready
              for participation in EPSCoR.  Proposal  development enhancement activities will
              improve the ability of all faculty to write a successful  research proposal. 
              Because of isolation and a lack of mentoring by senior faculty, many faculty 
              who are creative and have good research ideas have not learned the skills that
              are necessary to  write a successful research proposal.  An expected benefit of
              this activity is that some faculty  should be able to leapfrog past the EPSCoR
              process, directly to being nationally competitive.  The third activity at the
              individual level will be to develop a systemwide individual research 
              enhancement program.  This program will be a competitive small grant program
              operated by the  new EPSCoR Director, aimed at providing funding for creative,
              new ideas that need maturing  before being ready for nationally competitive
              grant programs.    Human resource development is an important component to
              Nevada's SI plan.  We have  included a human resource development cluster:
              "Women in Science and Engineering: Greater  Participation and Higher
              Productivity."  The purpose of this cluster is to improve the ability of  women
              scientists and engineers to acquire nationally competitive grants, and to
              encourage high  school and undergraduate women to choose careers in science and
              engineering.    By developing a systemic improvement plan that has activities
              at all levels, maximum  participation and benefit for all research-oriented
              faculty is assured.  Focused plans to enhance  certain research activities have
              been chosen to maximize EPSCoR resources and to assure  graduation of the three
              research clusters to national prominence.
