Title       : PPD: Model Program for Hearing Impaired and Deaf Students in Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9353824

Award Number: 9353824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip C. Wankat wankat@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9253,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353824  Wankat  This project will develop and institutionalize a model program
              for  deaf and hard of hearing students in engineering at Purdue  University. 
              The program will focus on providing academic support  and social integration
              for deaf and hard of hearing students who  want to study engineering in a
              mainstreamed environment.  Emphasis  will be placed on promoting retention of
              these students because  data indicate that attrition rates for deaf and hard of
              hearing  students are one-third higher than for hearing students.  Program 
              staff will also work with the University's Engineering Co-op Office  and with
              companies to make jobs available to the students who are  hard of hearing or
              deaf.    The program will also contain a recruitment component aimed at pre- 
              college students who are deaf or hard of hearing.  The recruitment  activities
              will concentrate on both encouraging qualified high  school seniors to attend
              Purdue and on encouraging students in  grade school through high school to stay
              in mathematics and science  courses so that they will be eligible for
              engineering, mathematics,  and science in college.  Efforts will be made to
              convince  counselors, parents and teachers that engineering is an excellent 
              career opportunity for hard of hearing and deaf students.    In addition, a
              national computer electronic network for deaf and  hard of hearing students
              interested in studying engineering will be  designed and developed.  This
              network will serve as a linkage  between high school students, their parents
              and teachers; current  college students in engineering or interested in
              transferring into  engineering; engineering professors; and practicing
              engineers.  The  network should help in the retention efforts and should
              provide a  basis for recruiting more deaf and hard of hearing students into 
              engineering.     Information on the program's methodology and results and the 
              electronic network will be disseminated throughout the United  States to
              engineering colleges and to organizations inte rested in  the education of deaf
              and hard of hearing students to promote  development of similar programs.
