Title       : Science, Parents and Literature: The Science Pals Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1997   
File        : a9353690

Award Number: 9353690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1011875            (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Shymansky   (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Dunkhase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353690  Shymansky    This Project is the result of a partnership between the 
              University of Iowa and the Iowa City Community School District,  whose teachers
              and administrators recently completed a science  self study and made a
              commitment to restructure their science  program.  The plan is to enhance all
              K-6 teachers in the district  by immersing them in inservice activities which:
              require them to  analyze the scientific basis of activities in the district's 
              current science program; allow them to examine potential  supplemental and/or
              replacement materials; and challenge them to  refine and revise their science
              program to make science more  meaningful to students.  Through the summer
              component of the  project three lead science teachers for each of the city's 
              elementary schools will be identified and prepared to provide  support and
              inservice opportunities for their colleagues.  During  the summer the lead
              teachers will have opportunities to expand  their own science knowledge,
              develop insights into children's  science reasoning, and improve their ability
              to use inquiry based  instructional strategies.  During the school year these
              lead  teachers will be given opportunities to mentor their colleagues  as they
              implement the school system's inquiry based science  units.  The Iowa City
              School District's stature as a leader in  the Midwest will enable this project
              to serve as a model for  other sites in the Midwest, to serve as an exemplary
              placement  for preservice elementary teacher education and to provide 
              leadership teams for future dissemination efforts.      The cost sharing for
              the project will be 50% of the National  Science Foundation support.  ***
