Title       : MPWG: Implementation of Sonya Kovalevsky Day Workshop for Female High School
               Students & Their Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1995 
File        : a9353747

Award Number: 9353747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary W. Gray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn For Women in Math
	      4114 Computer & Space Sci. Bldg.
	      College Park, MD  20742    301/405-7892

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353747  Gray    The project is designed to facilitate conducting mathematics
              workshops, talks, and problem-  solving competitions for female high school
              students and their teachers on various college and  university campuses.  The
              Association for Women in Mathematics would administer a program  of mini-grants
              for these activities which would be known as Sonya Kovalevsky Days.  Each 
              Sonya Kovalevsky day will have 100-500 female high school students and 10 to
              100 high school  teachers as participants.  They are designed to encourage
              young women to continue their study  of mathematics, to assist them with the
              sometimes awkward transition between high school and  college mathematics, to
              assist the teachers of these students, and to encourage colleges and 
              universities to develop more extensive cooperation with high schools in their
              respective areas.   Follow-up studies will be done to discover whether the
              participants go to college, what they  major in, and what they do upon
              graduation.  Also, an evaluation will be done of the host  institutions'
              subsequent activities, including more Sonya Kovalevsky Days and/or other
              activities  designed to enhance the participation and success of women and
              girls in mathematics.    It is to bridge the difficult transition between high
              school and college mathematics that this  project is designed.  By letting
              capable young women get together with their peers, by  introducing them to
              interesting substantive mathematics, by showing them what mathematicians  do
              and how others use mathematics in their jobs, it is expected that more will go
              on to major  in mathematics in college, and eventually some of those young
              women will become  mathematicians or scientists.  Efforts to give them a sense
              of participation, but also a feel for  problems solving and a love, not a
              loathing, for competition are imbedded in the project design.   Although not a
              specific goal of this project, opportunities for talented and interested
              students--  and sometimes for their teachers--to secure  scholarships at the
              host or other institutions, and to  obtain internships and part-time employment
              at government agencies, and at businesses, have  grown out of similar
              experiences.  The project is also designed to assist teachers by affording 
              them the opportunity to see what sorts of activities and support for their
              female students can  prove useful, especially through ideas garnered from
              workshop speakers and their peer  participants.  It will also provide them with
              a liaison with a college or university and the ability  to call on its
              resources, as well as those of women mathematicians in the community, for
              advice  and for future college and employment placements for their women
              students.  ***
