Title       : Chemical Ecology of Southeast Asian Dart Poisons: New Analytical Approaches to
               Old Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9208927

Award Number: 9208927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Richardson david.p.richardson@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam C. Messer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research, carried out in an undergraduate                    
              institution, is to study the cardiotonic glycosides alpha- and                 
              beta-antiarin, components of dart poisons isolated from the                    
              latex of Antiaris toxicaria.  The specific aims of the project                 
              are to test whether the antiarins and related secondary                        
              metabolites evolved as defense chemicals versus insect                         
              herbivores, to characterize any anti-insectan activity, to                     
              study the specific mode of action of the poisons as a guide to                 
              biorational pesticide development, to investigate the                          
              similarity of the antiarins to ouabain, a known inhibitor of                   
              membrane-bound NA+/K+ ATPase and to ascertain which structural                 
              units in ouabain and the antarins represent the sources of                     
              anti-insectan activity.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              With this Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award,                  
              the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr.                
              David P. Richardson of the Department of Chemistry at Williams                 
              College.  Professor Richardson will focus his work on carrying                 
              out rigorous chemical and biological studies on the dart                       
              poisons derived from the latex of Antiaris toxicaria, a tree                   
              indigenous to Borneo.  The project offers exceptional                          
              opportunities for student participation in the areas of                        
              chemical separation, structural analysis and synthetic                         
              chemistry.
