Title       : US-Poland Research on Elucidating Mechanisms of HeterogenousChemical Reactions
               of Environmental Importance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9208271

Award Number: 9208271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34490              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. W. Castleman awc@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5953      POLAND
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1524,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this US-Poland research project between                       
              Dr. A. W. Castleman of the Pennsylvania State University                       
              and Dr. H. Wincel of the Institute of Physical Chemistry,                      
              Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw is to investigate                           
              mechanisms of heterogenous chemical reactions of                               
              environmental importance and to underdtand the coupling                        
              between cycles involving both natural atmospheric                              
              constituents and pollutants introduced through various                         
              industrial processes.  The researchers will investigate:                       
              (1) cluster distributions, and studies to unravel the                          
              dynamics of formation and the growth of clusters; (2) the                      
              stability and reaction energetics of cluster ions through                      
              measurements of their thermochemical properties; (3) the                       
              reactivity of clusters of varying size to elucidate the                        
              reaction mechanisms as influenced by various chemical                          
              constituents and degrees of aggregation/solvation; and (4)                     
              photostability and photodissociation, which complement                         
              studies on the thermodynamic stability of ion clusters and                     
              elicit some spectroscopic information as well as                               
              information on the influence of light on pollutant                             
              conversion reactions.  During the course of the work, the                      
              researchers will intend to probe directly the spectroscopy                     
              of clusters via multiphoton ionization, so that the                            
              effects of clustering on electronic states can be                              
              determined.  The results will provide further insight into                     
              the nature and strength of cluster bonds, energy transfer                      
              following photoabsorption, and hence reactivity.                               
                                                                                             
              This project in atmospheric science fulfills the program                       
              obvjective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                       
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to                     
              combine complementary talents andn pool resources in areas                     
              of strong mutual interest and competence.
