Title       : Corticotropin-releasing Factor in Barrington's Nucleus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1994       
File        : a9208891

Award Number: 9208891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rita Valentino   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Aston-Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MCP Hahnemann University
	      Broad & Vine Streets
	      Philadelphia, PA  191021192    215/842-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Barrington's nucleus is a collection of cells in the brainstem that            
              projects to spinal cord neurons innervating the bladder.  Based on             
              lesion and stimulation studies, this nucleus has long been thought             
              to be involved in the micturition reflex.  Recently, Dr. Valentino             
              noted that this nucleus contains one of the most dense clusters of             
              corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF)-immunoreactive neurons in the             
              brain.  Since CRF is the primary brain hormone that initiates the              
              stress response and that stress increases the synthesis of CRF in              
              these neurons, she has proposed that Barrington's nucleus is                   
              involved in the regulation of autonomic function under stressful               
              conditions.  Dr. Valentino will systematically study this major                
              CRF-containing brain nucleus and its possible role in stress.  She             
              will employ state-of-the-art anatomical methods to map the afferent            
              and efferent connections of CRF-containing neurons of Barrington's             
              nucleus in the brain.  These studies will identify the neural                  
              circuitry by which stressors are able to communicate activity to               
              this nucleus.  In addition, Dr. Valentino along with her                       
              collaborator, Dr. Aston-Jones, will use electrophysiologic criteria            
              to determine how different kinds of stressors alter activity of                
              these CRF-containing neurons in this region.  The results will not             
              only provide new information about the function of Barrington's                
              nucleus but may lead to a better understanding about how the brain             
              integrates the multicomponent response to a stressor.
