Title       : Denitrification within the Macroalgal Canopy in a Eutrophic Embayment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1994      
File        : a9208935

Award Number: 9208935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59690              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlene D'Avanzo cdavanzo@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The loss of nitrogen from coastal ecosystems through                           
              denitrification is believed to be a major sink for nitrogen,                   
              particularly in eutrophic environments. The focus of this project              
              is a thick macroalgal canopy that carpets the bottom of Waquoit                
              Bay, a eutrophic embayment on Cape Cod, MA. The macroalgal canopy              
              frequently exceeds a thickness of 15 cm. Within the upper third of             
              the dense mat, O2 concentrations are high during the day due to                
              photosynthesis and NH4+ concentrations are low (several uM). In                
              contrast, the lower portion of the canopy is anaerobic even during             
              the day and NH4+ concentrations are very high (hundreds of uM).                
              Therefore, within a zone about 5 cm from the algal surface                     
              conditions are favorable for nitrification with sufficient O2 from             
              photosynthesis and diffusion from above and NH4+  diffusing from               
              below. It is hypothesized that high rates of denitrification may               
              occur at the high NH+4/low O2 interface within the algal canopy due            
              to the existence of denitrification-nitrification coupling in this             
              zone. The hypothesized interaction is in fact a triple coupling of             
              photosynthesis-nitrification-denitrification. This hypothesis will             
              be examined in a series of experiments to be conducted at the                  
              Marine Biological Lab in Woods Hole, MA, a facility close by to                
              Waquoit Bay. The project will evaluate nitrification and                       
              denitrification in specially constructed chambers containing                   
              sediment, algal canopy material, and overlying water. These                    
              questions relate directly to ongoing work at Waquoit Bay which is              
              one of the current sites under investigation through the Land                  
              Margin Ecosystem Research Program (LMER) and the measurements                  
              obtained will be an important input into the nitrogen budget of                
              this system.
