Title       : Discontinuous Synchrony in Visual Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9208709

Award Number: 9208709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Copeland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1160,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This field project will investigate an unusual type of                         
              synchronous flashing in Southeast Asian fireflies.  The Borneo                 
              "silent counter," a firefly that flashes continuously, pauses,                 
              and then flashes continuously again, will be studied using                     
              innovative modern technologies.  Dr. Copeland and his colleagues               
              will attempt to demonstrate unequivocally that this firefly is a               
              synchronizer and will focus on the activity of the pacemaker                   
              oscillator during the dark ("silent") period.  The oscillator-                 
              like flash behavior of three other closely related species will                
              also be studied, including two continuously synchronic (no pause)              
              fireflies and a non-synchronic firefly.  Since all four species                
              look alike and have been classified as Pteroptyx malaccae, some                
              of the fireflies whose flashes have been recorded will be                      
              preserved so that their DNA can later be subjected to                          
              restriction-enzyme analysis, to provide a biochemical taxonomic                
              identifier for the behavioral and morphological key to this                    
              complex of fireflies.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Synchronously flashing fireflies live in the fragile tropical                  
              environment of Southeast Asia.  Logging and industrial                         
              development are rapidly destroying the habitat of this unique                  
              type of animal.  This research, then, will document an unusual                 
              variety of synchronic behavior in fireflies before it becomes                  
              extinct.  Further, it is important to understand the mechanisms                
              underlying synchrony because synchrony occurs in so few                        
              organisms.  Other than fireflies, synchronous behavior has been                
              demonstrated only in crickets and humans.  Thus, this research                 
              could yield insights into the human ability to perform in                      
              rhythmic unison.  In addition, the modern technologies used in                 
              this study will provide, for the first time, quantitative data on              
              synchronous flashing on the same time scale as neurophysiological              
              data that will be obtained in future studies.  Thus, this project              
              is valuable as a guide for future neurophysiological studies with              
              implications for human biology.  Finally, combining this                       
              behavioral study with morphological and DNA studies will clarify               
              the taxonomy of these organisms and, thus, how to preserve them                
              better as their natural habitat shrinks.
