Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Modeling Biological Systems and Delay Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9208290

Award Number: 9208290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Mahaffy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator continues research on cellular                 
              control systems and delay differential equations, focussing on                 
              three main topics.  The first area is an interdisciplinary study               
              done in collaboration with Dr. J.  W. Zyskind on the modeling of               
              initiation of DNA replication in Escherichia coli.  Using                      
              mathematical models, they attempt to explain which are the most                
              important steps in the beginning of the DNA replication cycle.                 
              Several other regulatory processes for growing cells are                       
              examined, providing additional insight into cellular control                   
              systems and introducing new dynamical systems to study.  The                   
              second area of inquiry analyzes the stability region for a linear              
              differential equation with two delays.  Both analytical and                    
              numerical techniques are used to determine how the stability                   
              region varies with the parameters in this equation.  The                       
              stability region varies dramatically for even small changes in                 
              some parameters, so studying these anomalies is very important                 
              from a modeling point of view.  The final area of investigation                
              examines mathematical models for erythropoiesis and                            
              thrombopoiesis.  Previous models have included two delays linking              
              this study to the previous one.  More recently, models have been               
              developed using either state-dependent delays or age-structured                
              modeling.  The principal investigator has developed a new                      
              age-structured model that more accurately reflects the biology in              
              hematopoietic systems.  He will undertake mathematical studies to              
              determine the qualitative behavior of this model and to examine                
              how it compares to models with either multiple delays or                       
              state-dependent delays.  Parameter identification methods may                  
              provide quantitative information for how these systems can become              
              unstable in certain disease states.                                            
                   The principal objective of this project is to develop                     
              mathematical models that correspond to known biological behavior.              
              The models will provide insight into the mechanisms that govern                
              the specific biological problem.  DNA replication marks the                    
              beginning of the cell cycle in bacteria.  An understanding of the              
              controls underlying the cell cycle is important for other areas                
              of research, including genetic engineering and cancer research.                
              The mathematical studies provide support for certain biological                
              experiments, suggest further avenues of experimentation, and show              
              how some biological theories are impossible.  The computer                     
              simulations of cellular processes require less time to perform                 
              than experiments and are significantly less costly.  However, it               
              is the interaction between the experimenter and the mathematical               
              modeler in this study that will be most important to the                       
              advancement in understanding the cell cycle.  Mathematical models              
              for erythropoiesis or red blood cell production can elucidate the              
              effects of certain changes in this complicated process that                    
              begins with simple undifferentiated cells in the bone marrow and               
              proceeds to mature red blood cells, which carry oxygen throughout              
              the body.  The models may explain the mechanisms underlying                    
              certain blood diseases and suggest possible therapeutic                        
              procedures.  The models could aid in developing new procedures to              
              efficiently collect blood, which is significant for patients who               
              choose to provide their own blood supply for elective surgery and              
              avoid risks of HIV infection.  The work includes several novel                 
              mathematical techniques that will advance fundamental research                 
              tools available for future mathematical studies.  These tools                  
              will be applicable to a wide range of problems in applied                      
              mathematics.
