Title       : Transmission of Spike Train Codes Across Spinal Synapses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9208649

Award Number: 9208649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Comer                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242341             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian D. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy C. Cope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MCP Hahnemann University
	      Broad & Vine Streets
	      Philadelphia, PA  191021192    215/842-6000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Identifying the way in which information is transferred from one               
              nerve cell to another in the spinal cord is important to                       
              understanding how the spinal cord functions to produce normal motor            
              behavior. Information conveyed by a neuron is encoded in the rate              
              and pattern of action potentials, or "spikes" transmitted along its            
              axon. While one neuron's average rate of firing has clear effects              
              on the firing of other neurons that it contacts through chemical               
              connections called synapses, there is little experimental evidence             
              as to what details of firing pattern may be transmitted from one               
              neuron to another, especially for synapses that have small                     
              individual effects. That evidence will be provided by the research             
              to be done under this award to Drs. Timothy Cope and Brian Clark.              
              The work will use the synapse of type Ia muscle spindle sensory                
              neurons onto spinal motoneurons, which is part of the familiar                 
              stretch reflex circuitry. In addition, this work will yield                    
              important new information on how multiple sensory neurons interact             
              when their firing becomes partially synchronized, a situation that             
              appears to typify the action of stretch-sensitive sensory neurons              
              during dynamic changes of muscular length. The results of this                 
              research will be significant in two ways: first, it will reveal                
              what features of the spike trains of sensory neurons are actually              
              important for the control of muscles and movements; and second, it             
              will detail the influence between neurons that have a relatively               
              weak synaptic connection, thus shedding light on the mode of                   
              information transfer across synapses. This basic research will                 
              contribute to understanding the way in which the central nervous               
              controls movement.
