Title       : Survey and Morphology of Selected Groups of Early Land Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9208362

Award Number: 9208362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33256              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia G. Gensel pgensel@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Detailed investigation of morphologically and anatomically                
              preserved Early Devonian plant taxa referable to trimerophytes or              
              of problematical affinities is proposed.  Characters useful in                 
              determining their possible relationships to major pteridophyte                 
              groups, refining taxonomic circumscriptions, and postulation                   
              patterns of divergence of structures or lineages should result.                
              Specific projects include study of Psilophyton and Pertica-                    
              related plants from Canada and Germany in order to better                      
              characterize the trimerophytes and to develop hypotheses of                    
              phylogenetic relationships with other plant groups.  Taeniocrad-               
              type axes will be examined to determine number of taxa                         
              represented and to evaluate their relationships.  Additional                   
              information about morphology and affinities of remains similar to              
              the putative gameotophyte Caliculiphyton will be obtained.                     
              Several zosterophyll types continue to be studied for the purpose              
              of better evaluating generic and species relationships.  A                     
              variety of techniques, including degagement, maceration in acids,              
              thin-sectioning, SEM observation, whole plant reconstruction,                  
              hypotheses of homology of structures, and phylogenetic analytical              
              methods will be employed as appropriate.  This research will                   
              expand and improve the array of characters useful in phylogenetic              
              and evolutionary analyses, generate new hypotheses of                          
              relationships of some lineages, and contribute new information                 
              about the composition and diversity of early Devonian floras of                
              southeastern Canada.
