Title       : A Colloquium on Compatible Solutes and Macromolecular Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9208377

Award Number: 9208377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Crowe jhcrowe@ucdavis  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Five years ago the University of California's Bodega Marine                    
              Laboratory instituted a series of colloquia, during which experts              
              in timely fields were assembled for an exchange of ideas on current            
              research and to participate in extensive public discussions on the             
              topic of the colloquium. The colloquia are widely advertised and               
              have been well attended by participants from all over the world.               
              This proposal is for partial support for the fifth colloquium in               
              this series. Previous colloquia have been published, a practice                
              which the organizers of the proposed one intend to continue.                   
                                                                                             
              We will assemble many of the world leaders whose research focuses              
              on the stabilization of macromolecules under a variety of                      
              conditions. The focus of the meeting is specifically on "compatible            
              solutes" and their roles in stabilization. The speakers are chosen             
              from far-flung fields, including food science, biochemistry,                   
              biophysics, animal and plant physiology, physics and chemistry.                
              Because this subject has clear applications in "the real world",               
              participants from industry and Federal government are included in              
              the program. Being an interdisciplinary meeting, many of the                   
              participants have never met and may not even be aware of each                  
              other's work. It is unlikely that the scientists chosen to                     
              participate in this colloquium would be assembled at a regular                 
              scientific meeting. Thus, a major aim is to generate discussion and            
              interaction that would not likely otherwise occur, on a topic of               
              basic and applied importance.
