Title       : The Molecular Regulation of Male Gametophyte Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9208337

Award Number: 9208337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Mascarenhas jm558@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1131,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The male gametophyte, the haploid male plant in the life cycle of              
              flowering plants, plays an essential role by producing two sperm               
              cells and transporting them through the female tissues of the                  
              flower into the embryo sac where double fertilization occurs.  The             
              results from the previous NSF funded research have raised several              
              new and important questions with respect to the regulation of male             
              gametophyte development that form the basis of the present                     
              proposal.  Promoters of pollen-specific genes will be used to                  
              target in transgenic Arabidopsis plants the expression of several              
              specific genes to specific periods in pollen development.  The aim             
              is to over- and/or under-express the gene products in order to                 
              perturb development thus providing clues to their function.  The               
              genes selected are considered to have important roles in pollen                
              development although the details of the processes controlled by                
              them are not known.  Both repression of mRNA translation and mRNA              
              stability appear to be part of the spectrum of regulatory                      
              mechanisms operating in pollen development.  The cis-sequences in              
              pollen mRNAs required for these properties will be identified.  An             
              unusual repetitive sequence that is found in the 3' non-translated             
              end of several mRNAs present primarily in young microspores will               
              be investigated further.  In order to identify genes that play                 
              crucial regulatory roles in pollen development a search for T-DNA              
              tagged pollen defective mutants is being started.  This work will              
              significantly expand our knowledge about the mechanisms regulating             
              development of the male gametophyte.
