Title       : Neuroendocrine Integration of Environmental Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1992      
File        : a9208893

Award Number: 9208893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory F. Ball gball@jhuvms.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Information about diverse environmental factors, such as day length            
              (i.e., season), time of day, temperature, availability of food                 
              and/or water, presence of conspecifics that may be either                      
              competitors for limited resources (e.g. food) or potential mates,              
              is processed and integrated by the central nervous system.                     
              Utilizing both this environmental input and information about the              
              individual's internal status (e.g. nutritional, sexual maturity),              
              the brain sets in motion a variety of coordinated adaptive                     
              responses that involve the neuroendocrine system.  The goal of Dr.             
              Ball's research is to examine the neuroendocrine integration of                
              environmental information regulating reproduction.  He has selected            
              a species that show dramatic changes over the course of a year in              
              their propensity to exhibit an endocrine response to photoperiodic             
              stimuli that regulate the timing of reproduction.  Dr. Ball                    
              proposes that the neuropeptide gonadotrophin-releasing hormone                 
              (GnRH) is involved in the integration of signals.  He will                     
              determine whether GnRH changes in specific brain structures in                 
              response to seasonal variation.  Moreover, he will examine how                 
              extra-photoperiodic stimuli and physiological conditions affect                
              reproductive activity as measured by plasma hormone levels, gonadal            
              growth as well as GnRH neurochemistry.  These studies should                   
              provide new insight into both how the central nervous system                   
              assimilates the varied stimuli that regulate reproduction and the              
              nature of seasonal plasticity in the neurochemical systems involved            
              in mediating variation in responses to stimuli.  Understanding the             
              brain's integration with physiological and behavioral systems can              
              lead to the elucidation of basic principles that underlie the                  
              conservation and restoration of biological diversity.  Moreover,               
              it could provide a more thorough understanding of how species adapt            
              to adverse environmental changes that may prove important to human             
              adaptation in this changing world.
