Title       : Heterogeneity and Aggregate Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9208896

Award Number: 9208896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo J. Caballero caball@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project starts from the premise that microeconomic units do               
              not adjust continuously to the information and shocks they                     
              perceive, and that when they do adjust their actions typically                 
              involve relatively large changes.  Recent literature has developed             
              both the microeconomic justification for such behavior and the                 
              implications of such an environment for aggregate dynamics.  This              
              project is mostly a continuation of the latter.                                
                                                                                             
              The project has two parts.  The first provides methods for the                 
              empirical implementation of models of aggregate dynamics under                 
              heterogeneous and discontinuous microeconomic adjustment, and                  
              develops several applications.  On the methodological side, its                
              purpose is to show (i) how to recover from aggregate data different            
              forms of microeconomic adjustment policies, (ii) the implications              
              of such policies for aggregate dynamics, (iii) the empirical                   
              relevance of these, and (iv) how to integrate microeconomic and                
              aggregate data to improve the descriptive and predictive power of              
              aggregate dynamic models.  These techniques will be used to study              
              dynamic labor demands, price and wage dynamics, and business as                
              well as residential investment.                                                
                                                                                             
              The second part of the project is more specific and is aimed at                
              studying the dynamic and medium run implications of the presence               
              of costs of creating new production units in a growing economy.                
              The interaction between adjustment costs and growth yields a                   
              productive structure where heterogeneous units operate                         
              simultaneously, with continuous entry of new and efficient units               
              and scrapping of old and outdated ones.  The purpose of this part              
              of the project is to describe and study the efficiency of dynamic              
              unemployment and wage determination under this "cleansing" view of             
              both trends and cycles.  This apparatus will be used to study U.S.             
              and European business cycles, as well as the impact and optimal                
              policy design in the face of structural reforms.
