Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Geometry and Index Theory on Foliated Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1994  
File        : a9208182

Award Number: 9208182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Glazebrook                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franz W. Kamber kamber@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research on foliation                 
              theory.  The main emphasis will be the application of the methods              
              of algebraic topology (secondary characteristic classes) and                   
              spectral geometry.  Work will be done investigating the index and              
              spectrum of transversal Dirac operators on a foliated space,                   
              associated Cheeger-Chern-Simons classes, eta invariant and                     
              families of transversal Dirac operators parametrized by suitable               
              moduli spaces.  Applications to mathematical physics, in                       
              particular to gauge theory on foliated spaces, and global                      
              chiral anomalies will be further pursued.  The overall objective               
              of the project is to establish via heat equation methods and the               
              theory of spectral asymptotics on singular spaces, an index                    
              theorem for transversally elliptic operators on the basic section              
              of a Riemannian Foliation.  The main requirement is that the                   
              theorem and its extensions would be explicitly given in terms of               
              data relative to the transversal geometry of the foliation and of              
              the spectral properties of the associated zeta-function.                       
                   The study of foliations in geometric analysis is a natural                
              generalization of domains for differential operators.                          
              These operators can be shown to act in particularly simple ways                
              on sets which decompose domains in a layer fashion.  On the                    
              layers it is possible to analyze many operators using analogues                
              of some of the fundamental tools applied to the study of                       
              differential equations.
