Title       : Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of Resource Availability in the
               Sagebrush-steppe Ecosystem: Perception and Exploitation by Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9208212

Award Number: 9208212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800038            (Estimated)
Investigator: Martyn M. Caldwell mmc@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Pyke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Stark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9186,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Characterization of resource heterogeneity in space (patches) and              
              time (pulses) at scales of days to weeks and decimeters to meters              
              will be undertaken.  In addition to chemical and physical measures             
              of resource heterogeneity, assessments of how this resource                    
              variability is perceived by plants will be pursued, including: Root            
              and foliage characteristics that reflect local resource                        
              availability, acquisition of resources, competition with other                 
              plants and microbes for resources, and translation of resources                
              gleaned from patches and pulses into fitness and seedling                      
              recruitment.  Plant response to incongruity of resources and factors           
              that might smoothe heterogeneity (mycorrhizae and water efflux from            
              roots) will also be investigated.  Parameters to be measured include           
              nutrient pools, flux rates through nitrogen pools, microbial                   
              biomass, soil water potential, plant nutrient acquisition,                     
              photosynthesis, root uptake kinetics, respiration and growth, and              
              biomass and seed production.  Stable isotopes will feature                     
              prominently in the work including new isotopic dilution procedures.            
              Data collected in addressing 21 hypotheses will also be applied in             
              a new modeling application of Ecological Field Theory and kriging              
              interpolation.  The study features two species each of shrubs,                 
              perennial grasses and exotic annual grasses.  The current conversion           
              of the sagebrush steppe from a perennial system to exotic annuals is           
              also addressed.  This research will produce findings of importance             
              to the general ecology and ecosystem function of arid lands as well            
              as to the management of grazing land resources.
