Title       : Studies in Surface and Depth Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9208185

Award Number: 9208185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427782             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emile A. Schweikert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project, headed by Professor Emile Schweikert of                 
              Texas A&M University, and supported by the Analytical and                      
              Surface Chemistry Program, addresses questions of the analysis                 
              of solid materials using high energy ion projectiles and                       
              thermal neutrons.  Measurement of the kinetic energy of recoil                 
              nuclei will be used to develop a depth profiling method for the                
              analysis of light elements in solids.  Time and spatial                        
              correlation counting of secondary ions, electrons, and photons                 
              generated by the collision of high energy polyatomic ions with                 
              surfaces will be used to study the basic processes of                          
              ion-surface interactions.  This work promises an increased                     
              understanding of the physical interactions underlying the use                  
              of ions and thermal neutrons for surface and solid state                       
              analytical applications.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the outstanding problems in solid state materials                       
              analysis is the determination of the concentration of light                    
              elements as a function of distance from the surface of the                     
              solid sample.  This research project addresses this problem by                 
              developing an analytical technique which uses neutron induced                  
              reactions of the light element constituents and kinetic energy                 
              measurements of the recoil nuclei produced to obtain depth                     
              profiling information.  In addition, this project uses related                 
              experimental methods to investigate the details of the                         
              interaction of high energy polyatomic ions with surfaces, with                 
              a view towards the development of improved surface analytical                  
              methodology.  This work will have wide applicability in the                    
              analysis of the surface and bulk composition of materials                      
              important in the electronic device industry.
