Title       : Acquisition of a Custom Molecular Beam Epitaxy System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9208130

Award Number: 9208130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Myers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy C. Giles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry E. Halliburton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The II-VI semiconductors feature bandgap energies corresponding to             
              wavelengths which span the ultraviolet to the far infrared, thus               
              giving the potential for a wide variety of optoelectronic devices.             
              The development of a wide bandgap II-VI technology has been                    
              hampered by the difficulty in controlling the materials'                       
              properties.  To achieve the full potential offered by II-VI                    
              materials, a complete understanding of their physical properties is            
              required.  This custom molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system will                
              allow the growth of II-VI semiconductors at West Virginia                      
              University.  The system is designed to provide high quality                    
              materials for research into the optical, electrical, magnetic, and             
              defect structure of these materials.  The system is configured to              
              allow a detailed study of growth kinetics using techniques based on            
              reflection high energy electron diffraction, modulated beam mass               
              spectroscopy, modulated optical spectroscopy (photoreflectance and             
              electron beam electroreflectance), and reflectance difference                  
              spectroscopy.  Emphasis will be placed on how external                         
              modifications, such as illumination with photons or high energy                
              electrons, can be used to modify and control the growth kinetics.              
              Investigations will be aimed at understanding and controlling the              
              fundamental electro-optic properties of II-VI materials with                   
              emphasis on understanding point defects, and how defects control               
              electro-optic properties.
