Title       : Curation of Archaeological Collections from the Lower Columbia River Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1992     
File        : a9208663

Award Number: 9208663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85217              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie K. Stein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Stein and                        
              colleagues will curate large archeological collections which                   
              derive from sites in the Lower Columbia River area of Washington               
              State. The region from which the controlled excavations were                   
              conducted is now inundated as the result of dam construction and               
              the collections therefore constitute a unique resource. The                    
              materials include not only lithic artifacts, but also faunal                   
              remains and soil samples which permit environmental                            
              reconstruction. The material is presently stored in cardboard                  
              trays and cardboard curation boxes. The trays are open and                     
              bending under the weight of their own contents. Within trays                   
              artifacts are piled in open containers with large numbers of                   
              lithics stored together. Materials, including excavation notes                 
              are jumbled together.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Dr. Stein and colleagues will take these materials from their                  
              paper and cardboard containers, clean them, place them in                      
              archival-quality plastic bags with labels, catalog them using a                
              computer cataloging program (ARGUS) and place them in enameled-                
              metal specimen cabinets. Federal funds will compliment those                   
              provided by the University of Washington.                                      
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. Native American                 
              groups in the Northwest region reached a level of cultural                     
              complexity unique among hunting and gathering peoples and                      
              anthropologists wish to understand how societies could be                      
              sustained on such a subsistence base. It is also clear that                    
              interaction occurred between coastal and inland groups but the                 
              intensity and effect of these contacts are not known. The Lower                
              Columbia River sites provide crucial data to answer this                       
              question. These collections constitute not only a part of                      
              America's cultural heritage but also important scientific data                 
              which are virtually unusable at the present time. This project                 
              will help to remedy this situation.
