Title       : Self-Organization in Tethered Polymer Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1994  
File        : a9208527

Award Number: 9208527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Witten t-witten@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A new physical state of long-chain polymers is becoming                        
              increasingly important in technology.  In this state the ends of               
              the polymer chains are forced to crowd together at a surface, thus             
              causing them to elongate one another.  The resulting stored elastic            
              energy gives rise to striking spatial patterns and mechanical                  
              responses which have not been explained.  Recently we have                     
              developed a new theoretical method for treating this mutually                  
              elongated state of 'end-confined" or "tethered" polymers.  We will             
              apply the method to understand the layer of end-grafted polymers               
              often used to stabilize colloidal particles.  We will calculate the            
              functional form of the osmotic-pressure corona around such                     
              particles responsible for steric stabilization.  End-confined                  
              polymers in, for instance, a lamellar stack of copolymer layers                
              flow in a distinctive way because their entanglements are quite                
              different from those in simple polymer liquids.  We will calculate             
              the relaxation of stress with time in this state using recent                  
              theories of entangled-polymer motion.  We will explore the                     
              distinctive local elastic properties of the layer by calculating               
              the linear response of the pressure to a nearby perturbation of the            
              density.  Finally, we will calculate the interaction energy induced            
              by bridging of surfaces, for instance by triblock polymers.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be undertaken on the properties of                   
              polymers which are attached at one end to a surface.  This                     
              attachment causes the polymers to interact in a way which produces             
              unusual properties which will be explored in this research.  The               
              results of this work will produce a deeper understanding of this               
              class of polymers and provide a foundation for commercial                      
              application.
