Title       : Craniofacial Development in Eutherian and Metatherian Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9208514

Award Number: 9208514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen K. Smith kksmith@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work supported on a previous NSF grant has demonstrated that              
              the development of craniofacial systems in placental and                       
              marsupial mammals is characterized by large scale changes in                   
              relative rate and timing.  Specifically, the development of the                
              central nervous system and skeletal system are both dramatically               
              slowed in metatherians relative to eutherians, however, the                    
              development of the muscular system is greatly accelerated.  These              
              results confirm hypotheses that suggest metatherians possess                   
              specific developmental adaptations to the requirements of their                
              life history and suggest, somewhat surprisingly, that the                      
              development of craniofacial systems is quite plastic.  In the                  
              current project these results will be extended in two major                    
              directions.  First, craniofacial development will be examined in               
              other mammalian species to ask whether the variation is limited                
              to characterizing the two largest mammalian groups, eutherians                 
              and metatherians.  Second, preliminary studies on the cellular                 
              and molecular bases of the developmental patterns observed will                
              be initiated and the development of the nervous system will be                 
              examined in detail.                                                            
                   This study will combine comparative information with data on              
              gross, histological, cellular and molecular processes to allow an              
              integrated approach to craniofacial development.  The results                  
              obtained will address specific and significant problems  on                    
              mammalian biodiversity and provide opportunities to examine the                
              mechanisms of and constraints on developmental patterns.
