Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Genetic Architecture of Dispersal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9208149

Award Number: 9208149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan A. Pechenik Jpecheni@emerald.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dispersal is a major life history characteristic composed of many              
              interacting traits.  Most arguments about the evolution of                     
              dispersal patterns assume that there is significant genetic                    
              variation for these traits and that they covary genetically with               
              other traits influenced by natural selection.  A major difficulty              
              in understanding the evolution of dispersal patterns has been the              
              inability to quantify individual differences in those biological               
              parameters contributing to dispersal potential.  In the marine                 
              slipper snail, Crepidula fornicata, the principal biological trait             
              governing dispersal capacity is the duration of a free-swimming                
              larval stage.  Larval of Crepidula must develop in the plankton for            
              one to several weeks before becoming capable of metamorphosing to              
              the sedentary  juvenile stage.  This period of obligatory dispersal            
              can now be quantified for individual larvae.  The study will                   
              determine the quantitative genetic covariance with other larval and            
              post-metamorphic traits that have been previously proposed to                  
              influence the development of metamorphic competence and fitness                
              variation, and will specifically test the hypothesis that dispersal            
              capacity may evolve through its genetic correlation with other                 
              traits that are subject to natural selection.  The study will                  
              contribute to the increased understanding of the biology of marine             
              shellfish populations, and populations of other intertidal and                 
              estuarine species.
