Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI: The Homotopy Theory of Arrangements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9208072

Award Number: 9208072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Falk michael.falk@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will continue to study the dependence of                 
              topological invariants of the complement of a union of hyperplanes             
              in complex n-space on the combinatorial structure of the associated            
              arrangement.  Invariants to be studied include the homology of the             
              universal abelian cover, the higher homotopy groups, the homology              
              of the Milnor fiber, and the cohomology ring.  These will be                   
              described in terms of the underlying matroid, the oriented matroid             
              and its generalization to non-real arrangements, and the bounded               
              complex.  The results will be applied to unsolved problems                     
              concerning the matroid stratification of the Grassmannian, the                 
              homology classification of hyperplane complements in terms of                  
              combinatorial invariants, the combinatorial structure of free                  
              arrangements, and the factorization properties of the Orlik-Solomon            
              algebra.  The initial focus of this research will be on                        
              complexified arrangements in dimension three.  The main topological            
              tool is the 2-complex model T of the universal cover constructed by            
              the investigator.  The structure of T is determined in a simple way            
              by the complex of bounded faces of the real part of the                        
              arrangement.  On the one hand, this facilitates a geometric                    
              analysis of the second homotopy group.  At the same time, this                 
              universal cover complex yields an algebraic description of the                 
              homology of abelian covers in terms of modules over polynomial                 
              rings.  The study of free arrangements will center on the various              
              notions of formality introduced by the investigator and his co-                
              workers.                                                                       
                   The complement of an arrangement of hyperplanes in n-space is             
              just the collection of chunks into which n-space falls when cleaved            
              by a number of (n-1)-spaces.  This seemingly innocuous structure               
              has called forth a surprising amount of heavy machinery from                   
              various parts of algebra and topology and led to some gratifyingly             
              attractive analysis and general combinatorial principles.  Although            
              the work is theoretical and leads to rigorous proofs, at                       
              intermediate stages it is useful to experiment and test examples.              
              Some machine computation is indispensable at this point,                       
              particularly using such symbolic manipulators as Cayley, for which             
              a Sun SPARCstation is available to the investigator.
