Title       : Randomized Fault-Tolerant Self-Routing Algorithms for Clos Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1992   
File        : a9208240

Award Number: 9208240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74155              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdou S. Youssef youssef@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to develop and study randomized, fault-                     
              tolerant, fast, self-routing algorithms for Clos networks.                     
              These algorithms are suitable for synchronous as well as                       
              asynchronous routing, and apply to the buffered packet-                        
              switching mode as well as to the unbuffered circuit-switching                  
              mode.  The algorithms are based on the idea that setting the                   
              first column of a Clos network results in a self-routable                      
              network.  The algorithm sets the first column randomly.                        
              Several new randomization approaches will be developed                         
              yielding various routing algorithms of constant time control                   
              and very small routing delay.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The performance of each of the algorithms in fault-free and                    
              faulty Clos networks will be studied using both probabilistic                  
              analysis and simulation.  The performance metrics, measured as                 
              a function of the switch size and the number of faulty                         
              switches, are the number of network cycles per permutation in                  
              synchronous routing, and the message delay and network                         
              throughput in asynchronous routing.  Performance comparisons                   
              will be made between the algorithms to identify the best                       
              algorithm(s), and between the buffered packet-switching mode                   
              and the unbuffered circuit-switching mode to determine whether                 
              the added cost of buffers is justifiable in randomized                         
              routing.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The universality, high fault tolerance, self-routedness, and                   
              the expected small routing delays of our novel randomized                      
              routing algorithms make Clos networks not only superior to                     
              other networks, but also so fast and fault tolerant that they                  
              greatly improve the speed, throughput and reliability of                       
              parallel computer systems.
