Title       : Molecular Systematics of Ascaridoid Nematodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9208024

Award Number: 9208024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Nadler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Nucleotide sequence data will be used to estimate phylogenetic            
              relationships among ascaridoid nematodes.  This parasite phylogeny             
              then will serve as a framework for testing hypotheses concerning               
              the evolution of morphological characters and life history                     
              attributes.  Initial research involving direct sequencing of                   
              ribosomal-RNA and maximum parsimony analysis of these data                     
              indicates that ribosomal-RNA sequences provide a large number of               
              informative characters and a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for                
              ascaridoid nematodes.  A more inclusive phylogeny of ascaridoids               
              will be useful for testing competing hypotheses for the evolution              
              of morphological characters and life cycle attributes.  Analysis of            
              evolutionary patterns for characters and attributes will be                    
              performed by applying Farris optimization to map these characters              
              on the species cladogram inferred from the sequence data.  An                  
              independent phylogenetic hypothesis based on cladistic analysis of             
              documented morphological characters will also be developed.  In                
              addition, the molecular and morphological data sets will be used               
              for a combined (and unweighted) phylogenetic analysis.  The                    
              implications of the morphologically based and "combined"                       
              phylogenetic hypotheses for the evolution of life history                      
              attributes will also be explored by mapping.  Finally, specific                
              area of congruence and dissimilarity between the molecular and                 
              morphological data sets will be identified and examined, and the               
              relative efficiency of phylogenetic hypotheses proposed by other               
              researchers will be assessed independently for each data base                  
              (morphological, molecular, and combined).
