Title       : The Persistence of Trust: Further Tests of the Cooperators'Advantage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9208534

Award Number: 9208534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103171             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Orbell jorbell@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robyn M. Dawes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In many problems of shared resources, often termed "public goods,"             
              or problems where the decision outcome of one person depends highly            
              on the behavior of others, important research questions arise about            
              the nature of trust and cooperative or defective behavior.  In such            
              situations, cooperation works to the advantage of the group but                
              individuals are privately better off not cooperating.  Experimental            
              evidence from games that reflect the conditions of highly                      
              interdependent outcomes and optional participation, shows that (1)             
              people who intend cooperation are more willing than defectors to               
              enter into such situations (i.e. to "trust"); (2) cooperators are              
              relatively more successful regarding rewards from the experimental             
              games than the defectors, hence the term, "cooperators' advantage;"            
              and (3) neither intending cooperators nor intending defectors have             
              special capacity to recognize the intentions of strangers, meaning             
              that the cooperators' advantage comes exclusively from the                     
              disproportionate probability of participation with other                       
              cooperators.  This suggests that players decide to participate by              
              a heuristic where they project their own intentions to others.                 
              This research will further test the robustness of these results by             
              investigating the effects of experience on the heuristic that gives            
              rise to the cooperators' advantage.  Competing hypotheses predict:             
              (1) that repeated "sampling" of partners from the population pool              
              will lead expectations to converge such that the cooperators'                  
              advantage is eliminated; or (2) that available samples of others'              
              behavior are biased and provide both intending cooperators and                 
              intending defectors with confirming evidence of their original                 
              expectations and thus, stimulate little adjustment from experience.            
              These hypotheses will be tested by providing subjects with various             
              types of feedback about the choices of others.  The findings will              
              bear on the possibility of cooperation evolving independently of               
              tit-for-tat or other incentive-based mechanisms discussed in the               
              literature.
