Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorial Aspects of the Model Theory of Finite,
               Pseudofinite and Homogeneous Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1994     
File        : a9208302

Award Number: 9208302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Cherlin cherlin@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   There are a number of quite general related questions in model            
              theory which are connected with concrete combinatorial problems.               
              Cherlin will study several which represent fairly broad and poorly             
              understood areas.  In particular, the following questions will be              
              considered.  (1) Is the generic triangle-free graph pseudofinite.              
              (2) Is there a zero-one law for large finite labelled directed                 
              graphs containing no transitive tournament of order 3.  (3) What is            
              the minimal complexity of a language, admitting quantifier                     
              elimination, for the structures given by the action of the wreath              
              product Sym(n)*Sym(d) in its action on d-tuples of k-sets?  (4)                
              What is the classification of infinite primitive homogeneous                   
              structures for a language with three symmetric 2-types, under the              
              hypothesis that a negative constraint is imposed on a substructure             
              of order three.  The co-investigator, Thomas, will continue related            
              work on reducts and expansions of omega-categorical structures.  He            
              also plans to study omega-stable group actions and independence                
              results on infinite symmetric groups.                                          
                   The subarea of model theory within mathematical logic concerns            
              itself with axiomatic systems, particularly questions about                    
              theories founded on systems of axioms, which can be answered purely            
              from considering the forms of the axioms without real regard for               
              their content.  It is surprising how much can sometimes be learned             
              in this way, for it often seems to be getting something for                    
              nothing.  Model theorists have developed a rich subject and have               
              been able to shed light even on such well-studied topics in algebra            
              as the theory of groups and the theory of fields.
