Title       : Electrochemical Synthesis at Highly Structured Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9208614

Award Number: 9208614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Natan natan@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Allara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9298,
Abstract    :
              This project is in the general area of analytical and surface                  
              chemistry and in the subfield of electrosynthesis.  It is part of              
              a joint National Science Foundation/Electric Power Research                    
              Institute program of research on electrochemical synthesis.                    
              During the tenure of this three-year standard grant, Professors                
              Natan and Allara and their students will carry out experimental                
              studies of the extent to which structured interfaces can be used               
              to induce selectivity in electrosynthetic processes.  Three                    
              research thrusts will be pursued: electrocatalysis at conducting               
              inorganic materials, enantioselective electrochemistry at chiral               
              self-assembled monolayers and at chiral semiconductors, and                    
              functionalization of gallium arsenide with organothiolate films.               
              In the first two thrusts, the electrode structure is tailored to               
              function in a highly specific way using established criteria from              
              biological and organic chemistry.  The research on gallium                     
              arsenide is exploratory and capitalizes on recent discoveries in               
              the principal investigators' laboratories.  All three thrusts                  
              involve extensive characterization of the electrochemical                      
              interface using both in situ and ex situ techniques.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              This research should lead to an enhanced understanding of those                
              factors which control chiral electrosynthesis.  The successful                 
              attainment of the goals of this project could enable the design of             
              efficient and environmentally benign electrosynthetic routes to                
              the production of specialty chemicals.
