Title       : RNA Polymerase: Mechanism of Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9208830

Award Number: 9208830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald S. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this study will be Escherichia coli RNA polymerase                
              (RPase).  The interaction of RPase with a wide variety of synthetic            
              templates, native promoters and variant promoters have been                    
              extensively studied.  However, there are aspects of the                        
              thermodynamics and kinetics of the interaction of RPase with                   
              promoters have been extensively studied.  However, there are                   
              aspects of the thermodynamics and kinetics of the interaction of               
              RPase with promoter sites that have yet to be delineated.  Stopped-            
              flow kinetic studies on the interaction of a fluorescently-labeled             
              derivative of RPase with promoters offers the range of                         
              temperatures.  Thus, analysis of the data obtained in these studies            
              will provide detailed information about the molecular events that              
              occur in the enzyme during promoter complex formation and                      
              disscociation.  Moreover, because the fluorescently attached tag               
              appears to be sensitive to conformational changes in the enzyme,               
              these studies will provide information regarding structural                    
              alterations in the enzyme, these studies will provide information              
              regarding structural alterations in the enzyme during open promoter            
              complex formation.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Highly specific interactions between proteins and nucleic acids are            
              crucial for a wide range of biological processes such as                       
              replication, transcription and translation.  An understanding of               
              these processes and of the reasons for their malfunctioning                    
              requires detailed information on the structures of the protein-                
              nucleic complexes, as well as the thermodynamics and kinetics of               
              their formation.
