Title       : Disturbance Attenuation in Nonlinear Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1992 
File        : a9208306

Award Number: 9208306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Isidori isidori@zach.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The design of feedback laws for systems                                        
              characterized by complicated nonlinear dynamical                               
              behavior is a challenging research task which has                              
              attracted an increasing interest in recent years.                              
              Advances in nonlinear control theory will                                      
              substantially improve the design of control systems                            
              for light-weighted robot arms, for autopilots and                              
              guidance systems of highly maneuverable aircrafts,                             
              increase the flexibility and energy efficiency in the                          
              regulation of chemical plants, facilitate the real-time                        
              reconfiguration of a control system after the                                  
              occurrence of a failure.  Among the many problems                              
              which must be confronted, a most important one is                              
              the desing of feedback laws achieving tracking of                              
              prescribed exogenous commands and rejection of                                 
              exogenous disturbances.  The approaches to the                                 
              problem of tracking/rejection of exogenous inputs                              
              in a control system depend upon the model chosen                               
              to describe the family of exogenous inputs which                               
              are expected to affect the system.  If no model is                             
              available, an appealing strategy -which revealed                               
              itself very powerful and attractive in the case of                             
              linear systems- is to base the design  on the worst                            
              possible situation.  For instance, in the frequency                            
              domain, the feedback laws are designed so as to                                
              minimize the maximal amplitude of the frequency                                
              response to the exogenous inputs.  This research                               
              project would contribute to the extension of these                             
              design methodologies to systems described by                                   
              nonlinear mathematical models.  Using methods                                  
              and results from the geometric theory of control                               
              systems, the theory of differential games and the                              
              qualitative theory of dynamical system, the purpose                            
              of the research is to establish sufficiently general                           
              results about existence  and actual design of                                  
              feedback control laws achieving attenuation of                                 
              unmodeled external disturbances.
