Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Regularity Problems in Nonlinear Potential Theory and
               Quasiregular Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9208296

Award Number: 9208296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadeusz Iwaniec tiwaniec@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research aimed at                     
              exploiting newly discovered relationships between the classical                
              theory of quasiregular mappings and nonlinear elliptic systems of              
              variational equations.  Quasiregular mappings first appeared as a              
              modest branch of complex function theory (quasiconformal                       
              mapping).  The mappings are characterized geometrically by the                 
              property that they carry infinitesimal spheres into infinitesimal              
              ellipsoids.  In the second half of this century it was discovered              
              that these mappings proved to be fundamental objects in geometry,              
              such a Teichmuller theory, as well as to other areas of analysis.              
                    The present work focuses on how the Donaldson - Sullivan                 
              work on quasiconformal four-manifolds has led to new techniques                
              applicable to questions in nonlinear partial differential                      
              equations.  One of the first objectives of this work is to                     
              understand what, if any, distinctions arise in the study of                    
              quasiregular mappings defined on even and odd dimensional spaces.              
              Some of the deeper new discoveries are only known in the even                  
              dimensional case.  Arguments based on Hodge decompositions and                 
              Cacciappoli type inequalities may yield additional information                 
              about odd dimensions.                                                          
                   A second application of quasiregular mappings relates to                  
              vector-valued analogues of singular integral transformations                   
              consisting of matrices whose elements are Riesz transforms.  It                
              is believed that the p-norms of these operators do not depend on               
              the dimension of the underlying space. Although it may be                      
              impossible to achieve exact values for the norms, work will be                 
              done in showing that the bounds are dimension-free.  To achieve                
              this, a new technique called the complex method of rotation has                
              been introduced which applies to a broad class of integral                     
              operators in estimating their mapping norms.                                   
                   Finally work of a more geometric nature will continue on the              
              questions of the maximum dimension of removable sets for                       
              quasiregular mapping and how Hausdorff dimension is distorted                  
              under such maps.
