Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hypergroups, Measure Algebras and Polynomials in Rn
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9208407

Award Number: 9208407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40347              (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Connett connett@arch.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   The focus of this project is a generalized harmonic analysis              
              involving orthogonal functions on sets in higher dimensional                   
              Euclidean space.  The novel feature of the research is that the                
              sets under consideration do not form a group.  This lack of                    
              algebraic structure can often be compensated for by the existence              
              of an adequate algebraic structure in the measure algebra                      
              supported on the set.  The structures under consideration here                 
              are referred to as hypergroups in which the algebraic operation                
              is convolution.  If the elements of a basis of orthogonal                      
              functions act as homomorphisms of the hypergroup, then one gets a              
              viable mathematical structure.  For example, the initial one-                  
              dimensional work in the area used eigenfunctions of a Sturm-                   
              Liouville problem as a basis.  The current project seeks to                    
              extend existing structure theorems for compact one-dimensional                 
              hypergroups to the non-compact case.  Other work will focus on                 
              characterizing the compactly supported hypergroups in higher                   
              dimensions, developing a harmonic analysis of the disk                         
              polynomials and the spheroidal wave functions and analyzing the                
              structure of specific families of non-hypergroup measure                       
              algebras.                                                                      
                   The hypergroup concept, abstract as it is, has its roots in               
              probability theory, orthogonal polynomials and the theory of                   
              special functions.  Particular applications include the explicit               
              representations for annular spheroidal wave functions even though              
              the functions cannot be given in closed form and the development               
              of hypergroup interpretations of characteristic functions in                   
              probability theory.
