Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Regional Climate Model - Geographic
               Information System Approach To Wind Power Climatology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0302469

Award Number: 0302469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5903               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Andresen andresen@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Advances in wind turbine technology and reassessments of wind power potential
              have resulted in a rapid buildup of wind energy capacity in the United States
              and worldwide. Already several nations have mandated that a substantial portion
              of their electricity needs be generated by wind turbines. Numerous wind farm
              projects are under development in regions where the wind power resource has
              traditionally been considered too low for economical extraction. Wind energy is
              now, in many areas, less costly than conventional energy production methods. In
              choosing wind farm sites, planners rely on a regional wind climatology
              (averages and standard deviations) derived from the statistical interpolation
              of surface wind speed observations that are not at the height of the turbine,
              are sparsely distributed, and may be of questionable quality. Such
              interpolations may contain a great deal of error when no nearby observations
              exist, especially over water or complex terrain (often some of the windiest
              regions). As a result, wind farm siting methodologies are largely post hoc and
              the best sites climatologically may be overlooked. An alternative to
              traditional statistical methods is the use of a regional numerical climate
              model (RCM) to provide estimates of wind speeds at a fine temporal (hourly) and
              spatial (< 12 km) scale, and do so at the height of the wind turbine, rather
              than the surface. Thus, the primary goal of this dissertation research is to
              develop a regional climate model (RCM) based geographic information system
              (GIS) for the purposes of wind farm siting. The key question this research will
              address is whether the RCM/GIS approach represents a significant improvement
              over currently employed statistical techniques (e.g., spatial interpolation,
              measure-correlate-predict [MCP], probability density functions [pdf]). The
              research will make use of the wind speed output of the MM5 RCM operated by the
              U.S. Forest Service for fire weather analysis over the Great Lakes region of
              North America. The model output will be validated against wind speed
              observation records at several surface stations throughout the region. It is
              expected that the RCM will provide a significant improvement over traditional
              statistical methods in the fine-resolution estimation of the regional wind
              resource. Upon validation, the output of the RCM will be included in a GIS and
              coupled with additional wind farm siting criteria to create a siting tool that
              will identify the optimal wind farm sites in a region based upon the
              considerations determined by a wind farm developer. After the initial model
              development and validation, this grant facilitates the evaluation of the
              RCM/GIS model over a different region (the UK) where wind energy development
              also is growing rapidly and a great deal of wind climate research already has
              been conducted. This evaluation, to take place at the University of East Anglia
              will also provide an opportunity for leading European wind energy researchers
              to provide input on the suitability of such a model to varied and diverse
              regions. 

This research endeavors to provide a new method for the optimal
              siting of wind farms such that they can operate most economically and with a
              minimum of disruption to society and the environment. It also represents a new
              and practical use for a RCM outside the realm of atmospheric science. Such
              research would highlight the strengths and limitations of utilizing regional
              climate models in practical applications. Additionally, through the use of a
              regional climate model the wind resource of regions where surface wind
              observations are sparse or lacking may be effectively estimated. Such ability
              would facilitate the development of wind energy projects in offshore locations
              as well as in less developed countries that would greatly benefit from the
              development of an independent energy infrastructure. Furthermore, as a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

