Title       : DNA Separation on a Chip by Lateral Electric Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0302271

Award Number: 0302271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229685             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anuj Chauhan chauhan@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: 	DNA Separation on a Chip by Lateral Electric
              Fields
Proposal Number:		CTS-0302271
Principal Investigator:	Anuj
              Chauhan
Institution:			University of Florida


The objective of this
              project is to separate DNA molecules of different sizes in microfabricated
              channels through the combination of pressure-driven flow through the channel
              and electric fields orthogonal to the flow.  The electric field will
              concentrate the charged DNA molecules near the wall, while the axial flow will
              tend to transport the smaller molecules with higher diffusivities more rapidly
              down the channel.  Operation in a cyclic manner should lead to an effective
              separation of DNA molecules by size.  Several variations on this method are
              proposed to increase the efficiency of the separation.  The current, standard
              method for the separation of DNA molecules is through capillary
              electrophoresis, which is effective for smaller molecules up to about 20,000
              base pairs.  As new methods for sequencing larger molecules become available,
              the most difficult step will be the isolation of DNA.  The proposed separation
              method may be applicable to molecules in the megabase pair range.  In terms of
              the broader impacts, separation of DNA fragments on the basis of their lengths
              represents an important step in a number of areas of molecular biology,
              especially DNA sequencing for applications in medical diagnostics and drug
              delivery.  The proposed strategy does not require any gels, and it could be
              implemented in lab-on-a-chip devices.  In the educational area DNA separation
              topics will be included in transport courses, and outreach will include visits
              to middle and high schools for demonstration e

