Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Market Forces, Government, and Regional
               Development: A Case Study of the Appalachian Regional Commission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0302583

Award Number: 0302583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1980               (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy K. Glasmeier akg1@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Award provides a scientific case
              study of the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC), an agency designated by
              Congress in 1965 to improve the socioeconomic conditions of Appalachia. 
              Although the ARC's activities provide a rich resource for understanding federal
              regional development efforts in economically depressed areas, currently
              available research provides limited insight into the ARC's experience, and much
              remains to be understood. This research addresses a number of specific issues
              that are essential to understanding the ARC, including: how federal
              expenditures within Appalachia have compared to federal expenditures elsewhere
              in the U.S. during the course of the ARC's existence; the variation in ARC
              policy over time, including the spatial variation in the agency's expenditures
              and private sector interaction with such expenditures; and socioeconomic
              outcomes associated with ARC policy. This analysis utilizes a range of
              quantitative and qualitative techniques, including descriptive statistics,
              econometric modeling, document analysis, and interviews. It also draws upon an
              array of resources, including an ARC expenditure database, which contains
              information about all ARC expenditures from 1965 through 2002; project files
              consisting of detailed descriptions of ARC projects; federal government
              expenditure data for the entire U.S.; and an historical database of social and
              economic data. The case study is situated in the broad theoretical context of
              neoclassical economics, due to the need for empirical and theoretical
              evaluation of how a regional development agency can operate effectively in a
              social, political, and economic context that largely privileges the basic
              tenets of such theory.

Although the ARC is in many respects a relic of an
              era when federal regional development concerns and endeavors in the U.S. were
              more prominent than they are today, a renewed interest in regional development
              initiatives has surfaced in the federal government over the past few years. 
              There is evidence for this in the recent creation of two new development
              agencies - the Delta Regional Authority and the Denali Commission - as well as
              in discussions in Congress about creating regional development agencies in
              other economically depressed areas of the U.S. The ARC has in many ways served
              as a model for these new and proposed agencies. However, a lack of empirically
              informed research related to the ARC has resulted in insufficient knowledge
              about the efficacy with which the agency has carried out its mandate. This case
              study will broaden the understanding of the ARC and of the effectiveness of the
              agency's efforts. In many ways, the ARC stands as a test case for how a federal
              development agency can meet with success, and failure, within the American
              political and economic system. Such understanding can be important to guiding
              future development efforts in the U.S. and elsewhere.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.


