Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Building Negotiation: Architecture and Social
               Relations at Chau Hiix, Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0302481

Award Number: 0302481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11946              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Anne Pyburn APYBURN@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. K. Anne Pyburn, Christopher R. Andres will analyze
              data gathered during his archaeological investigations of the Maya site of Chau
              Hiix in northern Belize.  Chau Hiix is a medium-sized ceremonial center
              distinguished by a lengthy occupational history extending from at least 1000
              B.C. through 1450 A.D.  The community is notable because it was continuously
              occupied into the contact period and may have provided refuge for individuals
              displaced when Spanish entradas penetrated the region in the 15th century. 
              Chau Hiix not only maintained a significant population following this period of
              upheaval, but reflects spatial patterns in its architecture which depart from
              those of earlier periods.        
Andres' project will examine the extent to
              which Maya monumental architecture may have played a more active role in
              pre-Hispanic society than has traditionally been acknowledged.  While the Maya
              built environment is often viewed as a product of human activity, there is
              growing evidence that buildings were systematically manipulated to structure
              social relations.  As a form of material culture involved in the negotiation of
              social relations, architecture at Chau Hiix offers insight into changing
              relationships between members of different social groups.  Preliminary
              investigations suggest these changes between the Classic and Postclassic
              periods involve construction activity at previously undeveloped locations,
              remodeling of existing buildings, and changing patterns of accessibility to the
              central precinct and its constituent structures.  Andres' excavations will
              further document these architectural alterations.  Changing access and traffic
              patterns will be examined using formal methods of spatial analysis and compared
              with similar data from the neighboring Maya sites of Lamanai and Altun Ha,
              Belize.  These analyses will serve as a basis for explanations of architectural
              change and should help illuminate inter- and intra-site socio-political
              relationships in northern Belize between the Classic and Postclassic periods. 
              
Besides addressing questions of interest to architects and social scientists,
              this project will build on a decade-long effort by Pyburn to involve members of
              the Belizean community of Crooked Tree in the scientific investigation of the
              past and in protection of archaeological resources.  Public understanding of
              work at Chau Hiix will be enhanced through excavations carried out
              collaboratively with members of Crooked Tree Village; by presentation of
              research findings in the Crooked Tree Museum and during the annual Cashew
              Festival; and through guided tours of excavations available to visitors to Chau
              Hiix.  Communication of our findings to residents of other parts of Belize will
              take place at the Belize Archaeological Conference held in San Ignacio, Belize
              in July of 2003.  In the US, research results will be presented to the general
              public and academic community at open houses including Indiana University's
              annual Archaeology Day and through the Chau Hiix Archaeological Project's
              website.  American undergraduate students will receive training in a variety of
              skill sets, including excavation of monumental architecture.  The author will
              be trained in methods of architectural analysis.  Following the analyses
              discussed above, research results will be communicated to the scientific
              community through conference presentations and contributions to edited volumes
              and refereed journals.   

           

