Title       : Piezoelectric Phononic Lattice Surface Acoustic Wave Devices on Silicon and
               Sapphire for Ultra-High Frequency Filters and Biomedical Sensor Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0302494

Award Number: 0302494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Agis A. Iliadis agis@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A novel surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensor/filter device based on the "pass" and
              "stop" frequency bands of phononic lattices is proposed. The device uses the
              piezoelectric properties of the ZnO material system, in order to achieve the
              generation/detection, and propagation of acoustic waves through phononic
              lattices on a planar integrated device. The work will explore the properties of
              such device, explore the concept of acoustic wave propagation through phononic
              lattices experimentally, and the practical capabilities of
phononic lattices
              for ultra-high frequency filter applications and biomedical sensor
              applications.

Intellectual Merit: This proposal addresses the development of
              a novel SAW type device that is capable of exploring experimentally the
              properties of a class of artificially made lattices, the phononic lattices.
              Furthermore, it provides a functional device capable of ultra-high frequency
              response suitable for developing secure mobile communication systems and high
              performance acoustic, gas, and bio-immunosensors. Due to the novelty and
              potential applications of the device intellectual merit is considered very
              high.

Broader Impacts: This device will revolutionize wireless and mobile
              communication systems as it can achieve ultra-high frequency band pass filters,
              and furthermore, this capability of substantially higher operational
              frequencies will lead to the development of sensors with much higher
              selectivity and detectivity, such as those currently using quartz microbalance
              for immunosensing, with tremendous implications on the detection of pathogens
              and other bio-hazards.

