Title       : Molecular Genetic Characterization of Contaminated Environments as a Tool for
               the Assessment of Remediation Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0302645

Award Number: 0302645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loring Nies nies@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay T. Simonds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brett Baldwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy H. Nakatsu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0302645   Nies   Molecular genetic analysis of microbial community structure and
              function can provide a direct and powerful tool to assess stressed, impacted,
              and recovering ecosystems. This information can improve bioremediation system
              design and operation, evaluation of monitored natural attenuation (MNA) and
              resource allocation, and it will increase the use of sound science in decision
              making and regulatory oversight.
Intellectual Merit. We have developed a set
              of primers and a real-time PCR protocol to detect and enumerate aromatic
              oxygenase genes, and have used them in parallel with PCR-DGGE community
              analysis, to assess the feasibility of using this biotechnology as a
              bioremediation assessment and monitoring tool. The detection of oxygenase genes
              yields direct insight into the assimilative function of the local ecosystem,
              i.e. the occurrence of aerobic biodegradation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Our
              primers have been tested in well controlled experiments with pure cultures, in
              soil microcosms, and on samples from two field sites. Tracking catabolic genes
              involved in the biodegradation of priority pollutants can be used to optimize
              remediation systems and evaluate MNA. Reliable in-situ methods currently do not
              exist to evaluate the effectiveness of the components used for bioremediation
              aeration, such as vacuum pumps, air spargers, or oxygen releasing amendments.
              The direct measurement of genes encoding aromatic oxygenases would provide an
              effective tool for monitoring engineered aeration systems and for MNA. Aromatic
              oxygenase genes were chosen as indicators because they play a key role in the
              biodegradation of BTEX, the pollutants of principal concern at
              gasoline-contaminated sites. The utilization of expensive aeration technologies
              and oxygen releasing amendments could be significantly optimized by the
              development of modern biotechnology tools. We propose to evaluate the
              feasibility of using molecular genetic characterization of the microbial
              community structure, and catabolic function, to advance the state-of-the-art of
              LUST site remediation in a field-scale university-industry collaboration. Over
              a three year period, our interdisciplinary university-industry team proposes to
              conduct a research project that will obtain field performance data about this
              recently developed tool for monitoring petroleum contaminated sites. We expect
              that sites of different 'ages,' geochemistry and geology will have
              characteristic and detectable molecular signatures.

