Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hydro-Ecological Linkages in Urbanizing
               Watersheds: A Process-Based Assessment of Land-Use Change Impact on Nitrogen
               Export
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0302703

Award Number: 0302703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina Tague ctague@mail.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1195,1325,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The terrestrial-aquatic interface, in particular the riparian ecotone, plays an
              important role in watershed nitrogen cycling.  Because land-use change can
              significantly alter its capacity to process or retain nitrogen, understanding
              the linkages between upland nitrogen delivery and ecotone processing is crucial
              for land-use change impact assessments.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will address the role of the riparian zone and the stream in the
              retention, transformation and mobilization of nitrogen.  The student will
              examine the role of riparian and in-stream processing, the effect of spatial
              arrangement in land use, and the development of remote sensing-based
              aggregation procedures.  The research approach will combine hydro-ecological
              modeling with remote sensing and field measurements, allowing for addressing
              relevant processes and related patterns across a range of spatial and temporal
              scales.  The regional hydro-ecological simulation system (RHESSys), a
              hydro-ecological watershed model, will be coupled within a geographic
              information system (GIS) to a flow and water quality model for streams.  The
              stream model will be enhanced to account for stream-groundwater interactions
              and associated nitrogen processing in the hyporheic zone, the subsurface
              flowpath where stream water mixes with subsurface water.  Model development and
              application will be based on an established RHESSys application and on remote
              sensing data and field data collected as part of activities at the Baltimore
              Ecosystem Study Long Term Ecological Research site (BES-LTER).  Additional
              field campaigns will be conducted in support of the modeling activities,
              including field experiments and stream monitoring.

Understanding the
              linkages between hydrologic and biogeochemical cycling is an important research
              challenge in global change science.  Coupling hydrology and biogeochemistry
              across multiple spatial-temporal scales is a key approach for meeting this
              challenge.  This study will help bridge this gap in scientific understanding by
              providing a multidisciplinary, process-based approach for investigating
              nitrogen export from watersheds.  The study should enhance general
              understanding of spatial-temporal linkages in the landscape between water and
              biogeochemical cycling and their role in controlling human-induced impacts on
              ecosystem functioning.  The enhanced model should also be of direct value to
              practitioners who might use it for water- and land-resource management.  The
              research will build on established research endeavors and will integrate with
              educational and community outreach activities, including the use of high school
              students and community members as volunteer data collectors.  The doctoral
              candidate will assist interested students in using data they and others collect
              in science fair projects.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

