Title       : Development of a Mechanistic Model of Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH)
               based on Equilibrium Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0302618

Award Number: 0302618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Noguera noguera@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0302618   Noguera   Intellectual Merit: The main outcome of this research will
              be the establishment of a mathematical methodology to facilitate the design of
              probes for FISH. After a researcher has identified specific 16S rRNA sequences,
              our model will assist with (1) checking the specific target sites for
              accessibility using the unbiased map constructed in Task 2, (2) fine-tuning the
              probes to achieve high intensity signals (e.g., adjusting probe length to
              achieve .G 0 ov<-15 kcal/mol), (3) using site-specific m values (obtained
              during Task 1) to generate theoretical denaturation curves for the target and
              non-target microorganisms, and (4) designing probes with stable stem-loop
              structures to increase target and non-target differentiation, following
              guidelines developed during Task 3. Currently, none of these important
              evaluations are possible. Moreover, due to the wide applicability of FISH and
              similar hybridization methods, the outcome of this study is likely to cross
              multidisciplinary boundaries.
Broader Impacts: This project will contribute to
              the education of two graduate students. One of them is Mr. Safak Yilmaz, a
              third-year PhD student in Civil and Environmental Engineering. The second
              graduate student will be recruited from the pool of applicants to the Civil and
              Environmental Engineering program and special consideration will be given to
              diversity applicants. The PI will use the existing infrastructure in the
              College of Engineering and the UW to foster educational equity, such as the
              Graduate Education Research Scholars Program, and the College of Engineering
              Opportunities in Engineering Conference. In addition, during the duration of
              this project, the PI will offer summer internships to diversity undergraduate
              students through existing summer programs in biology and engineering (SRP-Bio
              and SURE/REU). Finally, we plan to establish a website where users can access
              the large databases generated in this project and use the model for the
              mechanistic design of FISH protocols. The model itself, the generated 16S rRNA
              maps (i.e., m values and inaccessibility), and the model applications will be
              distributed to the scientific community in peer-review publications and the
              best available electronic approach.

