Title       : Fluctuations and Phase Transitions in Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0302596

Award Number: 0302596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Lobb lobb@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Anlage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award will support an experimental study of the temperature vs. magnetic
              field phase diagram of type-II superconductors.  The project's goal is to
              determine if there is a transition in non-zero field, and to determine the
              critical exponents of that transition if it exists, as well as the exponents of
              the zero-field transition.  (The exponents reported in the literature vary
              widely for both transitions.)  The methods used will be DC I-V and
              high-frequency (45 MHz to 45 GHz) conductivity measurements on the same
              samples, providing independent experiments.  It is expected that this project
              will lead to a much-improved understanding of phase transitions in
              superconductors and in other systems. More broadly, the project will reaffirm
              that questioning and testing widely-accepted results is an essential part of
              the scientific process.  An important part of this project is the support for
              training of graduate and undergraduate students.  The PIs will continue their
              strong efforts to involve women and minorities in research, and to collaborate
              with scientists from Latin America and Eastern Europe.  Finally, both PIs will
              continue their extensive efforts to encourage broader education in science,
              including work with predominantly minority public-school students. 

A
              superconductor, by definition, is a material that has no resistance to the flow
              of electricity, a property with great potential technological importance. 
              Prior work showed that the consensus concerning the limits of
              superconductivity, in particular, whether materials are superconducting in a
              magnetic field, may have been incorrect.  This award will support research that
              will more generally explore under what conditions superconductivity can exist. 
              The project will reaffirm that questioning and testing widely-accepted results
              is an essential part of the scientific process.  An important part of this
              project is the support for training of graduate and undergraduate students. 
              Both PIs will continue their strong efforts to involve women and minorities in
              research, and to collaborate with scientists from Latin America and Eastern
              Europe.  Finally, both PIs will continue their extensive efforts to encourage
              broader education in science, including work with predominantly minority
              public-school students. 


