Title       : Observations of Jets from Accreting White Dwarfs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0302055

Award Number: 0302055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Sokoloski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : J,Sokoloski
	      891 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    617/496-7573

NSF Program : 1609      NSF ASTRON & ASTROPHY PSTDC FE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0302055
Sokoloski, Jennifer

Dr. Sokoloski is awarded an NSF Astronomy
              and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and
              education at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.  She will address
              the creation of astrophysical jets, which are found on many different size
              scales in the universe. The cause of these highly focused outflows are thought
              to be accretion disks around central objects, but are not well understood.  Dr.
              Sokoloski will conduct a detailed study of accretion disks around symbiotic
              stars, in which a white dwarf star accretes gas from the stellar wind of a red
              giant. The three facets of the research project will be (1) an archival
              spectroscopic survey for jets in symbiotic stars, plus complementary radio,
              optical, and X-ray imaging observations; (2) an exploration of the disk-jet
              connection in symbiotic stars, including interferometric observations that
              could possibly produce the first image of a tidally distorted star; and (3) a
              detailed examination of the jet-producing inner-disk region in selected
              white-dwarf accretors. The goal is to use the symbiotic stars to distinguish
              between competing jet models, both for these systems and for astrophysical jets
              generally. 

Dr. Sokoloski will also work towards increasing the
              participation of women and girls in science. She will continue to participate
              in the "Eyes to the Future" science mentorship program for middle-school girls,
              and focus on recruiting colleagues to participate as well. In addition, she
              will work on disseminating the results of the International Conference on Women
              in Physics to different groups in the Boston area, both giving talks and
              collecting feedback. She will also lead discussions in preparation for a
              follow-up meeting, tentatively scheduled for 2006. 
***
