Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Fate of Maize Genetic Resources in Chiapas,
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0302676

Award Number: 0302676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Brush sbbrush@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Loss of genetic variability, or genetic erosion, in centers of crop origin and
              evolution has been identified as a negative result of social and agricultural
              cultural change.  A key step in improving the way we manage the loss of genetic
              resources in agriculture is to take stock of the extent, condition and trends
              that cause this erosion. A critical need is to develop research tools for
              larger spatial scales to assess the scope of social and environmental processes
              that affect genetic resources and identify opportunities for effective
              conservation. Mexico is the primary center of wild and cultivated maize
              resources, one of the world's most three important crops, but the survival of
              maize genetic resources is threatened by landscape changes taking place across
              the country.  It is against this background, and with the ultimate goal of
              improving crop genetic resource conservation strategies, that this project will
              investigate the effects of climate change and land conversion on maize
              diversity across the state of Chiapas in southern Mexico. Until recently,
              agricultural modernization posed the greatest threat to the loss of genetic
              variability.  Coupled with current patterns of land conversion, future climate
              change may surpass these effects, in both magnitude and extent, by endangering
              the integrity of the highly adaptive ecological-niches where most traditional
              maize landraces are grown.  Combining traditional field data with current
              spatial analytic techniques, the relationship between maize diversity and
              patterns of land conversion will be examined through the use of spatial
              analytic methods coupled with a time-series database of both maize diversity
              and land use.  A special emphasis is placed on modeling the biophysical and
              socio-economic constraints that are likely to negatively impact the existing
              diversity of maize varieties in view of expected climate and
              land-use/land-cover changes. Modeling will adopt a spatial perspective. The
              project will apply this information to identify priority zones for conservation
              efforts, and will generate a model of land use to promote conservation efforts
              in the future.  

As a reservoir of traits of great value to breeders, maize
              genetic resources are a resource for both present and future food production. 
              Conserving crop genetic resources has been adopted as an international
              imperative and is included in the mandate of the Convention on Biological
              Diversity.  Thus far, efforts to understand and cope with genetic erosion are
              hampered by the lack of models that integrate these factors as the landscape
              level, focusing instead on two opposing spatial scales: micro-level studies of
              crop diversity and farmer choice, and global or hemispheric studies of
              crop-climate relationships.  Research at the sub-national level could help to
              integrate these data, resulting in an understanding of the factors that operate
              within, and interact across, the various scales to maintain crop diversity.  A
              particular challenge for researchers in the field of conservation of crop
              genetic resources is in developing sustainable management models for a region's
              habitats, in which both biophysical specificity required by these resources and
              human resource needs are made compatible.  This project will develop databases,
              theory, and methodology to address this challenge.  The project represents a
              major step forward in the study of the basis of crop evolution and an important
              contribution to the theory and design of genetic resource conservation.  The
              identification of effective environments of different types of maize and the
              methodology employed could be used to identify priority zones in crop
              conservation in other regions of the world and would also be helpful in the
              development of more efficient sampling strategies for monitoring maize
              diversity.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.


