Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Tunica Miracle, Sin and Savior in America's
               Ethiopia: A Poverty & Social Impact Analysis of Casino Gaming in Tunica, MS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0302603

Award Number: 0302603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy K. Glasmeier akg1@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the last decade, casino gaming development has been widely adopted in the
              US as a means for fostering employment growth and generating tax revenue,
              particularly in distressed areas.  This trend has received widespread attention
              with regard to its overall economic and social effects, yet its impacts on the
              well-being of individuals living in persistently poor places remains unknown. 
              This doctoral dissertation research improvement project questions the extent to
              which the benefits of casino development extend to resident poverty
              populations.  Specifically, the study will assess the character and
              distributional impacts of the casino gaming industry on those residing in one
              of the nation's historically most impoverished counties, Tunica County (MS), by
              way of a poverty and social impact analysis (PSIA) methodology.  PSIA
              represents a multi-faceted, contextual approach to research in which mixed
              methods are employed to capture the complexities of economic, social, cultural,
              and political relationships in the manifestation and persistence of poverty. 
              As such, multiple theoretical points of departure will be taken, in relation
              to: (1) the economic and political history of poverty in the Mississippi Delta,
              (2) the racial, cultural, and spatial construction of poverty in Tunica County,
              (3) casino gaming as an economic growth strategy and the embeddedness of the
              industry in Mississippi over the last decade, and (4) the sectoral, fiscal, and
              distributional impacts of casino development.  In addition, alternative
              perspectives on the meaning of poverty and well-being will be considered
              through individual accounts of living conditions and casino impacts by the
              local poverty population.  This research will demonstrate that the analysis of
              casino gaming impacts at multiple scales, using a variety of methods for data
              collection and examination, produces divergent and contradictory results. 
              Therefore, our understanding of the success of gaming as an economic growth
              strategy is dependent on the unit of analysis, the method or combination of
              methods applied, and the characteristics of the place.  Further, situating
              poverty and social impact analysis in the economic and political geography of
              the casino development area will detail questionable politics of class,
              congruent with the region's history of race relations, as the primary factor in
              determining the poverty outcome.  Thus, it is argued that the "miracle" of
              casino gaming in Tunica County and its measure of effect in ameliorating
              poverty is contextually and conceptually driven-the impact of casino gaming on
              Tunica County poverty is socially constructed in place as well as a social
              construction of place.  

This doctoral dissertation research will advance
              our understanding of the value of casino gaming as an economic growth strategy
              by examining the actual economic effects of an ongoing development activity. 
              It will address the manner in which those effects impact resident and
              vulnerable populations, an area of study where many assumptions and anecdotal
              evidence exist, but where factual knowledge is lacking.  This research will
              provide community groups and policy-makers with insight into the relationships
              between economic growth and development and their ability to produce positive
              outcomes for society as a whole while also targeting the needs of a specific
              segment of the population.  Such information is essential in devising more
              effective development strategies and ways of ensuring that the benefits are
              distributed to underprivileged populations in a meaningful way.  Further, PSIA,
              as defined by the World Bank and piloted around the developing world, has yet
              to be given serious consideration in the US case.  Therefore, this study will
              contribute to scientific research by extending the testing of an integrated
              methodology for impact analysis to the poverty context of a developed nation. 
              As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement grant, this award will also
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

