Title       : Using Lyman-Alpha Absorbers as Probes of Galaxy Halos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0302049

Award Number: 0302049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica Rosenberg jrosenbe@casa.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : J, Rosenberg
	      University of Colorado
	      Boulder, CO  803090389    303/735-4190

NSF Program : 1609      NSF ASTRON & ASTROPHY PSTDC FE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0302049	
Rosenberg, Jessica

Dr. Rosenberg is awarded an NSF Astronomy
              and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and
              education at the University of Colorado.  Her research will explore the nature
              of intervening absorption between distant Quasi-Stellar Objects (QSO's) and
              ourselves.  This absorption of ultraviolet Lyman-alpha radiation by neutral
              hydrogen atoms is seen at all redshifts, and can be used to map out the
              intervening material.  Dr. Rosenberg will combine ground-based optical and
              radio observations with space-based ultraviolet spectroscopy to study the
              nature of these absorbers locally, i.e. at low redshifts. She will use deep
              galaxy surveys to look for correlations between low redshift absorbers and
              galaxies. Ultraviolet space-based observations will also allow her to use these
              absorbers as probes of a statistically significant sample of galaxy halos.
              Using these two techniques she will study the sizes and structure of the galaxy
              halos, as well as the spread of heavy elements through those halos due to
              feedback processes. 

In addition to her research, Dr. Rosenberg will conduct
              a two-pronged effort in teaching and outreach at the K-12 and undergraduate
              levels. She will work with the Science Explorers program at the University of
              Colorado, a program that provides professional development for K-12 teachers
              through day-long, activity-based workshops with the teachers and five of their
              students.  Dr. Rosenberg will work on curriculum development in astronomy and
              also assist with some of the workshops. After a year of working with this
              program, she will work with astronomy professors in developing material using
              innovative methods for the large undergraduate survey course in astronomy. 
              
***
