Title       : The structure of transformation group C*-algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0302401

Award Number: 0302401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Christopher Phillips ncp@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Phillips

The Principal Investigator, N. Christopher Phillips,
              proposes to follow up on his recent joint work with Qing Lin on crossed
              products by minimal diffeomorphisms, and on his recent results on crossed
              products by free minimal actions of finitely generated free abelian groups on
              the Cantor set. These results, and particularly the methods of proof, suggest
              that much stronger theorems should hold. Specifically, consider a minimal and
              essentially free action of a countable amenable group on a compact metric space
              with finite covering dimension. The ultimate goal is to prove that the
              transformation group C*-algebra of such an action is a direct limit, with no
              dimension growth, of recursive subhomogeneous C*-algebras. In particular, it
              should have stable rank one, real rank zero or one, and cancellation of
              projections. While the conjecture as stated is still far from being proved, the
              Principal Investigator hopes to make substantial progress by analyzing various
              aspects of it in isolation from each other; the idea is to put the pieces
              together afterwards. The Principal Investigator also proposes to investigate,
              where appropriate, the smooth counterparts of such algebras, to investigate the
              isomorphism classification of the resulting C*-algebras, and to investigate
              connections with orbit equivalence problems in topological dynamics.

A
              dynamical system consists of a space and a collection of transformations of
              this space satisfying suitable mathematical conditions.  As an example,
              consider the set of possible states of a physical system and its time
              evolution: the transformations specify for a given time and initial state what
              state the system will be in after that much time has passed. Another example
              would be a physical space and its underlying symmetries, such as the Lorentz
              group acting on space-time in special relativity. If the relation between the
              space and the transformations is simple, the dynamical system can be studied
              directly. When this relation is complicated, it is often useful to introduce
              additional objects; one natural such object is the transformation group
              C*-algebra. An additional reason for studying this algebra is that sometimes
              objects of physical interest are more closely related to it than to the
              original dynamical system; an example is the Schroedinger operator for an
              electron moving in a quasicrystal. The purpose of this project is to understand
              the transformation group C*-algebras in cases in which the dynamical system is
              complicated, but in which the C*-algebra seems likely to be amenable to
              analysis. (This incluse the quasicrystal case.) It also seeks to better
              understand the relation between the dynamical system and the C*-algebra, and to
              begin the analysis, in appropriate cases, of objects that are related to the
              C*-algebra but preserve more information about the original dynamics.

