Title       : Residual Strength After Liquefaction: A Rheological Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0302971

Award Number: 0302971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16889              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro A. De Alba padealba@hypatia.unh.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1576,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Predicting the residual strength available after liquefaction can be a major
              factor in the design of tailings dams and hydraulic-fill dams for stability. 
              As strong-motion data accumulate in seismic areas, design acceleration levels
              tend to become progressively higher.  Consequently, dams must be periodically
              reevaluated for safety, and remediation may become necessary.  Analysis may
              show that liquefaction of at least part of the dam is probable, and remediation
              measures often hinge on the calculated stability of the structure assuming that
              there are zones within the dam that liquefy and the strength reduces to a
              residual value.  In some cases, remedial measures may become so costly that the
              dam is instead taken out of service, disrupting water supply, power generation
              or mining operations.  Thus, the prediction of residual strength can have an
              important effect on dam safety and operation decisions.

Residual strengths
              used in earthquake engineering practice are basically values back calculated
              from a limited number of case histories of liquefaction failures.  There is
              considerable scatter in the data, probably due to the unique features of each
              failed embankment.  Laboratory studies of residual strength after liquefaction
              are desirable to study this behavior under controlled conditions, and a large
              number of studies have been done.  However, even for very similar materials,
              the values obtained vary widely, and tend to be much higher than those back
              calculated from field cases.  It is very likely that the problem resides in the
              types of apparatus used, which generally do not have the capability of applying
              shear strains at a rate comparable to that of liquefaction slides, nor can they
              produce an amount of strain comparable to that observed in field cases.

This
              exploratory project will test the basic idea using a different approach.  Earth
              scientists have for many years studied debris-flow slides in partly saturated
              natural materials, with a wide range of particle sizes.  They have concluded
              that sliding behavior is a complex phenomenon controlled by particle/particle
              and fluid/particle interactions that are best interpreted as a form of viscous
              flow.  However, a practical quantitative model of this behavior is still not
              available, due to the many variables involved.  In the earth dams of concern,
              the range of particle sizes is generally smaller, and the material is
              saturated, which is a somewhat simpler case.  This study measures the stresses
              around a small sphere pulled through liquefied soil, and analyzes the motion of
              the sphere in liquefied sand to see if it can be interpreted using a viscous
              flow (rheological) model.  Both the rate of strain and the amount of relative
              strain are controlled to more closely resemble field values than in previous
              experiments.

If successful, this approach could lead to a better
              understanding of liquefied sand behavior during flow sliding, and provide a new
              experimental approach for studying the influence of different factors (e.g.
              fines content) on sliding behavior.  Residual strength would thus not be
              modeled as a unique value, but would include a limiting threshold strength plus
              the strength gain due to the speed of viscous flow.
 


