Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Latino (Im)migration to the Upper South
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0302502

Award Number: 0302502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8556               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Schein schein@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research analyzes a new chapter in understandings of race and ethnicity in
              the US South, through an examination of Hispanic migration to Nashville,
              Tennessee, and Lexington, Kentucky.  These are two mid-size southern cities
              that have experienced rapid Hispanic population increases in the last decade
              and dramatic changes in the local labor force's racial and ethnic composition. 
              Although many US regions are experiencing Hispanic migration, this growth has
              particularly strong implications in the US South, where historically, a
              black-white racial binary has organized social, economic, and political
              interactions and large-scale voluntary in-migration has not been common.  To
              investigate these implications, this study proceeds through two phases that
              together provide a broad overview of Hispanic migration to each city and more
              detailed case studies of this migration.  First, it examines how Hispanic
              migration to Lexington and Nashville has developed and how Hispanics are
              entering local labor markets through sectors such as construction and
              agriculture.  These initial research questions will be answered through content
              analyses of each city's major newspapers and public documents on Hispanic
              communities, analyses of recent census data, and interviews with spokespersons
              of local immigrant service providers.  Second, the research shifts scales to
              local worksites that have recently become dependent on Hispanic labor.  In case
              studies of these worksites, it addresses how the growing number of Hispanics at
              Lexington and Nashville worksites is affecting workplace practices and social
              relations.  This research question will be addressed through participant
              observation and interviews with Hispanic workers and their non-Hispanic
              co-workers and supervisors concerning daily workplace practices and social
              interactions.  The project will use data from these interviews to investigate
              how ethnicity and race differentiate workplace experiences for workers and
              supervisors and what workplace changes the increase in Hispanic labor has
              necessitated.  Workplace comparisons will be made both within and between
              Nashville and Lexington, to assess the impacts of factors, such as worksite
              gender and ethnic integration and each city's broader management of Hispanic
              migration, on social interactions between and among workers and
              supervisors.

This study will make three theoretical contributions to
              geographical scholarship through these case studies.  First, in a national
              context, it will provide a point of comparison for broader immigration research
              organized in a bi-coastal pattern that privileges large gateway cities and,
              thus, will reflect the changing geographies of Hispanic migration to and within
              the US.  Second, the study will examine changes in racial identities and race
              relations within the US South outside the racial dualism that has long
              dominated such studies and at the very onset of Hispanic migration to the
              region.  Finally, through detailed case studies of racial and ethnic
              interactions at Lexington and Nashville workplaces, the research will add a
              qualitative richness to studies of immigration to the US upper South, a part of
              the United States off the maps of most immigration studies but clearly visible
              to more and more Hispanic men and women.  In addition to these theoretical
              contributions, this research will have broader societal impacts, particularly
              within Kentucky and Tennessee.  It has created opportunities for
              collaborations, such as joint survey initiatives and database sharing, with
              various immigrant-service organizations.  These and other partnerships will
              allow much broader dissemination of results, through avenues including public
              presentations and progress reports within each city.  In this way, the Hispanic
              communities on which the research is based and the groups that work with them
              will benefit from the research in which they participated. As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

