Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interactions between Higher Education Systems
               and Industry for Regional Economic Growth/Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0302670

Award Number: 0302670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11024              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Harrington jwh@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Given the widely recognized increase in the economic importance of individual
              skills, organizational knowledge, and technical innovation, higher education
              systems have been increasingly emphasized in economic growth and development
              theory and practice. Universities and colleges are recognized as important
              providers of human capital and contributors to industrial innovation, a key to
              bring economic growth and development. Many regional economic
              growth/development policies pursue closer links between higher education
              systems and industry. The purpose of this research is to understand the role of
              higher education systems in regional economic growth and development under
              different regional settings: various firm strategies influenced by firm size,
              universities and colleges of varying quality, physical and organizational
              distance, technological match between industry and universities/colleges, and
              regional institutional arrangements. Diverse channels (labor supply,
              occupational training, research collaboration, and spin-offs) and different
              geographies of interactions between higher education systems and industry will
              be examined in Information Technology-related fields and industry sectors for
              metropolitan areas in the U.S. Secondary data including patent citation will be
              analyzed, and a mail questionnaire survey will be conducted both to
              universities/colleges and firms in three case study areas. 

This research
              should contribute to understanding the role of higher education systems in
              providing human capital and fostering industrial innovation. It will provide an
              indication of strategies of firms and higher education institutions in their
              interactions and contribute to building regional policies for industry-higher
              education system interactions that reflect characteristics of
              universities/colleges and industry in different settings of regions. The
              results of this study will be valuable to practitioners in the field of
              regional economic growth and development.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

