Title       : ATE Centers -- Environmental Resource Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0302799

Award Number: 0302799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1455367            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen J. Kabat Lensch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk J. Laflin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hazardous materials Traini
	      ATEEC
	      Bettendorf, IA  527226804    563/441-4090

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project the Advanced Technology Environmental Education
              Center
(ATEEC) is significantly expanding and enhancing its national
              Environmental Resource Center capabilities.

Intellectual Merit
The project
              is identifying environmental education information, materials, research,
              expertise and support services of value to educators, workers, and the general
              public; and to organizing and presenting this body of knowledge and services in
              formats that are stimulating and accessible to a broad array of user groups.
              The project builds upon ATEEC's eight years of experience and success in
              serving as a national NSF Center of Excellence.

Broad Impact 
The
              Environmental Resource Center is having broad impact on a wide diversity of
              user groups. These include: high school and community college students in
              environmental courses; community college students across the spectrum of
              academic and technical programs; workers engaged in retraining or skill
              upgrade; military and security personnel; community and municipal leaders
              including Tribal colleges; the environmental research establishment; the
              general public; and international environmental educators. The Environmental
              Resource Center supports and promotes quality teaching and learning by: 
(a)
              strengthening the Center's many communication vehicles; 
(b) closely linking
              NSF-ATE environmental projects to the Center;
(c) initiating efforts to extend
              environmental education across the curriculum; 
(d) focusing upon ease of
              access and providing information electronically; 
(e) capturing emerging
              environmental research and making it available to students and all of society,
              
(f) developing a segmented marketing approach to attract underrepresented
              students to the field; 
(g) providing a comprehensive mentoring program to
              environmental programs at colleges across the nation; 
(h) providing
              stimulating professional development opportunities; and, 
(i) expanding access
              to on-line environmental courses and materials. 

ATEEC continues its focus
              on inclusiveness with special outreach activities to
underrepresented groups
              through the composition of advisory committees and the selection of people to
              highlight in marketing materials as well as by ensuring a diversity of
              attendees at professional development events and special activities with
              underrepresented groups. This project also continues to focus upon fostering
              the integration of emerging research and education. Much of the strength of the
              Environmental Resource Center derive from the manner in which ATEEC leverages
              its capabilities and expertise with the capabilities and expertise of its many
              collaborators and partners. The Environmental Resource Center is advancing
              environmental knowledge and understanding in high schools, community colleges,
              the workforce, and society at-large.

