Title       : Application and Ar-Ar Calibration of Uranium-Series Dating at Olorgesailie
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0302157

Award Number: 0302157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Ludwig kludwig@bgc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Deino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren D. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berkeley Geochronology Cen
	      2455 Ridge Road
	      Berkeley, CA  947091211    510/644-9200

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Kenneth Ludwig, Alan
              Deino, and Warren Sharp will collect and analyze samples for Argon-Argon
              dating, and analyze existing samples for uranium-series dating, from the
              classic Olorgesailie archeological area in southern Kenya.  Olorgesailie, with
              its extremely rich accumulation of early human artefacts and continuous record
              of human occupation, has been studied for over 50 years, most recently by the
              ongoing studies or Richard Potts and colleagues at the Smithsonian Institution.
               The pre-600,000 year record at Olorgesailie is now well-dated, as the result
              of previous Argon-Argon dating by Deino.  However, the younger part of the
              record, which contains one of the very few records of the transition from
              Acheulean technology (a relatively crude stone industry characteristic of
              relatively small-brained Homo Erectus) to Middle Stone Age technology (related
              to anatomically near-modern humans) of  is only now being studied in detail. 
              Few dates of any kind are available for this part of the Olorgesailie
              stratigraphy, however, and none of high precision.  It is just this gap which
              we will fill with the research of this proposal, in part by applying a
              relatively new but well-validated and extremely high-precision method -
              uranium-series by thermal ionization mass spectrometry - to new types of
              samples that have been shown to be common at Olorgesailie.  These new types of
              samples - of which the most promising is root-casts which have been replaced by
              the opal form of silica - have not been used before for Uranium-series dating,
              so their reliability and accuracy are unvalidated.  Fortunately (and very
              unusually), such validation can be carried out at Olorgesailie because of the
              common co-occurrence of samples for uranium-series dating with samples of
              volcanic ash for Argon-Argon dating, the latter being the acknowledged "gold
              standard" for archaeological dating in the time-range of 50,000 years to
              millions of years.  If validated, the uranium-series dates can then be used to
              provide age control on those parts of the younger Olorgesailie beds that lack
              ash beds suitable for Argon-Argon dating.  With the anticipated age control
              provided by this research, the detailed studies by Smithsonian Institute
              scientists (who recently obtained a 5-year National Science Foundation grant to
              continue their research at Olorgesailie) on the evolution of human culture and
              behavior in East Africa will gain an invaluable and precise dimension of age
              control at a level that is unprecedented in a single-site study of long-term
              human evolution over the past 500,000 years.  This project will thus by highly
              synergistic with other federally-funded research (especially given the
              significant degree of cost sharing of this project), as well as providing
              valuable experience to a work-study student in applied high-technology methods
              in archeology and geology.


