Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Re-Scaling Conservation: The Political Ecology
               of Community-Based Forest Management in Southern Malawi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0302636

Award Number: 0302636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ezekiel Kalipeni kalipeni@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade, the re-scaling of conservation from the national to the
              village scale through the community-based natural resources management model
              has become the trend in African conservation, yet its relative benefits and
              costs remain unclear. While there are strong theoretical reasons in development
              and common-pool resource management theory to expect both conservation and
              social benefits from the model, initial evidence suggests that expected
              improvements in levels of local participation, conservation initiatives and
              resource management, economic and administrative efficiency, social equity, and
              development often fail to materialize. The objective of this research is to
              conduct an assessment of community-based forest management (CBFM) in southern
              Malawi as a solution to the escalating environmental "crisis" arising from
              deforestation; and to find out what "works" and does not, and why. Cognizant of
              the complexity of human/environment interactions, the study will integrate
              biophysical and socio-spatial factors of landscape change in the miombo biome
              of southern Africa. The central hypothesis is that a mismatch exists between
              the ecological scale of forest fragmentation processes and the social scale of
              forest management imposed by the CBFM model, and that this scalar mismatch
              undermines forest conservation efforts. To test this, the study will combine
              approaches from landscape ecology, land use/land cover change studies,
              common-pool resource theory, and political ecology. Data will be gathered from
              (1) satellite image analyses to give a characterization of recent forest cover
              and landscape pattern changes, (2) spatially explicit analyses that combine
              statistical regression with geographic information systems (GIS) to provide a
              linkage to possible social and biophysical factors associated with that change,
              and 3) various interview and survey methods to provide contextual information
              on the sociospatial and institutional relations of power surrounding forest
              access and use in the study area, and to compare local perceptions of forest
              change processes with patterns revealed by remotely sensed data. 

The
              results should contribute a unique spatio-scalar approach that combines social
              and biophysical considerations in the analysis of deforestation and
              conservation interventions in Africa. The results will questions standard
              paradigms surrounding the CBFM model and common-pool resources theory,  and
              help to reconcile the promise  and rhetoric of CBFM to reality, suggest
              improvements in the analysis and practice of CBFM, and raise policy and
              research questions that allow the search for alternatives to CBNRM where
              needed. The study will also increase the current knowledge in the land use and
              land cover change literature on the methodological challenges for integrating
              dominant paradigms in the social and natural sciences, and integrating social
              and biophysical data in explaining such change, and specifically demonstrate
              contributions of geographic political ecology to such literature. The study
              will also add to knowledge on the change processes taking place in the miombo
              biome of southern Africa.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

