Title       : Coulomb Blockade and Few-Electron Energy Spectra of Quantum Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0302222

Award Number: 0302222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Zaslavsky Alexander_Zaslavsky@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,1688,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Condensed Matter Physics project deals with nanoscale quantum conductors
              that have a circular, i. e., "ring" geometry.  Ideal quantum rings have a
              number of fascinating properties: Ground-state persistent currents, strong
              Aharonov-Bohm interference effects, and an oscillatory dependence of the
              wavefunctions and all thermodynamic quantities on the enclosed magnetic flux,
              with period given by the flux quantum.  This research will focus on the
              properties of individual and multiply-connected quantum rings in the
              few-electron and Coulomb blockade regime.  The PI has recently discovered that
              inhomogeneous strain relaxation in sufficiently small Si/SiGe quantum dots
              leads to ring-like confinement.  Additionally, tunneling measurements have
              confirmed the expected flux quantum periodicity.  Given the control over device
              geometry, elliptical rings and coupled ring structures will be fabricated and
              few-carrier energy spectra, spin interactions, and Coulomb blockade effects
              will be measured as these rings are filled by carriers from zero carrier
              occupancy.  The work will be coupled to state-of-the-art finite-element solid
              mechanics simulations.  Experiment data will provide feedback on the interplay
              between electronic and mechanical properties in nanostructures.  Graduate
              students involved in this research will acquire a full complement of skills,
              from deep-submicron fabrication, to low-temperature, low-signal measurements,
              to numerical simulation, which will prepare them for employment in academia,
              the semiconductor industry, or government.  A teaching plan focusing on
              improved undergraduate teaching of core courses in the Electrical Engineering
              program is an integral part of this project.  

Ideal quantum rings, in which
              carriers follow circular orbits without scattering, have fascinating
              properties: Currents that flow without resistance, phase-interference effects,
              and the oscillatory dependence of carrier energies and wavefunctions on the
              enclosed magnetic flux.  Quantum rings have also been suggested as possible
              building blocks for quantum computation.  This research will focus on the
              properties of individual and multiply-connected quantum rings in the
              few-electron and Coulomb blockade regime, where the one carrier circling the
              ring affects the probability of another tunneling into the ring.  The rings in
              question arise from the strain relaxation at the sidewalls of etched
              structures, making it possible to control the geometry (circular or elliptical)
              and the topology (single-ring or multiply-connected ring) of the system. 
              Tunneling current measurements will study the carrier and spin interactions as
              these rings are filled by carriers from zero; the results will be compared to
              state-of-the-art finite-element strain simulations and our data will provide
              experimental feedback on the interplay between electronic and mechanical
              properties of nanostructures. Graduate students involved in this research will
              acquire a full complement of skills, preparing them for research jobs in
              academia, the semiconductor industry, or government.  A teaching plan focusing
              on improved undergraduate teaching of core courses in the Electrical
              Engineering program is an integral part of the project. 


