Title       : Dissertation Research: Women's Worlds Among the Kalasha of Northwestern
               Pakistan: Subordination, Empowerment, and the Menstrual House
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9307296

Award Number: 9307296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Knauft antbk@anthro.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Knauft/Maggi  9307296    The Kalasha of northwestern Pakistan consider the
              menstrual house to be the most impure place in the valley.  Yet this very
              institution seems to empower Kalasha women, offering them an opportunity to
              define themselves in ways which seem to directly oppose dominant ideologies. 
              The proposed research explores this tension by examining the way in which
              gender is constructed and used in three distinct arenas:  community ritual
              practice, the everyday world of house and family, and the bashali, or menstrual
              house.  Through carefully tracing individual women as they move through these
              social contexts, the investigator will evaluate the thesis that gendered
              meanings and practices vary systematically across social arenas.  I hypothesize
              that male insistence on female impurity and its entailments in female
              subordinate practice will be most emphasized in community ritual practice, less
              evident in village and household relations, and strongly countered with
              female-centric ideology and expressions of women's power and autonomy in the
              menstrual house.  This contextual variation calls into question monolithic
              attributions  of "female status" or "identity" and provides for a more complex
              and penetrating understanding of how women's experiences are constituted.   
              The proposed project will contribute significantly to a more balanced
              ethnographic understanding of the Hindu Kush cultural region, will apply and
              refine sociocultural theories of gender, and will provide detailed ethnographic
              information on the menstrual house, and institution which has been much
              fantasized about but not carefully studied.  ***    Q  QcS S S S T TzUsW     ~ 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               Õ                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              !         !         !              F           
                               l             l                                 S    Times New
              Roman    Symbol  & Arial  1 Pres Elite  5 Courier New  & Casablanca           l
                                  "             h        %   %              d         e   
              knauft maggi abstract abstract award abstract knauft maggi  Raymond Hames
              Raymond Hames                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
