Title       : Research into Network Algorithms and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9307045

Award Number: 9307045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge A. Plotkin plotkin@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew V. Goldberg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This project studies fundamental network problems,  including  maximum, 
              minimum-cost, and multicommodity flow problems, shortest  paths problems, 
              minimum cut problems, and the assignment problem.  These are  classical 
              combinatorial optimization problems that have  numerous applications. 
              Designing efficient algorithms and  understanding combinatorial structure of 
              these problems is  important from a theoretical point of view because these 
              problems  are very basic to the field, and from a practical point of view 
              because instances of these problems need to be solved.  There is  interest in 
              extending the results of this work to related  problems, such as linear 
              programming.    The research has three interrelated components: (1) the first  
              involves a  better understanding of combinatorial structure of these problems; 
              (2) the second involves development of new  algorithms that improve currently
              known  bounds on  the problem  complexity; and (3) the third   involves
              experimental evaluation of the  currently existing and newly   developed
              algorithms.    The worst-case  theoretical efficiency does not always
              correspond  to practical  efficiency.  Experimental evaluation of existing and 
              newly developed  algorithms for some of  the problems is of  interest.  The
              experimental research also motivates  theoretical research by identifying
              subproblems and data  structures needed by  the implementations and by
              suggesting  variations of  algorithms which may be  more efficient than the 
              original variants originating  in theoretical research.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
