Title       : CAA: Comparative Studies of Spatial and Nonspatial Memory inMammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9307317

Award Number: 9307317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucia F. Jacobs squirrel@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              The size of the hippocampus, a brain structure known to mediate                
              spatial learning, is correlated with spatial behavior in wild                  
              rodents.  In this career advancement award, a comparison will be               
              made of the spatial learning ability of different species on                   
              abstract learning tasks.  Using operant methods, pairs of species,             
              known to differ in hippocampal size, will be compared on two                   
              operant tasks known to involve the hippocampus (spatial delayed-               
              nonmatch-to-sample, simultaneous odor discrimination) and two tasks            
              that do not require an intact hippocampus (auditory discrimination,            
              successive olfactory discrimination).  Two species of kangaroo rats            
              (Dipodomys) and two species of voles (Microtus) will be compared.              
              It is predicted that, within each genus, the species with a larger             
              hippocampus will show superior learning ability on hippocampal                 
              tasks, particularly the spatial task, but that there should be no              
              species differences on nonhippocampal tasks.                                   
                                                                                             
              The proposed study will be significant for several reasons.  It                
              will be the first comparative study of different types of memory in            
              wild rodents.  Because our understanding of the physiology of                  
              memory in mammals is largely based on the laboratory rat, it is                
              important to know if laboratory rats show typical rodent behavior.             
              More importantly, comparative studies of closely related rodent                
              species can identify what features of a species's habitat can lead             
              to increases in learning and memory capacity.  Not only can this               
              study help us to understand the evolution of animal memory, but it             
              can also help us to understand the hippocampus, a structure                    
              critical in both animal and human memory.  For example, no other               
              animal study has attempted to compare performance of different                 
              tasks involving the hippocampus (maze learning, odor                           
              discrimination).  Thus, this study will shed light not only on the             
              evolution of memory, but on the function of the hippocampus, a                 
              structure of clinical importance.
