Title       : CAA: Characterization of the Molting Cycle of a Freshwater Crustacean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9307290

Award Number: 9307290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele G. Wheatly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9222,
Abstract    :
              This is a career advancement award to enable the PI to acquire,                
              through a sabbatical leave, modern techniques required to examine              
              the molecular biology of the crayfish calcium ion ATPase and                   
              factors that regulate expression of the gene during the molting                
              cycle.  Preliminary work has employed a heterologous mammalian cDNA            
              probe to identify mRNA for the crayfish calcium ion ATPase.  The               
              objective of the present study is to generate tissue specific                  
              authentic cDNA clones of the crayfish calcium ion ATPase using                 
              strategies based on the polymerase chain reaction and on screening             
              a cDNA library.  The full length clone will be sequenced and                   
              compared to published mammalian sequences.  Partial clones will be             
              used to study expression of calcium ion ATPase in tissues of                   
              interest during the molting cycle using quantitative Northern                  
              blotting and Western analysis, and to examine possible regulation              
              of gene expression in vitro by the steroid ecdysone.  Findings will            
              further our understanding of the evolution of ion motive ATPases               
              and perhaps assist in understanding their form and function.                   
              Finally the steroidal regulation of calcium ion transfer is of                 
              significance for all animals that form mineralized tissues.                    
                                                                                             
              In living organisms the mineral calcium plays many important                   
              biological roles.  In animals it is crucial for the formation of               
              the skeleton.  This process is easily studied in crustaceans                   
              (crabs, lobsters, crayfish).  First their skeleton is external and             
              therefore far more accessible than that of vertebrates.  More                  
              importantly, in order to grow, they undergo the molting cycle.  In             
              preparation for molting, calcium is reabsorbed from the old                    
              skeleton and effectively recycled; at the same time a new soft                 
              skeleton is laid down underneath.  After "busting out" of the old              
              skeleton, the new skeleton is rapidly mineralized to provide                   
              protection.  Therefore at different stages in the molting cycle                
              scientists can study the movement of calcium either into or out of             
              the skeleton.  This movement is effected by protein "pumps" on the             
              surface of specialized cells.  Manufacture of protein is under the             
              control of genetic material in the nucleus of the cell.  In this               
              grant appropriate genetic information that codes for the calcium               
              pump will be extracted to assess what regulates the abundance and              
              activity of the calcium pumps at different stages in the molting               
              cycle.
