Title       : Synthesis, Bonding and Properties of Conjugated Transition- Metal Complexes and
               Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9307013

Award Number: 9307013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Hopkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Hopkins, of the University of Pittsburgh, will                       
              synthesize transition-metal compounds having conjugated bonding                
              systems with support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                     
              Organometallic Chemistry Program.  These compounds will                        
              incorporate an array of bonds to achieve this objective,                       
              including metal-metal delta bonds, metal-ligand pi bonds, and                  
              ligand pi bonds.  In most of the compounds the metal centers                   
              will be molybdenum and tungsten, and the ligands will include                  
              phosphines, alkylidenes, alkylidynes, and bridging dienes.  The                
              compounds to be synthesized will include both monomeric species                
              as well as polymers.  Assessments of the effects of conjugation                
              will be made by low-temperature electronic spectroscopy, NMR                   
              spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and resonance Raman                           
              spectroscopy.  A number of the compounds will be investigated                  
              for their nonlinear optical properties.  The research will                     
              generate an extensive comparison of the effects of conjugation                 
              in inorganic and their classic organic analogues.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              A fundamental concept in organic chemistry is conjugation,                     
              i.e., the effects of alternating single and multiple bonds.                    
              Conjugation has major effects on the properties of organic                     
              molecules.  The present study will determine the degree to                     
              which this concept can be applied to inorganic chemistry, and                  
              in particular to compounds where metal atoms are essential                     
              participants in the conjugation.  Metal atoms have more diverse                
              modes of bonding than carbon atoms (including "delta" bonding),                
              which raises the potential for conjugation in such systems to                  
              have even more profound effects than are found in organic                      
              systems.  The present research will entail the synthesis of                    
              compounds designed to engage in conjugation, the elucidation of                
              their structures, and measurements of their physical properties.
