Title       : Interfacial Driven Convection - The Effect of Side Walls on Pattern Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1999   
File        : a9307819

Award Number: 9307819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranga Narayanan ranga@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1406,9231,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT -- CTS-9307819  Narayanan     The proposed research focuses on
              interfacial driven convection in stacked fluid layers. A specific goal is the
              study of the effect of sidewalls on the flow pattern or structure in superposed
              fluids. The PI expects to find the following: a) the conditions for the onset
              of convection in a bounded two layer system and compare our results to
              calculations, b) the flow pattern development in the post onset region for a
              bi-layer system, c) the onset conditions in a tri-layer where the physics are
              considerably different than a two layer system.     An experiment will be
              conducted in circular and rectangular cylindrical containers and the
              multi-layer will be bounded in the vertical direction by two horizontal
              thermally conducting plates, one of which is transparent. The critical
              conditions for onset will be determined by the enhancement of heat transfer and
              flow visualization. A Schmidt-Milverton type of plot will be made. A detailed
              model of the convective flow will be compared with the experimental results.   
               This problem is rich in physics on account of multi-layer interaction in
              interfacial driven or Marangoni-B nard convection. This interaction is
              connected to the heat and momentum transfer at the interface. Even geometric
              changes affect the relative importance that the interface plays. This problem
              is also an important prototype of liquid encapsulated crystal growth and this
              is explained in the proposal.  The PI expects that this study will answer some
              important questions on convective instability as related to multi-layer
              interaction, geometric variables, properties and heating direction. Such issues
              include the role of gravitational effects and a possible counter mechanism
              between buoyancy and interfacial tension gradient induced convection. The
              interesting aspect of generation of oscillations and the enhancement of heat
              transfer in this region will affect application to the problem of encapsulated
              crystal growth.
