Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Geometry and Topology of Manifolds and Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9307583

Award Number: 9307583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mladen Bestvina   (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey Mess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns several open problems and questions at              
              the interface between geometry, topology, and group theory.                    
              Specifically, Bestvina intends to continue working with R. D.                  
              Edwards on the Hilbert-Smith Conjecture, a classical conjecture                
              on the topology of manifolds, and on a program of research                     
              related to the dynamics of group actions on R-trees.  The notion               
              of an R-tree, i.e. a tree-like space modelled on the real                      
              numbers, has developed into a powerful research tool in topology               
              and group theory in recent years.  Understanding R-trees will                  
              lead to a deeper understanding of the degeneration of the                      
              universal cover of a negatively curved space.  Certain phenomena               
              first discovered in 3-dimensional manifolds, in particular, the                
              characteristic submanifold, the classification of surface                      
              homeomorphisms, and the role of measured laminations, have a                   
              wider significance in light of this new theory, as has become                  
              clear through the work of Gromov, Rips, and many others.  Mess                 
              intends to work on various problems about discrete and geometric               
              structures, especially in connection with 3-manifolds.  Work in                
              this area over the past decade has made clear the power of                     
              geometric analysis in developing new insights.  With this in                   
              mind, Mess seeks to understand more about the deformations of                  
              geometric structures by means of laminations, and to understand                
              uniformly quasisymmetric groups.                                               
                   The group of symmetries of an object plays an important role              
              in an attempt to understand the object.  Conversely, abstract                  
              groups often arise as groups of symmetries of a space.  In the                 
              cases this project deals with, the spaces have fractal nature,                 
              which makes for a fascinating interplay between the fractal                    
              geometry of the spaces and the properties of the groups.                       
              (Fractal geometry is characterized by the repetition of similar                
              structures on ever smaller scales in an infinite recession.  It                
              is a notion that has come into its own in recent years as a                    
              natural theoretical construct for a computer to model, and, as a               
              practical matter, it has enabled computer graphics to depict                   
              unusually realistic mountains, clouds, etc. from remarkably                    
              simple programs.)
