Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Uniqueness of Multiple Trigonometric Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9307242

Award Number: 9307242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall Ash mash@condor.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      25 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              Ash  9307242       This mathematical research focuses on problems of multiple 
              trigonometric series.  The single-variable theory of such series  could be said
              to be reasonably well understood, although there  remain a number of
              exceedingly difficult problems still  unresolved.  Multiple trigonometric
              series have intrinsic  problems which do not allow for simple generalizations
              from the  one-variable case.  One of the primary issues of convergence  results
              from the variety of natural ways one can try to sum a  multiple series.  Even
              the most basic question of whether  a multiple series which sums to the zero
              function must have  zero coefficients (Cantor's theorem in one variable).  If 
              unrestricted rectangular convergence is allowed then the answer  is affirmative
              in all dimensions.  This was only proved two years  ago.  For spherical and
              square convergence, the answer is still  unknown, except for spherical in
              dimension two.  Work will be  done to extend the recent results obtained for
              rectangular  convergence to the remaining cases. Related work will be carried 
              out on the almost everywhere convergence of multiple Fourier  series.  For
              functions in the Lebesgue spaces with power less  than two, spherical partial
              sums may diverge on sets of positive  measure.  Nothing is known about
              convergence for functions with  finite quadratic norm (Hilbert space).  To
              study this class, work  will first concentrate on radial functions to see if 
              counterexamples already exist within this group.       The influence of
              trigonometric series on the development  of modern mathematical analysis is
              impossible to record in  this short space.  The basic U.S. graduate courses are
              replete  with byproducts of the research efforts that have gone into  our
              attempts to understand these building blocks of  mathematical synthesis used
              universally by all scientists.  Yet  the underlying summability properties of
              the series remains, to a  large extent, an enigma.  This project seeks to build
              on a  remarkable breakthrough which  occurred when four researchers  settled
              one of the most famous unsolved problems of multiple  Fourier series two years
              ago.  ***
