Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Large-Scale-Ratio Space-Time Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1996     
File        : a9307893

Award Number: 9307893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry S. Greenside hsg@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Greenside         The investigator undertakes computational and theoretical 
              efforts to understand extensively chaotic nonequilibrium systems  such as those
              studied experimentally in fluid, laser, and chemical  systems by Ahlers,
              Behringer, Gauthier, Gollub, Kolodner, and  Swinney.  A spatially-homogeneous
              chaotic system is defined to be  extensive if its fractal dimension grows
              linearly with the volume  of the system.  Theorists hope that extensively
              chaotic systems  may be amenable to a thermodynamic-like description that 
              characterizes complex systems through laws relating intensive and  extensive
              macroscopic (coarse-grained) variables.  Specific  research problems studied
              are: the identification and analysis of  simplified mathematical models that
              have experimentally relevant  features of extensive chaos; a comparison of
              different spatial  correlation lengths for quantifying extensive chaos; a study
              of  the variation of dimension density and other intensive variables  with
              system inhomogeneities; the development and testing of  algorithms for
              estimating fractal dimension densities from time  series; the analysis of the
              lengthscales and timescales involved  with the transition between non-extensive
              and extensive chaos; the  identification and testing of Langevin descriptions
              of extensively  chaotic regimes; and the development of related numerical 
              algorithms and optimized computer codes for scalable parallel  computers such
              as the Duke 32-node CM-5 computer.       Many nonequilibrium physical
              systems---both natural and  manmade---are complex in that they evolve
              nonperiodically in both  space and time.  An increasingly important theme in
              many modern  areas of science and technology is how to quantify this complex 
              behavior.  Why do systems become complex as one varies parameters,  how does
              one complex state differ from another, and how does  transport of energy and
              matter depend on complexity?  Recent  experimental advances in the study of
              fluid flow, of liquid  crystals, of nonlinear optics,  and of chemical
              excitable media  have identified a new and important class of complex systems
              to  understand: large homogeneous sustained nonequilibrium systems  that
              undergo a sudden change from a time-independent homogeneous  state to a
              non-transient temporally and spatially disordered state  (spatiotemporal
              chaos).  This research uses a combination of  mathematical analysis and
              large-scale parallel computing to  explore the properties of carefully chosen
              models of  spatiotemporal chaos.  Of particular interest is to understand how 
              complexity grows with the size of a physical system (extensive  chaos) and
              whether a thermodynamic-like description can be found  in the limit of infinite
              system size.  An improved understanding of  extensive chaos should improve the
              design, control, and  optimization of engineering applications, improve the
              forecasting  of nonperiodic time series, and improve the validation, 
              efficiency, and accuracy of large-scale computer simulations for  complex
              systems.
