Title       : Polyribosome Targeting to Microtubules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1993      
File        : a9307112

Award Number: 9307112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy A. Suprenant ksupre@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9237,
Abstract    :
                 One of the hallmarks of a eukaryotic lifestyle is that RNA is               
              distributed unequally among cellular compartments.  Highly                     
              regulated mechanisms exist for the temporal and spatial assignment             
              of specific RNA molecules to particular nuclear and cytoplasmic                
              domains.  Intricate cellular machinery accurately sorts,                       
              distributes, targets, and anchors the RNA to its final destination.            
              This asymmetric sorting of RNA and protein underlies the classical             
              embryological concept of cytoplasmic localization, whereby cell                
              fate is specified by the region of egg cytoplasm inherited.  Recent            
              studies indicate that the nonrandom distribution of messenger RNA              
              and protein may be intrinsically generated by the egg cytoskeleton.            
              Similarly, in differentiated cells, the cytoskeleton may provide an            
              asymmetric framework for the regional distribution of mRNA and                 
              perhaps the functional specification of cellular processes such as             
              dendrites, axons, or lamellipodia.  Each of the major cytoskeletal             
              structures --- microtubules, intermediate filaments, and                       
              microfilaments --- have been implicated in the general process of              
              mRNA localization.  One approach to understanding how and why the              
              translational machinery interacts with the cytoskeleton is to                  
              biochemically purify and reconstitute ribosomes and other                      
              translational factors with mRNA and a single cytoskeletal element.             
              Progress towards realizing this goal has been made with the in                 
              vitro assembly and isolation of a polyribosome -poly(A)+RNA-                   
              microtubule complex from sea urchin eggs and embryos.  The goal of             
              this pilot study is to test the hypotheses that the mRNAs in these             
              complexes code for microtubule-associated proteins and that the                
              polysomes are targeted to microtubules via nascent polypeptides                
              with microtubule-binding domains at their amino termini.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              There is a long and controversial history of observations of                   
              messenger RNA association with cytoskeletal elements in various                
              cell types (including mammalian cells, higher plant cells, and                 
              invertebrate cells).  These observations have been difficult to                
              interpret due to problems of potential artifacts arising from the              
              methods employed to study the phenomena.  The approach to be used              
              in this pilot study, using in vitro techniques and highly purified             
              components, will allow the stated hypothesis to be tested while                
              avoiding some of the artifacts that plagued earlier approaches to              
              the problem.   Because of the controversy surrounding the general              
              field of study, and the degree of risk in this pilot project, a                
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research is an appropriate funding                 
              mechanism for the project.
