Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Self-Affine Sets, Random Walks on Discrete Groups, and
               Thermodynamic Formalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9307855

Award Number: 9307855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Lalley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research will be conducted in three related areas:                        
              Self-Affine Sets and Expanding Maps; Probability on Discrete                   
              Groups; and Thermodynamic Formalism.  The ultimate goal is to                  
              contribute to the understanding of statistical behavior in                     
              nonconformal expansive and hyperbolic dynamical systems,                       
              especially as it relates to the "fractal" geometry of repellers.               
              The more immediate aim is to elucidate the structure of                        
              self-affine sets,e.g., the relationship between Hausdorff and                  
              Bouligand dimensions and the natural dynamical systems associated              
              with such sets.  For this a better understanding of random matrix              
              products, especially their large deviations, seems essential. The              
              study of random matrix products, in turn, leads to questions                   
              concerning random walks on nonabelian groups and the theory of                 
              Gibbs measures and thermodynamic formalism: in particular, a                   
              significant component of the research effort will be directed to               
              producing accurate approximations to the transition probabilities              
              of random walks on discrete groups and semigroups, and developing              
              a theory of Ruelle-like operators appropriate for this purpose.                
                   Investigations into the behavior of certain chaotic                       
              dynamical systems will be conducted, in particular, those in                   
              which the phase space is stretched at different rates in                       
              different directions.  Unusual geometric objects that arise in                 
              the "phase spaces" of these dynamical systems, called                          
              "repellers," and their connections with the nature of the                      
              dynamics will be closely studied.  The theory of probability                   
              predominates in these investigations: questions involving the                  
              behavior of "typical" orbits are studied by choosing an initial                
              state of the system "at random." This viewpoint leads to related               
              problems in probability theory proper, mostly concerned with                   
              certain features of random walks on state spaces with a highly                 
              noneuclidean geometry ("matrix groups").
