Title       : Carbohydrate Receptors and Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9307282

Award Number: 9307282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric V. Anslyn anslyn@ccwf.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two related topics will be studied: (1) Carbohydrate                           
              molecular recognition in lipophilic and hydrophilic solvents                   
              and (2) Multifunctional catalysis in phosphatediester                          
              hydrolysis. In the first topic, molecules will be                              
              investigated where two intramolecular hydrogen bonds are                       
              both retained and broken in complexation to a receptor with                    
              two hydrogen bonds. Multiple energetic analyses will be used                   
              to probe the strength of intra- and inter-molecular hydrogen                   
              bonds. Bis-boronic acid molecular hosts that are                               
              complementary to pyranoses will be prepared that incorporate                   
              a redox metal ion that will change coordination on                             
              complexing glucose. The difference in redox potential of the                   
              metal ion, with different coordination spheres, will be the                    
              basis of an electrochemical sensor for glucose in aqueous                      
              medium. In the second topic, bifunctional catalysis by two                     
              guanidinium groups in stabilization of the transition state                    
              of phosphatediester hydrolysis will be studied.                                
              Trifunctional catalysis with a general base and                                
              tetrafunctional catalysis with an added metal ion will be                      
              studied in the guanidinium system. A method for predicting                     
              enzyme rate enhancements based on binding constants and                        
              transition state analogs will be applied to the proposed                       
              multi-functional catalysis.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              work of Professor Eric V. Anslyn at the University of Texas,                   
              Austin. Two topics will be pursed: (1) Complexation of                         
              carbohydrates and (2) Multifunctional catalysis of                             
              phosphatediesters, which are important in biological                           
              systems. In the first project, molecules that complex                          
              carbohydrates such as glucose in both water and organic                        
              solvents will be prepared. The structures of these complexes                   
              and their stabilities will be determined. A metal ion, such                    
              as an iron, will be incorporated into the receptor, which                      
              will be probed electrochemically to determine if glucose is                    
              complexed. This will lead to a practical application for the                   
              detection of glucose in aqueous solutions. In the second                       
              topic, a molecule will be prepared that uses two organic                       
              groups as catalytic centers for phosphatediester hydrolysis.                   
              This system will be expanded stepwise to include a basic                       
              functional group, and a metal ion. It is anticipated that                      
              this synthetic system will mimic an enzyme.
