Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Group Proposal in Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9307987

Award Number: 9307987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197439             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Alan Taylor taylor@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel M. Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Berit Stensones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Taylor  9307987       Much of the work supported by this award focuses on 
              mathematical problems related to function theory and geometric  questions in
              the theory of several complex variables.  The work  includes a search for
              geometric conditions an algebraic variety  must satisfy in order that the
              plurisubharmonic functions on the  variety satisfy estimates in the spirit of
              the classical  Phragmen-Lindelof Theorem.  The reason for this line of 
              investigation stems from the observation that many properties of  constant
              coefficient partial differential operators are  characterized by estimates for
              plurisubharmonic functions on a  variety.  A second line of study concerns
              ongoing work  combining complex analysis and multiserver queues.  The 
              connection derives from the fact that the Markov chains  underlying the queuing
              processes are given by homogeneous,  vector-valued random walks on the integer
              points in the positive  orthant.  The resulting functional equation has
              coefficients that  are matrix-valued analytic functions and the unknowns are 
              vector-valued analytic functions. Other work centers on the  embeddability for
              three-dimensional Cauchy-Riemann manifolds.   The goal here is to test whether
              all embeddable Cauchy-Riemann  structure on the 3-sphere must be the boundary
              for a strictly  pseudoconvex domain diffeomorphic to the complex 2-ball.  A
              final  topic concerns the classification of harmonic maps on the  2-shpere into
              the projectivized Hilbert space and the question of  whether they must factor
              through a finite-dimensional  sub-projective space.       Several complex
              variables arose at the beginning of the  century as a natural outgrowth of
              studies of functions of one  complex variable.  It became clear early on that
              the theory  differed widely from it predecessor.  The underlying geometry was 
              far more difficult to grasp and the function theory had far more  affinity with
              partial differential operators of first order.  It  thus grew as a hybrid
              subject combining deep characteristics of   differential geometry and
              differential equations.  Many of the  fundamental structures were defined in
              the last three decades.  Current studies still concentrate on understanding
              these basic  mathematical forms.  ***
