Title       : Phylogenetic Study of Homosporous Ferns Based on Chloroplast and Nuclear Gene
               Sequences and Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1993   
File        : a9307068

Award Number: 9307068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Gastony gastony@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9307068 Gastony          Difficulties in identifying natural evolutionary
              lineages in homosporous ferns and in circumscribing these lineages as genera
              and families are often attributed to the effects of convergent and parallel
              evolution on the morphological characters traditionally used in fern taxonomy. 
              The cheilanthoid ferns, largely adapted to semi desert conditions or to other
              seasonally dry habitats, are the foremost examples of this.  Molecular data
              from the chloroplast genome are unaffected by habitat related selective forces
              acting on morphology and are beginning to yield fundamental insights into fern
              evolution and phylogeny.  However, recent studies on flowering plants have
              found some instances in which hybridization, introgression, or lineage sorting
              may lead to significant error in phylogenetic reconstructions based solely on
              the cytoplasmically inherited chloroplast genome.  This raises concern for
              ferns because the high incidence of allopolyploid hybrids and high basic
              chromosome numbers in ferns suggest that modern ferns may be paleopolyploids in
              whose ancestry reticulate evolution has been important.  Dr. Gastony's project
              will serve as a model study for homosporous ferns by using cladistically
              analyzed molecular data from chloroplast DNA (nucleotide sequences of the   
              rbc   L gene) to provide fundamental new insights into cheilanthoid fern
              relationships and phylogeny.  Importantly also, the project will use molecular
              data f rom the nuclear genome (nucleotide sequences of ribosomal DNA) to
              compare with chloroplast DNA results and with traditional morphological
              characters. %%%          The combined morphological and molecular data will
              form the basis of a revised classification of cheilanthoid ferns and of a
              robust reconstruction of their phylogenetic relationships, on a worldwide
              basis.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
