Title       : Performance Analysis of Doppler Lidar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1995      
File        : a9307233

Award Number: 9307233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rod G. Frehlich rgf@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9307233  Frehlich  Research is proposed to analyze the performance of Doppler
              lidar for real system configurations, including the effects of refrctive
              turbulence and detector geometry.  System performane is determined by the
              Signal to Noise Ratio(SNR) and the heterodyne efficiency.  Analytic and
              numerical calculations of SNR and heterodyne efficiency for real and idealized
              Doppler lidar systems will be performed.  The statistical behavior of estimates
              for heterodyne effciency will be determined for single element and
              multi-element detectors.  The use of multi-element detectors for improving
              system performance when refractive turbulence is important will be investigated
              theoretically and with numerical simulations.  The simulations will also
              produce accurate statistical description of real Doppler lidar signal
              fluctuations due to the random aerosol targets and refractive turbulence.  The
              different physical mechanisms of Doppler lidar performance will be investigated
              and the regimes where simple analytic results are valid will be determined. 
              The calculations will emphasize the shorter wavelenghts of solid state lidar
              systems.  The effects of wind variations in the sensing volume of Doppler lidar
              will be determined theoretically for realistic atmospheric conditions.  New
              data analysis techniques will be applied to Doppler lidar data to verify the
              theoretical results and produce accurate estimates of the atomospheric
              decorrelation time for Doppler lidar signals.  This is essential for evaluating
              the accuracy of Doppler Lidar velocity estimates.  The performace of Doppler
              Lidar velocity estimation for various wavelengths and system designs will be
              determined using the theoretical results of the atmospheric decorrelation
              calculations and the experimental measurements.  This research will help design
              the next generation of solid state Doppler lidars for remote sensing of the
              atmosphere.  ***
