Title       : Molecular Analysis of Naturally Occurring Copia Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1995  
File        : a9307220

Award Number: 9307220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323750             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. McDonald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9104,9169,BIOT,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9307220  McDonald       Molecular Analysis of Naturally Occurring copia
              Variations   (John F. McDonald, P.I.)%%%       There is an ever growing body of
              evidence that retroviruses  and retroviral-like transposable elements are a
              major source of  mutation in higher eukaryotes including humans.  The 
              ramifications of this fact extend to a broad range of biological  disciplines
              ranging from medicine to evolutionary genetics.   Although we now know a great
              deal on the mechanisms of how  retroviral-like elements  alter the expression
              of chromosomal  genes, little or nothing is  known concerning how retroviral 
              elements are maintained and spread within and between species.   In addition,
              it remains a mystery as to how retroviral elements  insertion mutations which
              are usually non-adaptive can  nevertheless increase in frequency and eventually
              become "fixed"  (i.e., attain a frequency of 1.00) in some species over time.  
              One possibility is that host chromosomal genes capable of  suppressing the
              mutant phenotype associated with retroviral  insertion variants are present in
              natural populations and serve  to harbor insertion variants by shielding them
              from natural  selection.  Dr. McDonald hypothesizes that insertion variants may
               periodically increase in frequency due to "founder events" or  other such
              forced inbreeding effects.%%%       Over the next three years Dr. McDonald will
              study the  mechanisms by which the copia retroviral-like element is  maintained
              and spread through natural populations of Drosophila.   Drosophila is an ideal
              system for these studies because  retroviral elements are well understood in
              this organism and  element frequency and mutational effects can be easily
              monitored.    Dr. McDonald will be concentrating on identifying host genes 
              capable of trans-regulating retroviral elements and studying  their frequency
              and mode of action in a number of Drosophila  species.  The DNA sequence of
              copia elements isolated from a  number of Drosophila populations and species
              will be analyzed t o  determine if structural differences which might affect
              element  activity are variable in natural populations.  Dr. McDonald will 
              search for transregulatory effects by introducing the same copia  LTR-reporter
              gene construct into several strains and species and  monitoring the effect of
              LTR mediated expression.  Results will  shed light on the factors determining
              the maintenance and spread  of retroviral elements in natural populations and
              species of all  higher eukaryotes.  ***
