Title       : U.S.-Czech Joint Fund Research on Modelling and Numerical Computations in
               Geodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9307379

Award Number: 9307379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : May 14,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Ctirad Matyska   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Charles University
	      Maloslanske nam 25 118 000 Praha
	      , CZ  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510801   Geodynamics & Mettallogen               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Czech Joint                                   
              Fund research project between Dr. Ctirad                                       
              Matyska, Charles University, and Dr. David A.                                  
              Yuen, University of Minnesota, is to                                           
              investigate outstanding questions in solid                                     
              earth geophysics from theoretical and numerical                                
              approaches.  They will study the problem of the                                
              interaction between mantle convection and                                      
              movements of the Earth's rotational axis.  Of                                  
              special focus will be the quantitative                                         
              evaluation of large-scale mean-flow in the                                     
              Earth's mantle.  Additionally they will conduct                                
              a detailed inversion study of the transport                                    
              properties inside the Earth from satellite                                     
              observations of the gravity field and internal                                 
              density fields inferred from seismology.  This                                 
              will be done using the latest experimental                                     
              constraints on the relationship between seismic                                
              velocity variations and density changes.  Based                                
              on their results , the researchers hope to                                     
              develop numerical algorithms suitable for                                      
              solving three-dimensional mantle convection                                    
              problems on supercomputers and for rapid                                       
              interpolation of large datasets needed for                                     
              graphics and visualization.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research in geophysics fulfills the                                       
              program objective of advancing scientific                                      
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in the                                   
              U.S. and Czech Republic to combine                                             
              complementary talents and pool research                                        
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest                                   
              and competence.  Funds for the project are                                     
              awarded through the US-Czech Joint Fund,                                       
              Prague, in accordance with established                                         
              guidelines.
