Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis and Optimization of the Effective Properties of
               Inhomogeneous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9307324

Award Number: 9307324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Golden golden@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrej V. Cherkaev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This research will analyze the effective properties of a                  
              broad range of inhomogeneous materials that arise in many                      
              technologically and scientifically important applications.  One                
              of the main thrusts of this work will be to obtain rigorous                    
              bounds on effective properties, such as conductivity and                       
              elasticity.  The investigators will consider general composite                 
              materials, particularly those composed of three or more                        
              components, which are particularly important in applications, and              
              for which there are many challenging mathematical questions that               
              remain open.  Also to be studied is the behavior of media whose                
              components have highly contrasting properties and where                        
              percolation effects play the dominant role in the analysis.                    
              Examples where such an analysis is necessary include                           
              semiconductors, cermets, porous media, sea ice, and the fracture               
              of metals.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
                   There has been a dramatic increase in the use of composite                
              and inhomogeneous materials for technological and scientific                   
              applications over the last two decades.  One of the key questions              
              underlying the efficient design and use of such materials is how               
              the arrangement of the various components determines the                       
              effective properties, such as strength or conductivity, of the                 
              composite.  The overall goal of the proposed research is to                    
              develop mathematical techniques which provide a quantitative                   
              understanding of this connection between mixture geometry and                  
              effective properties.
