Title       : Ion and Thermal-Induced Transformations in Metal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1993  
File        : a9307662

Award Number: 9307662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Mayer james.mayer@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Silvanus S. Lau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                                                  9307662  Mayer     Fundamental materials
              science investigations of ion- and  thermal-induced transformations/reactions
              in III-V semiconductors  and copper-silicon systems will be conducted.  It is
              proposed to  investigate the reactions of alloying elements in Cu and oxide 
              formation in Cu3Si/Si.  The study of alloying elements in Cu will  be an
              important factor in the use of Cu for integrated circuit  metallization for
              adhesion and formation of diffusion barriers.  The controlled formation of
              oxide layers at low process  temperatures may offer a method to form this oxide
              on silicon.  Since electrical activation of Si-implanted GaAs is a sensitive 
              function of implantation dose-rate and substrate temperature it  is planned to
              investigate ion induced defect interaction by the  combined use of electron
              microscopy, electrical analysis and ion  channeling.  %%%  An understanding of
              dopant activation in ion-implanted GaAs is  important to integrated circuit
              applications.  Research will be  conducted on fundamental ion-solid
              interactions as well as  factors that influence the electronic and optical
              properties of  semiconductor material combinations with potential advantages in
               electronics and photonics applications.  The semiconductor  material
              combinations under study have wide applicability in  electronic and
              optoelectronic devices; thus the research results  are expected to provide the
              basis for continued improvements in  the performance of advanced devices and
              integrated circuits of  the type used in computing, information processing, and
               telecommunications.  ***
