Title       : Why so Little Planktonic Nitrogen Fixation in Estuaries-- Limitation by Trace
               Metals and Grazing?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1994  
File        : a9307337

Award Number: 9307337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Howarth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9307337  Howarth  In the temperate zone, primary production is limited by
              Nitrogen  in many if not most estuaries and by Phosphorus  in most lakes.  One
              major reason for these difference is a difference in Nitrogen  fixation by
              planktonic cyanobacteria (blue-green algae).  In lakes, temporary shortages of
              Nitrogen  relative to Phosphorus  result in blooms of cyanobacteria which fix
              Nitrogen  and help alleviate the shortage.  This does not occur in most
              estuaries, where planktonic cyanobacteria capable of Nitrogen  fixation are
              rare and rates of Nitrogen  fixation low.  The work proposed here addresses
              this difference with a series of mesocosm experiments using water from
              Narragansett Bay.  The central hypothesis of the proposal is that low
              availability's of  Iron and/or Molibdium  in estuaries lead to slow growth
              rates of planktonic, Nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria.  This leaves the
              cyanobacteria vulnerable to consumption by generalized grazing animals, leading
              to low population numbers and rates of Nitrogen  fixation.  The hypothesis does
              not state that herbivores in estuaries specifically feed on cyanobacteria. 
              Rather, it is hypothesized that estuarine ecosystems may contain high numbers
              of generalized grazers which are capable of feeding on fine cyanobacterial
              filaments and are likely to do so incidentally to their feeding on other
              particles when such filaments are present.  Zooplankton, ctenophores, and a
              variety of bivalves (mussels, oysters, clams) are examples of such filter
              feeding animals common in estuaries which may fed on cyanobacterial filaments. 
              With sufficiently high growth rates, cyanobacteria might bloom and fix Nitrogen
               even with high rates of grazing, as can happen in freshwater.  Iron and/or
              Molibdium availability's are viewed as central to the growth rate of
              cyanobacteria based on previous research; the requirement for both in Nitrogen
              fixation is high.  %%%  Mesocosm experiments form the core of the proposed
              research.  Estuarine water and plankton assemblages will be subje ct to
              different additions of Iron, Molibdium, and Phosphorus, and levels of grazing
              will be controlled by adding predators on herbivorous zooplankton.  Silversides
              (Menidia beryllina) will likely be the predator used.  Interactions of metal
              additions with the fish additions in replicated experiments are of particular
              interest.  Response variables to be measured include rates of Nitrogen
              fixation, abundance's of cyanobacteria and heterocysts, composition of the
              zooplankton community, assimilation, of Molimdium, Sultan, and Iron, and
              concentrations of nutrients, Molibdium, and Iron.   A recently published method
              using oxine to complex labile forms of Iron will be used to estimate Iron
              availability to phytoplankton.  The proposed research should lead to a better
              understanding of the factors which exclude Nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria from
              the plankton of most temperate estuaries and coastal seas, helping to cause
              Nitrogen limitation of net primary production in these systems.  The research
              should also lead to a better understanding of the controls on Nitrogen fixation
              by plankton in lakes, and therefore on the maintenance of Phosphorus limitation
              even in lakes receiving nutrient loading with low Nitrogen:Phosphorus.  Thus,
              the research relates to the practical issue of management strategies to control
              eutrophication in both estuaries and lakes.
