Title       : Torque Investigations in High-Tc Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1997     
File        : a9307581

Award Number: 9307581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Farrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project involves collaboration between an experimentalist at              
              Case Western University and a theorist at Iowa State University.               
              The research involves the use of high sensitivity equilibrium                  
              torque measurements of high-Tc materials.  The theoretical goal of             
              the project is to determine how the behavior of the torque in such             
              materials is influenced by thermal fluctuations.  The experimental             
              thrust is focused on three areas:  the flux-lattice melting                    
              transition in yttrium-barium-copper-oxide materials, the magnetic              
              field dependence of this transition, and the determination of the              
              symmetry of the superconducting ground state in this material.                 
              These results should lead to a deeper understanding of the behavior            
              of high-Tc materials in a magnetic field.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              High temperature superconductors are being widely studied, in part             
              because of their potential for carrying large electrical currents              
              without the energy losses found in ordinary conductors such as                 
              copper and aluminum.  However, the very large currents in the                  
              superconductors generate very large magnetic fields which react                
              back on the superconductors and eventually destroy the                         
              superconducting state.  Thus the behavior of superconductors in                
              magnetic fields is a fundamental issue in high-Tc materials                    
              research.  This project involves both a theorist and                           
              experimentalist in an effective collaboration which is focused on              
              studying the forces experience by a superconductor in a magnetic               
              field.  This magnetic torque measurement apparatus is unique in the            
              US and is providing important fundamental information that is also             
              useful in technological applications.
