Title       : Dissertation Research: A Political History of Quirigua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1993      
File        : a9307752

Award Number: 9307752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9693               (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Schele   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Linda Schele, Mr. Matthew Looper will               
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will study the                  
              stelae erected between ca. 720 to 810 AD at the Guatemalan Mayan               
              site of Quirigua. Stelae are large stone plaques with carved                   
              inscriptions and produced and erected by ruling kings  to proclaim             
              their victories and legitimize their power. They thus contain a                
              wealth of political and historic information. The site of Quirigua             
              covers approximately 4 square kilometers and contains a large                  
              number of such remains. With National Science Foundation support,              
              Mr. Looper will study the Quirigua stelae and with a professional              
              photographer make a detailed and complete record of them. Copies of            
              all photographs will be given to the government of Guatemala and to            
              the University of Texas at Austin where they will serve as a                   
              permanent archive and record available to all researchers.                     
                                                                                             
              In recent years great strides have been made in decoding this                  
              previously unreadable language and the results have provided a                 
              wealth of information for archaeologists. Mr. Looper wishes to                 
              understand how the many Mayan states developed and Quirigua,                   
              because of its many stelae provides an excellent test case. Work               
              done to date indicates that this small polity grew rapidly between             
              ca. 720 and 810 AD and that a number of monumental buildings were              
              erected during this period. The stelae appear to record this                   
              process and the wars which the Quirigua people fought and                      
              apparently won. Through analysis of the writing Mr. Looper hopes to            
              gain insight into how this occurred.                                           
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data in the form of high quality photographs which will be of value            
              to many researchers. Mayan artifacts are often stolen for illicit              
              sale and such a record is essential. The project will also serve to            
              increase our understanding of how Mayan peoples developed state                
              level organization in a difficult lowland tropical environment.                
              Finally, it will assist in the training of a promising young                   
              scientist.
