Title       : The Cuzco Ceque System Research Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1993 
File        : a9307513

Award Number: 9307513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34695              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian S. Bauer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for New World Archaeo
	      6101 Broad Street
	      Bethesda, MD  208162613    312/667-7408

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307513  Bauer    With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Brian
              Bauer  will continue his examination of the Incan system of "ceques" which 
              were described by the earliest Spanish missionaries. What these  documents
              indicate is a system of 41 or 42 hypothetical lines  (ceques) which radiated
              out from the capitol of Cuzco in highland  Peru. Religious shrines were
              situated at various points along these  lines. In past work Dr. Bauer has
              located some of these shrines on  the ground but many remain unknown. To
              complete this task, he and  Peruvian colleagues will first study archival
              documents which are  located in repositories in both Peru and Spain. They will
              then  conduct field survey to locate the places actually described. On  this
              basis it will be possible to reconstruct the ceque system and  how it
              functioned and then to situate it in real space.    Although this research may
              appear to concern an esoteric ritual  system, it in fact provides direct
              insight into how states  function. Lacking both writing and wheeled vehicles,
              the Inca  rulers created an empire which extended beyond the boundaries of 
              present day Peru and which integrated large numbers of people who  spoke
              diverse languages and lived in very different environments.  A question which
              interests archaeologists is how such a complex  system was maintained.
              Information available indicates that the  ceque system played a central role in
              this. Ceque lines marked  major boundaries between kin groups and the
              maintenance of  individual shrines was also based on kin and social ties. Thus
              the  ceque system may provide insight and a way to approach more basic 
              questions of social organization.     This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also
              increase our  understanding of how complex societies develop and are
              maintained.  ***
