Title       : U.S.-Bulgarian Research on Microfibrillar-Reinforced Polycondensate Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9307812

Award Number: 9307812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41478              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerold M. Schultz schultz@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 5958,
Abstract    :
              9307812  Schultz    This grant supports U.S.-Bulgaria joint cooperative research
              on "Microfibrillar-Reinforce  Polycondensate Blends" between Dr. Jerold M.
              Schultz of the University of Delaware and  Dr. Stoyko Fakirov of the Laboratory
              on Structure and Properties of Polymers, Sofia  University, Bulgaria. 
              Previously, the researchers showed that incompatible polycondensate  blends of
              unusually high uniaxial mechanical properties can be produced through a three- 
              stage process: (1) uniaxial cold-drawing; (2) heat-treatment above the melting
              or softening  temperature of the discontinuous phase; and (3) continued
              heat-treatment in a temperature  range consistent with solid-state exchange
              reaction.  Indications are that fibrillar crystals or  glass are formed in the
              first stage, and the "matrix" is relaxed in the second.  The most  unusual
              stage is the third, where the fibril/matrix interface appears to be
              compatibilized  through an exchange reaction.  With this grant, the preceding
              process will be further studied,  to characterize and test all phases of the
              suggested structure development.  Kinetic studies of  interfacial exchange
              reactions in model incompatible systems will be followed by  spectroscopic and
              other means.  The researchers will examine the microfibrillar  microstructural
              hypothesis using transmission electron microscope methods developed  recently
              in their laboratory and also by small-angle x-ray scattering.  They will follow
               changes in chain orientations with processing time and temperature, using
              infrared  dichronism.  They will measure mechanical properties of selected
              materials and fit them to  models they developed using microstructural
              characterizations.    This research in materials science fulfills the program
              objectives of advancing science by  enabling leading experts in the U.S. and
              Bulgaria to combine complementary talents and pool  research resources in areas
              of strong mutual interest and competence.
