Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships of Dennstaedtioid Ferns Based on DNA Sequence
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9307091

Award Number: 9307091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Wolf wolf@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307091 Wolf          Determining evolutionary relationships among organisms is
              a major goal of systematists; phylogenies provide the necessary historical
              framework for studies of evolutionary processes, biogeographic dispersal and
              migration, and coevolution with symbionts and other ecological associates. 
              Recently, DNA sequencing has provided valuable new data for phylogenetic
              analysis of plants, especially the flowering plants.  Historically, ferns have
              been the subject of major taxonomic confusion, particularly at upper taxonomic
              ranks (families and orders), and a wide variety of classifications and
              hypothetical phylogenies exists for this group of ca. 10,000 species.  This
              confusion results in part from a lack of morphological features that are both
              variable in their expression or form species to species but coherent enough to
              be homologous, that is, similar and comparable across numerous different
              species and genera.  DNA sequence data are ideal characters for both reasons:
              variable among taxa but comparable across all of them, at least for
              functionally important genes.  Dr. Paul Wolf of Utah State University is
              sequencing DNA from the chloroplast photosynthetic gene for numerous fern
              species allied in the "dennstaedtioid" group, in order to reconstruct their
              phylogeny under the working assumption that mutational differences track the
              divergence of species through time. %%%          An independent molecular set
              of data will provide a valuable tool for assessing the origins of various fern
              groups as well as for examining patterns of morphological and chromosomal
              variation.  The dennstaedtioid ferns constitute a major component of the
              leptosporangiate or "higher" ferns, and  the data from this study will
              ultimately be combined with results from other laboratories working on DNA
              sequencing in ferns to provide a phylogenetic framework for all major fern
              lineages.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
