Title       : The Impact of Economic Development on the Extraction of Non-Timber Forest
               Products by the Sumu Indians of Nicaragua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1996     
File        : a9307588

Award Number: 9307588
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342554             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Ashton pashton@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo A. Godoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas V. Brokaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0314000   Rural Development                       
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1577,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               Economic development in the tropics has led to wide-spread destruction of rain
              forests largely through commercial logging and clear cutting for ranching and
              agriculture.  Less dramatically but just as importantly, non-timber forest
              products (NTFP) such as medicinal plants, fish and game animals, and certain
              vegetable resources (e.g., Brazil nuts) are strongly effected by economic
              development.  Therefore, it is important to understand the local and global
              forces advance or retard the destruction of biodiversity in tropical forests. 
              The goal of this project is to measure, for the first time, the impact of
              economic development on the extraction of non-timber forest products by the
              Sumu Indians of Nicaragua.  The researchers hypothesize that economic
              development through increases in income: (1) encourages foraging specialization
              (i.e., harvesting of wild resources), resulting in the extraction of fewer
              NTFP; (2) increases the share of household income from non-foraging
              occupations; (3) produces a yearly value from NTFP extraction of about US$
              50/hectare; and (4) produces depletion of NTFP entering commercial channels and
              sustainable extraction of NTFP facing cheaper industrial substitutes.  To test
              these hypotheses a multidisciplinary team of researchers (a botanist,
              zoologist, and anthropologist) will conduct field research over the course of
              2.5 years in a poor and in a rich Sumu village to collect data on resource
              collection, ecological sustainability of foraging activities, household
              economics, and the value of NTFP.  These villages were specially selected based
              on pilot research conducted in 1992.     This research  should provide us
              fundamental information on the human, ecological, and economic impact of
              development in the rain forest.  The researchers hope to provide an explanation
              of why and how people's use of both forest plants and animals changes as an
              economy modernizes.  They will provide the first rigorous, quantitative
              estimate of the yearly value of the forest from foraging.  Finally, they will
              provide one of the first direct measures of the short-run sustainability of
              human foraging in the tropical rain forest.    ts meeting                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              !         !         !              F                           
               v             v                                 (    Times New Roman    Symbol
               & Arial                             ?   "             h                       
                           i    abstract for ashton godoy abstract godoy ashton godoy
              abstract  Raymond Hames Raymond Hames                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
