Title       : Identification of Phagocytosis Receptors in Dictyostelium discoideum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9307356

Award Number: 9307356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine P. Chia cchia@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9221,
Abstract    :
                In phagocytosis, binding of a particle signals a rapid                       
              recruitment and polymerization of actin that drives pseudopod                  
              extension.  Although cell-surface receptors for phagocytosis have              
              been identified in platelet, macrophages, and polymorphonuclear                
              leukocytes, the molecular details of how receptors signal the                  
              dynamic changes in the actin-based cytoskeleton are unclear.  The              
              long-term goal of this project is to understand how specific                   
              localized cytoskeletal responses occur in the phagocytic process.              
              The specific objective of this proposal is to identify cell surface            
              molecules responsible for the recognition and binding step of                  
              phagocytosis.  A primarily biochemical approach will be used, with             
              the expectation that the knowledge gained will guide a molecular               
              genetic analysis of phagocytosis in Dictyostelium discoideum.                  
              The purpose of these studies is to generate a based of knowledge               
              that will support and guide future biochemical and genetic analyses            
              of the interactions between cell surface molecules and the                     
              cytoskeleton.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Phagocytosis, or "cell eating," is a process whereby cells bind to             
              and subsequently internalize particulate materials.  The process is            
              critical to free-living amoebae, who depend on phagocytosis of food            
              particles (e.g., bacteria) for their survival.  The process is also            
              critical to mechanisms of animal defense against microbial                     
              pathogens, both in invertebrate systems, where phagocytic cells may            
              be the primary mechanism of immunity against such pathogens, and in            
              higher animals, including man where phagocytosis serves a far more             
              complex series of immune functions.  Phagocytic processes are also             
              involved in a broad variety of non-immune related cellular "clean-             
              up" functions, such as the clearing of smoke particles in the lungs            
              by macrophages.  This project has the potential to increase our                
              understanding of this fundamental life process.
