Title       : Surfactant Interfacial Transport from Growing Drops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9307890

Award Number: 9307890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clayton J. Radke radke@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9307890  Radke    The PI has pioneered a novel growing-drop technique for
              studying  rates of adsorption at fluid/fluid interfaces.  The proposed 
              growing-drop method relates the instantaneous pressure and size  of a radically
              expanding liquid drop to the dynamic interfacial  tension arising from sorption
              of surface-active solutes.   Preliminary measurements with surfactant-free
              surfaces obtain  accurate tension values over a wide range of tensions and
              times  and for both liquid/gas and liquid/liquid interfaces.  Initial  modeling
              establishes that transport of a prototype nonionic  surfactant, 1-decanol, to a
              radically growing aqueous/air  surfaces is diffusion limited.    This powerful
              growing-up technique is applied to study  interfacial sorption rates and
              mechanisms.  Ionic surfactants,  micellar solutions, and surfactant mixtures
              will be studied, and  theories describing their transport will be developed and
              tested  experimentally.   Adsorption rates of synthetic and natural 
              macromolecules will be measured.  Studies of nonionic ethylene  oxide
              surfactants ranging from two to thousands of ethylene  oxide groups will be
              undertaken with the goal of defining the  limit at which molecular
              reorientation at the interface causes  a change from diffusion to kinetic 
              controlled adsorption.   Likewise, adsorption kinetics of proteins will be
              investigated  in an attempt to determine the conditions and time scale over 
              which proteins retain their native configurations at  interfaces.. Finally, the
              growing-drop apparatus will be  modified to incorporate oscillating drops, this
              opening new  vistas for understanding desorption kinetics.  Transport of
              surface-active substances to and across liquid/gas  and liquid/liquid
              interfaces is a determining factor in foam and  emulsion stability, in bubble
              and droplet motion during two-  phase separation processes, and in multiphase
              and dispersed  phase flow in porous media.  In enzyme catalyzed bioreactors, 
              rates of enzyme adsorption at interfaces are a significant   factor limiting
              maximum reactor residence times.  In  biopharmaceutical packaging of proteins
              competitive rates of  adsorption between proteins and surfactants can determine
              the  chemical stability of the protein during shipping.  At a  fundamental
              level, kinetic rates of adsorption reflect molecular  configuration  and
              orientation at interfaces.  Dynamic  interfacial tension is a convenient probe
              for revealing  surfactant adsorption/desorption kinetics at deformable 
              interfaces.  Upon disturbing the interface, the interfacial  tension is
              monitored as a function of time to expose surfactant  accumulation.
