Title       : A stable Intron from the T Cell Receptor Gene: Characterization and Functional
               Role
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1993      
File        : a9307963

Award Number: 9307963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miles Wilkinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9307963  Wilkinson  The topic of this application is an unusual intron which 
              accumulates following its excision from pre-mRNA.  This intron,  IVS1 CB1 is
              derived from the T cell receptor-B (TCR-B) gene.  Our  published investigations
              suggest that IVS1 CB1 may employ at least  two different mechanisms to escape
              the degradation pathway that  other known mammalian introns follow: i) IVS1 CB1
              may be  inefficiently debranched, thus preventing exonuclease attack; @)  IVS1
              CB1 may reside in a protective microenvironment in the  nucleus, such as in the
              splicesome itself.  Our preliminary studies  also suggest that this stable
              intron may perform a function.   Indirect evidence suggests that the presence
              of IVS1 CB1 inhibits  the disassembly of the splicesome following the splicing
              reactions.  The specific aims of this project are:  1) To determine the 
              location of spliced IVS1 CB1 transcripts within the nucleus.  This  aim is
              important because it will provide clues as to how this  intron escapes
              degradation. It may also help reveal how IVS1 CB1  can impede the transport of
              mature TCR-B transcripts out of the  nucleus. In situ hybridization will be
              used to localize IVS1 CB1    within the nucleus.  Cofraction experiments will
              be performed to  investigate the relationship of IVS1 CB1 and splicesomal
              components  in vivo and vitro.  2) To determine if IVS1 CB1 lariats perform a 
              regulatory function.  In particular, it will be investigated  whether the
              presence of IVS1CB1 inhibits the transport of fully  spliced transcripts our of
              the nucleus.  For this study,  transfection experiments will be performed in
              mammalian cell lines.  It will be assessed if the rate of nuclear
              -to-cytoplasmic  transport and/or some other post-transcriptional event is
              affected  by this intron.  It will be determined if IVS1 CB1 and/or adjacent 
              exon sequences are responsible for the post-transcriptional  regulation.  It
              will also be examined if this intron can confer  this regulation to
              heterologous transcripts in cis.  %%%  The maj ority of higher eukaryotic genes
              are interrupted by non-  coding segments termed introns.  These introns are
              excised from  precursor RNAs in the form of lariat structures by the process of
               RNA splicing.  Introns have been an enigma since their original  discovery in
              the late 1970's.  The fate of introns after their  excision from precursor RNAs
              is not well understood.  It is not  clear if mammalian introns posses function
              capabilities.  We intend  to explore these issues by studying an unusual intron
              that remains  stable after it is spliced our of nuclear transcripts.  This 
              intron, IVS1 CB1, is derived from precursor transcripts encoding  the T cell
              receptor (TCR) for antigen.  We will investigate whether  IVS1CB1 functions to
              control the expression of TCR protein in T  cells.  Another issue that has not
              been resolved in the RNA  splicing field is the precise mechanism by which
              introns are  spliced out of precursor transcripts.  An impediment to research
              on  this topic is the lack of systems to study intermediate stages of  the
              splicing in vivo.  Our studies suggest that the presence of  IVS1CB1 inhibits
              the disassembly of the splicesome following  splicing in vivo.  Thus, IVS1CB1
              may be useful tool to study  intermediate stages of RNA splicing in intact
              cells.
