Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Bayesian Inference Design and Bayes -
               Classical Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9307727

Award Number: 9307727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anirban Dasgupta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jayanta K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, we propose to consider problems in Bayesian asymptotics,
              design,  inference, and the question of synthesis with classical procedures. In
               asymptotics, we propose to consider the limiting behavior of the posterior in 
              nonregular problems. Design of experiments will be considered in nonlinear 
              models, when prior information is available about parameters of the model. Such
               nonlinear models typically are hard to deal with because of dependence of the 
              design on the parameters themselves. In particular, we will try to use the rich
               linear theory by approximating nonlinear response functions by linear
              functions,  such as polynomials. We also will derive designs that give a
              preexperimental  guarantee of pos data accuracy, uniformly in the data whenever
              possible. Finally,  in canonical Exponential family problems, we will derive
              priors for which the  implied Bayes procedure has classically satisfactory
              property.  Much of existing statistical methodology has evolved from methods of
              so called  classical statistics. In comparison, the alternative methods known
              as Bayesian  methods are still growing.  Nevertheless, it is now recognized by
              the community  as a whole that Bayesian methods can be very useful as tools for
              statistical data  analysis. In this project, our goal is two fold:  first, to
              study alternative  Bayesian methods in important classes of statistical
              problems, such as designing  statistical surveys, and second, to bridge the two
              methods of statistical  analysis together by studying Bayesian methods which
              are also acceptable  according to classical criteria.
