Title       : Mathematical Sciences: New Resonance Phenomena and Adiabatic Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9307074

Award Number: 9307074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tasso J. Kaper tasso@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent advances in geometric singular perturbation theory                 
              have established a powerful set of tools for analyzing resonance               
              phenomena and homoclinic orbits in systems of ordinary                         
              differential equations with two time or length scales. Among                   
              these new tools is the Exponentially Small Exchange Lemma (called              
              EXSEL), which was developed by the author with C. Jones and N.                 
              Kopell, and which has been used successfully to prove the                      
              existence of multiple fast-pulse homoclinic orbits in perturbed                
              multi-degree-of-freedom Hamiltonian systems, as well as in                     
              traveling wave problems for coupled reaction diffusion equations.              
              It is proposed here to analyze four fundamental aspects of                     
              resonance phenomena in singularly-perturbed systems: (1) the                   
              existence of resonant sub- and super-harmonic orbits, (2) the                  
              geometry of islands of stability, which are obstructions to                    
              mixing in adiabatic chaos, (3) the resonant response of                        
              homoclinic structures in the forced, damped sine-Gordon equation               
              which are conjectured to be sources of chaos, (4) the existence                
              of periodic orbits in problems of passage throughresonance.                    
                   Physical problems with multiple time scales arise in many                 
              branches of science and technology, including fluid mechanics,                 
              accelerator dynamics, plasma physics, neurophysiology, and                     
              biology. These problems are modeled mathematically as                          
              singularly-perturbed or adiabatic systems.  Despite the long                   
              history of progress and the considerable continuing interest in                
              this area, a wealth of open problems exists. This proposal                     
              concerns a group of four fundamental mathematical questions                    
              concerning resonance phenomena and homoclinic behavior that are                
              of direct significance in the applications. Several new                        
              mathematical techniques, some developed by the author, have                    
              recently become available which offer substantial promise of                   
              solving these problems. While the main goal of the work proposed               
              here is to use and extend the scope of these new tools, it is                  
              also endeavored to answer the above questions with an eye toward               
              the technological applications. Toward this end, the proposer                  
              points to his successful development of enhanced fluid-mixing                  
              technology as an application of his earlier work on the geometry               
              of homoclinic tangles in singularly-perturbed systems.
