Title       : Investigations of Ectomycorrhizal Guild Structure in Coastal Bishop Pine Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9307150

Award Number: 9307150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Bruns boletus@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Ectomycorrhizal fungi are symbiotic associates of most                    
              temperature forest trees.  Their association with the roots of                 
              trees such as pines and oaks is necessary for normal growth and                
              reproduction of the trees.  These fungi exhibit a high level of                
              species diversity even at a single sit.  Yet little is currently               
              known about the functional significance of this diversity.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              In this study researchers will use molecular identification methods            
              in combination with soil core sampling, mushroom mapping, and                  
              experimental manipulations to dissect the community structure of               
              these fungi in coastal pine forests.  The sampling schemes used are            
              designed to reveal the variation of fungal species composition in              
              space and time at several scales, and will ultimately yield the                
              first picture of ectomycorrhizal fungal communities in any single              
              forest type on a regional scale.  Methods for molecular                        
              identification of mycorrhizae will be further refined to facilitate            
              widespread use and they will be adapted for the identification of              
              fungal individuals.  The latter level of identification will enable            
              us to investigate clonal size and dissect the genetic strategies               
              employed by selected fungal species.  This work will result in a               
              better understanding of the basic ecology of these fungi and will              
              provide a basis for future management of pinc ecosystems.
