Title       : Molecular Analysis of an Allatotropin in Manduca Sexta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1996  
File        : a9307051

Award Number: 9307051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank M. Horodyski horodysk@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9307051  Horodyski    Metamorphosis in insects is regulated by juvenile hormone
              (JH), a  compound produced in the corpora allata (CA), a neurohaemal organ 
              attached to the brain by the nerve fibers. Metamorphosis is  prevented if the
              JH levels in the blood are high during a molt.  Besides controlling
              metamorphosis, JH also regulates completely  separate physiological processes
              in the adult female insect,  sexual maturation and egg development. In order to
              control these  functions, the levels of JH fluctuate in a characteristic manner
               during development.    JH levels are regulated both by the control of its
              synthesis by  the CA and the control of its degradation by catabolic enzymes 
              present in the blood. Dr. Horodyski wants to further understand  the regulation
              of JH synthesis by the CA. It has previously been  shown that JH synthesis is
              positively and negatively regulated by  neuropeptides  synthesized in the
              insect brain. One of these  peptides, allatotropin (Mas-AT), has been 
              purified, sequenced  and shown to stimulate JH synthesis in CA of adult insects
              of the  order Lepidotera (butterflies and moths). He has isolated the  gene for
              Mas-AT, and has begun to characterize the structure of  this neuropeptide and
              the control of its synthesis using  molecular biological techniques. These
              methods are much more  sensitive than traditional biochemical approaches when
              studying  peptides that are present in such small amounts.    He has shown that
              this is synthesized as as part of larger  precursor which contains other
              peptides. The functions of these  peptides are not yet known. The Mas-AT gene
              is expressed in the  brain and in the nerve cord, and the mRNA is present
              during  larval life and during adult development. Its presence suggests 
              another role besides the control of JH synthesis, since Mas-AT  was inactive in
              stimulating JH synthesis in larval CA. He will  identify the cells in the times
              in which the gene is expressed.  He will initiate studies to characterize the
              receptor protein  which med iates the cellular response to Mas-AT, and to
              define the  target cells for the action of this peptide.  ***
