Title       : Barium in Bone as a Paleodietary Indicator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9307301

Award Number: 9307301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Price and his            
              colleagues will examine the usefulness of barium as a paleodietary             
              indicator. Considerable research done focussing on strontium has               
              shown that it is discriminated against relative to calcium in                  
              biological systems. Therefore relatively less strontium is present             
              in herbivores which eat plants than in the plants themselves.                  
              Likewise bones of carnivores contain less strontium than do bones              
              of their herbivore prey. Preliminary analyses conducted by Dr.                 
              Price and colleagues indicate that the same holds true for barium              
              and that in this latter case the differences between trophic level             
              are even more pronounced. Relatively little is known however about             
              how barium moves through ecological systems and preliminary data               
              again indicate that the patterning is complex. Marine, arid and                
              non-arid terrestrial systems all seem to act differently. In this              
              first stage of a planned long term project the team proposes to                
              gain a better understanding of the barium cycle in a series of                 
              environments. They will collect samples and analyze a broad range              
              of species. Included within this will be anthropologically relevant            
              skeletal remains.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Because food is essential to human existence and subsistence and               
              social systems of necessity are built around this need,                        
              archaeologists pay a great deal of attention to the reconstruction             
              of prehistoric diet. This has proven extremely difficult because               
              various classes of food are differentially preserved in                        
              archaeological sites. Plants for example which formed an essential             
              part of prehistoric diet are rarely preserved. Chemical analysis of            
              bone has proven extremely useful since different diets may leave               
              telltale chemical fingerprints in skeletal remains. The proposed               
              work by Dr. Price and colleagues will help to develop a new                    
              technique which may yield insight not only into diet but                       
              paleoclimate as well.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This work is important because the technique, when developed will              
              provide a useful way to address a number of archaeological                     
              questions in many parts of the world.
