Title       : Scramble Competition: An Examination of Day Range Length Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1994      
File        : a9307477

Award Number: 9307477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne A. Isbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A major goal of studies in primate behavior has been to                        
              understand the causes of competitive relationships among females.              
              Historically, attempts to explain variation in competitive                     
              relationships have focused on what has been called "contest                    
              competition," which can lead to dominance hierarchies, a major                 
              organizing theme in describing female relationships.  However,                 
              field studies have now shown that greater variation in female                  
              relationships exists than is accommodated or recognized by models              
              of contest competition alone.  Also, predictions of day range                  
              size from competition models have proved inadequate to date.                   
                                                                                             
              This project will focus on the complementary relationship of                   
              contest competition and "scramble" competition, which has not                  
              been so widely examined in the past.  It has been widely accepted              
              that intragroup competition increases as group size increases.                 
              One result of this increased competition is that in many primate               
              species larger groups travel farther per day than smaller groups.              
              However, not all species respond to increases in group size by                 
              traveling longer daily distances.  In fact, primates can be                    
              separated clearly by whether they do or do not increase their day              
              ranges with increasing group size.  This division also separates               
              clearly along the strength of the dominance hierarchy within                   
              groups (a form of contest competition).                                        
                                                                                             
              Isbell argues that in those species that increase day range                    
              length with increasing group size, dominance hierarchies among                 
              females within groups are strong and easily detected.  In                      
              contrast, in those species that do not increase day range length               
              with increasing group size, dominance hierarchies are weak or                  
              difficult to detect.                                                           
                                                                                             
              This study promises to clarify some fundamental issues regarding               
              behavioral expressions of competition in social groups of                      
              primates.
