Title       : Genetics and Molecular Biology of Temporal Control in a Simple Eukaryote
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9307299

Award Number: 9307299
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer J. Loros   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9307299 Loros Virtually all eukaryotic organisms appropriately examined have
              been shown to possess the capacity for endogenous temporal control and
              organization.  The cellular machinery that generates this ability is known
              collectively as the biological clock.  Extensive research in the past has
              demonstrated the extent and significance of clock control of gene expression
              and enzyme activities, but in general little is known regarding how clocks
              control the metabolism of the  cells in which they operate.  One salient aspect
              of this regulation is clock control of mRNA abundance via circadian regulation
              of DNA transcription. This research is based on experiments in which we used
              subtractive hybridization to compare the populations of RNA present in
              Neurospora at two times of day.  By this approach, two clock controlled genes
              (ccg 1 and ccg 2) were identified that are unequivocally regulated by the
              circadian clock through activation of transcription in the subjective morning. 
              Transcripts arising from both genes are abundant, suggesting that they may be
              quite important for the organism, and the identity of ccg 2 has been
              demonstrated.  Based on this past work, we are analyzing the function of the
              ccg 1 gene and its protein product in the cell, and we will continue to develop
              and implement a mutant selection scheme that can be used to identify novel
              genetic loci affecting clock function and suppressors of existing clock genes,
              by completing the development and implementation of an enrichment scheme for
              Neurospora circadian clock mutants that is based on the clock regulated
              expression of an antibiotic resistance gene.  We will begin characterization,
              mapping and cloning of mutants. S pecific Aim 1      Identification of the
              product and analysis of the function of ccg 1 are beginning to determine the
              function of this gene in the cell.     In addition to speaking to the identity
              and role of this potentially important gene, this information will be valuable
              in understanding the role of circadian regulation in general in the life of
              this organism.  We will determine the developmental expression pattern of the
              ccg 1 gene over the course of Neurospora development.  We will further examine
              what effects loss of Ccg 1 in our null strains has on the clock and biology of
              Neurospora.  We will also examine gene dosage effects on growth and the
              circadian clock.  If time allows, we hope to raise antibodies to Ccg 1 in order
              to further study the protein proct of this gene.  These data, combined with the
              polypeptide sequence, should allow us to begin to make reasonable guesses as to
              the function of this extremely abundant, circadianly regulated gene product,
              and ultimately perhaps to the advantage of circadian control to the organism.
              Specific Aim 2      Implementation of an enrichment scheme for clock mutants.  
               We are developing an enrichment/selection scheme for clock mutants by placing
              hygromycin phosphotransferase, encoded by the hph gene, under the control of
              the circadian clock so as to restrict the activity of the hygromycin resistance
              gene to a definable part of the circadian cycle in transformants.  The
              development of this scheme, as a method for identification of genes involved in
              the mechanism in the circadian clock, is an ongoing project.      h)         
              0*0*0*         %%% These experiments are in pursuit of our long term goals:  to
              develop the fungus Neurospora as a system where the pathways and mechanisms of
              clock regulation can be studied on a broad scale at the molecular level, to
              appreciate the role of daily rhythmicity in the life of the cell, and to
              understand the organization of the cell as a function of time. ***             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
