Title       : RPG: Neuroethological Basis of Hygienic Behavior in Honey Bees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1993      
File        : a9307026

Award Number: 9307026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marla Spivak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              This is a research planning grant for women.  Hygienic behavior is             
              considered the primary mechanism of resistance to at least two                 
              disease deleterious to larval honey bees, American foulbrood caused            
              by the bacterium Bacillus larvae and chalkbrood caused by the                  
              fungus Ascosphaera apis.  Resistance is conferred by hygienic bees             
              detecting, uncapping, and removing diseased brood from the nest                
              before the causative organism reaches the infectious stage.  The               
              objectives of the research planning activities are to 1) continue              
              selection and maintenance of hygienic and non-hygienic lines of                
              honey bees; 2) continue development of a more precise and realistic            
              behavioral assay of hygienic behavior; 3) analyze the behavioral               
              response of individual hygienic and non-hygienic bees to sealed                
              cells containing freeze-killed brood and to cells containing larvae            
              infected with A. apis; and 4) explore whether the behaviors                    
              exhibited by hygienic and non-hygienic bees are associated with a              
              differential distribution of biogenic amines in the bee brain.                 
              Biogenic amines may control the behavioral states and therefore,               
              the response to diseased brood, of the genetically distinct lines              
              of bees.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The goals of this research are to explore the ethological and                  
              neurobiological bases for the expression of hygienic and non-                  
              hygienic behavior and to assess the role of these behaviors in                 
              disease resistance in honey bees.  Hygienic behavior can control               
              economically important diseases of honey bees, however its                     
              expression appears to be facultative.  It is crucial to study the              
              relation between the genetic, environmental, behavioral, and neural            
              factors that regulate the expressions of both hygienic and non-                
              hygienic behaviors to understand how the balanced expressions of               
              these factors may confer resistance to diseases.  An analysis of               
              the neuroethological mechanisms underlying the behaviors will                  
              provide an opportunity to examine how behavioral states may affect             
              the expression of genetically determined behaviors.
