Title       : Electron-Transfer Across Artificial Beta-Sheets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1995  
File        : a9307791

Award Number: 9307791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Y. Ogawa mogawa@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9112,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9307791  Ogawa  Professor Ogawa of Bowling Green State University will 
              investigate electron transfer across artificial beta-pleated  sheets with
              support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and  Organometallic Chemistry
              Program.  He will synthesize compounds  based on oligopeptides;  these will be
              joined in pairs at the  ends so as to induce the beta-pleated sheet
              conformation.  Electron transfer donor and acceptor sites will be attached to 
              these capped oligopeptides so that the role of beta pleated  sheets in
              mediating electron transfer can be assessed.  The  molecules will be
              characterized by circular dichroism and  multinuclear nmr spectroscopy, and
              where possible by x-ray  diffraction.  Electron transfer will be initiated by
              flash  photolysis and monitored by fluorescence and absorption  spectroscopy. 
              The primary goal will be to determine if  beta-pleated sheets are unusually
              effective in mediating  electron transfer, as has been predicted theoretically.
               %%%  The transfer of an electron through proteins is an essential  component
              of many life processes.  Often this must occur  through distances that are long
              on the atomic scale.  It has  been suggested that certain structural motifs
              within proteins  are especially effective in fostering such long range electron
               transfer events.  In particular, structures known as  "beta-pleated sheets"
              have been implicated.  Experiments to  test this hypothesis will be conducted
              by designing and  synthesizing artificial beta-pleated sheets;  these molecules
               will be constructed with sites that are able to participate in  electron
              transfer reactions.  The rates of electron transfer  will then be measured and
              compared with those of similar  molecules that lack the beta-pleated sheets. 
              The information  to be obtained will refine our understanding of the ways that 
              proteins perform their functions.  ***
