Title       : Estimating Gene Flow into Tropical Forest Fragments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9307878

Award Number: 9307878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Hamrick hamrick@dogwood.botany.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9307878  Hamrick       While surveys of genetic diversity in tropical tree
              species  are numerous enough to make some generalizations (high within 
              population diversity, relatively low diversity among populations,  much
              species-to-species variation in genetic diversity) We know  very little about
              the underlying mechanisms that influence the  levels and distribution of
              genetic diversity in tropical trees.   The relatively low levels of
              differentiation seen among tropical  tree populations indirectly indicates that
              gene movement over  rather large geographic distances (5-10km) is high, but
              here are  very few studies available that have made quantitative estimates  of
              gene movement.  Those estimates that are available are  consistent with the
              levels of differentiation seen among  populations.  Unfortunately, the species
              richness of tropical  forest and the wide array of pollen and seed dispersal
              agents  available to tropical trees makes generalizations based on a few 
              studies questionable at best.  The proposed research will  increase the number
              of species for which estimates of gene flow  are available under natural
              conditions.  The comparative nature  of this research, while based on a
              relatively few species will  extend our knowledge of gene movement in tropical
              tree species to  several pollination syndromes that have not been studied to
              date.   Upon its completion this research will greatly extend our 
              understanding of gene movement in tropical forest.%%%       By studying
              effective pollen immigration into isolated  forest fragments we will extend our
              evolutionary studies into the  realm of applied conservation biology.  Any
              management plan with  the goal to preserve forest tree species and their
              genetic  resources will need to  know the degree of gene movement among  forest
              fragments and the levels of inbreeding they experience.   Also our work will
              begin to determine the effects of isolation  distance on levels of gene flow
              and how these relationships vary  for species with different pollinati on
              syndromes.  Knowledge of  the levels of gene movement and the spatial scales at
              which it  occurs may ultimately allow the development of landscape level 
              designs that accommodate agricultural development but at the same  time
              preserve the biological and genetic diversity of tropical  tree species.***
