Title       : Active Observer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9307126

Award Number: 9307126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252327             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruzena K. Bajcsy bajcsy@cis.central.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,9216,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9307126  Bajcsy  This is the first year of a three year continuing award.  The 
              research involves  investigation of modeling, analysis and  synthesis of visual
              behaviors of Active Observers.  An Active  Observer is a mobile agent whose
              task is to observe, and  report/communicate information about the activity of
              another  agent(s) whose task may be manipulation and/or navigation.  Active 
              Observers are part of a small team of agents who work together in  a
              cooperative fashion.  All agents in the team are equipped with  visual
              navigation capabilities, but the tasks they are engaged in  differ, depending
              on their role in the team and their goal.  The  agents could navigate
              independently or in a cooperative fashion  (i.e. in the case of two manipulator
              agents carrying an object  together).  For manipulatory-agents navigating in a
              cooperative  fashion, the issue of communication arises; hence, the problem of 
              representing visual information for communication.  The visual  tasks of the
              observers-agents will differ depending on whether  their observations serve for
              the navigation or manipulation  purposes of the other agents.  The main
              emphasis in this research  is on the control structure that the observer must
              have in order to  deliver the proper observations for the task at hand.  For
              the  purpose of modeling behaviors a formalism from the Discrete Events 
              Systems (DES) theory has been adopted, suitable for investigating 
              control-theoretic issues of a system.  It is anticipated that the  contribution
              of this research will be in: 1) modeling visually  guided behaviors which
              tightly couple visual processing with  control architecture; and 2) the
              identification of elementary  behaviors needed for navigation and communication
              and their  composition leading to more complex behaviors.  Two kinds of 
              elementary behaviors are distinguished, one where observations are  directly
              connected with physical actions, and the other where  observations and actions
              are either received or transmitted.  The  use of DES  formalism allows the
              synthesis of  complex behaviors in  a systematic fashion and guarantees their
              controllability and  observability
