Title       : Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee Workshop on Arctic Contamination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1993 
File        : a9307167

Award Number: 9307167
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Charles E. Myers                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce F. Molnia   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey
	      Mail Stop 970
	      Reston, VA  22092    /   -

NSF Program : 5240      INFORMAT & ADVIS SVC(ARCTIC RE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              During the past year, a number of sources have independently                   
              reported and documented a multi-year history of dumping of nuclear             
              and other toxic waste materials by the Former Soviet Union (FSU)               
              into the Arctic Ocean, its marginal seas, and its larger                       
              tributaries.  Materials dumped or lost in the marine environment               
              are purported to include: sealed barrels of radioactive waste,                 
              other hazardous and toxic waste, fueled nuclear submarines, and                
              intact nuclear reactors.  The magnitude of the damage and risk                 
              resulting from these historical activities of the FSU to aquatic               
              ecosystems, terrestrial ecosystems, and human inhabitants of the               
              Arctic and beyond is unknown.  However, the Arctic nations and many            
              other non-governmental entities are voicing concerns about both                
              short- and long-term consequences.                                             
              The purpose of the IARPC workshop is to assess the extent of                   
              marine, terrestrial, and atmospheric contamination in the Arctic               
              resulting from the historical practices of the Former Soviet Union.            
              The primary product of the workshop will be a document, An IARPC               
              Action Plan for Assessing Arctic Contamination Resulting From                  
              Disposal Practices of the Former Soviet Union.                                 
              The principal tasks of the workshop will be to:                                
                   A)  characterize the extent of Arctic contamination by                    
                   evaluation of existing data and information about sources and             
                   types of FSU contaminant releases.                                        
                   B)  evaluate and define known and probable transport pathways,            
                   sinks, and likely effects of Arctic contaminants.                         
                   C)  prepare a plan with recommendations for an integrated                 
                   assessment of FSU Arctic contamination.                                   
                   D)  plan for future systematic monitoring efforts, and                    
                   formulate a strategy to utilize ships and aircraft of                     
                   opportunity that will be journeying to the Arctic.                        
                   E)  prepare for Federal policy and decision makers                        
                   recommendations and a summary of existing information on how              
                   to best deal with the issue of Arctic contamination.                      
                                                                                             
              This workshop is being sponsored by several of the IARPC agencies.
