Title       : RUI: Sensory Influences on the Evolution of Diversity in Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1993    
File        : a9307019

Award Number: 9307019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41884              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo J. Fleishman fleishml@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              9307019  Fleishman    Animals communicate with an amazing variety of signals. 
              Even closely related  species often have signals that differ greatly in
              appearance.  Understanding how  this diversity has evolved has been a major aim
              of evolutionary biologists since the  time of Darwin.  Dr. Fleishman will test
              an important new theory, known as  "sensory drive," which suggests that the
              great variety in the design of visual  signals of different species evolved
              because the different habitats occupied by each  species influenced the visual
              system in a different way.  For example, differences  in the typical light
              intensity or background vegetation coloration in a habitat will  influence what
              color and/or motion pattern is easiest to see.    Dr. Fleishman will test this
              theory by studying the evolution of signal diversity in  four species of small
              lizards from Puerto Rico.  These lizards, known as anoles, are  closely
              related, but each species occupies a distinctly different type of habitat.  
              Male anoles attract mates and defend territories using visual displays which 
              consist of elaborate motion patterns of the dewlap, a colorful, expandable flap
              of  skin under the throat.  Each species has its own dewlap color and its own
              pattern  of motion.  In lizards, detection of moving objects by the visual
              system depends  upon a brain structure called the optic tectum.  By making
              neurophysiological  recordings from the optic tectum of each species, Dr.
              Fleishman will determine  what combination of stimulus color and movement most
              effectively stimulates the  tectum.  He will then make careful measurements, in
              the field, of the light and  color conditions typical of the habitat of each
              species.  He will return to the lab  and test the effect of these different
              light and background conditions on the ability  of the optic tectum to respond
              to moving objects of different colors and motion  patterns.  He will test the
              "sensory drive" hypothesis by comparing the color and  motion patterns in the
              actual displays to t he ideal color and motion patterns  predicted from the
              laboratory studies.
