Title       : Data Management for Mobile Computing-Exploratory Research Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1994   
File        : a9307165

Award Number: 9307165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz Imielinski imielins@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Badri R. Nath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              SGER:  Data Management for Mobile Computing                                    
                                                                                             
              The rapidly expanding technology of cellular communications will               
              give mobile users capability of accessing information anytime and              
              anywhere. It is expected that in the near future, millions of                  
              people in the U.S. alone will carry a lightweight, inexpensive                 
              terminal (such as the personal communicator recently announced by              
              AT&T and EO or Apple's Newton) with wireless connection to the                 
              worldwide information network. Mobile computing poses new                      
              challenges to the data management community. How will the mobility             
              of users affect data placement, query and transaction processing?              
              What is the role of wireless medium in distribution of information?            
              How can one query data broadcast over the wireless? What is the                
              influence of limited battery life on data access from a mobile                 
              palmtop terminal? How should prolonged periods of disconnection of             
              the mobile machines be handled? The primary objective of this                  
              exploratory research is to provide preliminary solutions to the                
              above problems and identify which of them are technically the most             
              challenging and for which of them solutions can be provided by                 
              minor extensions of current technology. In particular, the                     
              following problems are being investigated: (1) locating users;  (2)            
              querying location dependent data;  (3) handling frequent                       
              disconnection; and (4) replicating information and services to                 
              provide information from anywhere and at anytime. Further, a                   
              possible prototype of a system for wireless broadcasting of                    
              information to a large number of users is also being developed.
