Title       : Secondary State Formation in the Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1993      
File        : a9307784

Award Number: 9307784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Stanish   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307784  Stanish    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles
              Stanish will  continue his archaeological research in the Lake Titicaca Basin
              of  Southern Peru. The work focuses on the Lupaqa, a prehistoric group  which
              survived into early historic times and was described in  Spanish chronicles.
              The Lupaqa consist of a distinct, spatially  limited, regional group which
              maintained its identity although it  was conquered by and incorporated into
              successive Tiwanaku and Inca  empires. Building on his prior work, Dr. Stanish
              will expand his  survey for sites and will excavate several of them. On this
              basis  he will reconstruct how this group developed and responded to 
              influences from the broader Andean region.    Archaeologists wish to understand
              how large complex entities such  as empires expand and maintain their control
              over subject  populations. There is much disagreement about the extent to which
               direct force of arms is involved and the strategies used not only  to
              establish but also to maintain power. Because the Lupaqa  constitute such a
              "marginal" group and because they were  consecutively incorporated into two
              such kingdoms they provide an  excellent context in which to examine this
              issue.    This research is important for several reasons. The basic forces 
              which shaped Andean prehistory are evident in the world today. Many  countries
              consist of diverse ethnic groups brought together under  a strong central rule.
              An archaeological case such as the Lupaqa  permits one to examine the interplay
              of central and regional forces  over a long period of time.  ***
