Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Intervals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9307499

Award Number: 9307499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. T. Hwang jth5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hwang will work on two areas in statistics: a theory  concerning  the
              conditional analysis and a theory about prediction based on a  measurement
              error model. In the first part of the proposal, the  principal investigator
              proposes to examine the estimated  confidence approach by applying it to the
              Fieller's problem and  by relating it to Fisher's exact tests for contingency
              tables.  The second part of the research will focus on construction of 
              prediction intervals based on measurement error models, which  arise in many
              applications.  The examples that motivate the  principal investigator in this
              research are about the prediction  problems of compressive strengths of
              concrete based on  nondestructive tests.  The principal investigator will work
              on two areas:  conditional  inference and prediction.  For the first area,
              Hwang shall  determine which statistical procedures for evaluating the 
              probability of a particular event can take advantage of lucky  data better than
              others; in other words, which procedures work  better conditionally.  The event
              involved refers to whether a  particular interval (based on data) covers some
              ratios of unknown  parameters.  In the second area, Hwang's focus will be on 
              prediction by intervals, where the studies are more applicable to  U.S.
              society. The aim of the research is to construct a  prediction interval for the
              compressive strength of a wall, a  bridge, or a building based on a
              nondestructive method such as  pulse velocity of penetrating sound waves. 
              Success of this  project may help to determine, without destroying any part of
              the  bridge, whether the bridge is weak enough that it causes concern.
