Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Mathematical Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9307886

Award Number: 9307886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diamond                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Solovay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Solovay will investigate various topics in Mathematical                   
              Logic.  A common theme of many of the questions to be explored is              
              the notion of the consistency strength of formal systems.  Among               
              the questions to be considered are the following:  Did Godel have              
              a proof of the independence of the axiom of choice from the                    
              axioms of type-theory prior to Cohen's discovery of forcing?  Is               
              the non-orthodox system of set-theory proposed by Quine                        
              consistent?  Can one get significantly more precise estimates on               
              the "consistency strength" of subsystems of second order number                
              theory?                                                                        
                   One of the important discoveries of twentieth century logic               
              is that the kinds of reasoning carried out by mathematicians can               
              be codified into axiom systems.  The most popular such system, by              
              far, is the axiom system proposed by Zermelo (and later modified               
              and corrected by Fraenkel and Skolem), but there are interesting               
              extensions that have been extensively studied by set theorists as              
              well as some significantly weaker ones beloved by the                          
              mathematically cautious.  It has become clear that the study                   
              of such weak subsystems of set-theory is intimately related to                 
              large cardinals (a research specialty of Solovay's).  Solovay                  
              hopes to apply his expertise in large cardinals to achieve a more              
              precise calibration of the strength of these weak subsystems.                  
              If successful, this will bring substantial progress to a                       
              research program of some fifty years duration, which excites                   
              renewed interest in the present era of computers.
