Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Varaiables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9224859

Award Number: 9224859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Rosay jrosay@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical work on problems in the               
              study of functions and domains in the space of several complex                 
              variables.  The first involves a combination of ordinary                       
              differential equations and several complex variables where one is              
              interested in holomorphic vector fields, realized as systems of                
              differential equations.  The solution vectors provide examples of              
              one parameter groups of automorphisms of the full n-dimensional                
              space.  When the vector field is complete, the automorphisms can               
              be continued indefinitely.  One goal of this project is                        
              to determine the extent to which every holomorphic vector field                
              can be approximated by a complete one. A second line of                        
              investigation focuses on the image of two-dimensional space under              
              a holomorphic embedding.  More precisely, work will be done in                 
              determining the type of algebraic variety which can be omitted by              
              such an embedding.  It is known that one complex line may be                   
              omitted and three complex lines cannot.  Additional work will be               
              done in an effort to understand how the example of Duval allows                
              for a Lagrangian disk to be embedded in two-dimensional space                  
              which is not polynomially convex.  Yet, in the appropriate sense,              
              allpolynomial hulls can always be explained in terms of                        
              holomorphic disks.  The difference must lie somewhere between the              
              idea of a holomorphic disk and the older idea of an H-infinity                 
              disk. Questions of this type have been studied for decades, so                 
              progress is expected to be slow.                                               
                   Several complex variables arose at the beginning of the                   
              century as a natural outgrowth of studies of functions of one                  
              complex variable.  It became clear early on that the theory                    
              differed widely from its predecessor.  The underlying geometry                 
              was far more difficult to grasp and the function theory had far                
              more affinity with partial differential operators of first order.              
              It thus grew as a hybrid subject combining deep characteristics                
              of differential geometry and differential equations.  Many of the              
              fundamental structures were defined in the last three decades.                 
              Current studies still concentrate on understanding these basic                 
              mathematical forms.
