Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9224748

Award Number: 9224748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. De Boor deboor@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amos Ron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9224748  deBoor       This project focuses on optimal approximation and 
              interpolation. The work expands on recent research on  approximation orders in
              the quadratic and supremum norms.  It is  expected that the approximation order
              of the intermediate  Lebesgue spaces will remain constant.  In addition, work
              will be  done on finding the dimension of box spline approximation spaces  in
              three dimensions. Efforts will be made in seeking a Fourier  analysis approach
              to solve approximation order questions in  seeking a more general approach
              applicable to any scale, whether  local or not.  Further research will be
              carried out on  shift-invariant spaces using shifts of radial functions as 
              suitable approximants or restricted families of functions. New  approaches to
              the wavelet construct, the multiresolution  analysis, has led to an expanded
              nonstationary wavelet which may  have practical benefit.  Related to this will
              be a close study of  the stability of shifts of solutions of dilation equations
              in  terms of their Fourier transforms.  Continuing research on  approximation
              of surfaces and the problems of blending patches of  surfaces will continue. 
              At the present time, blended patches are  only satisfactory when the given
              surfaces are relatively flat.   Better understanding is needed to tell whether
              a given surface  can be well represented by a few blended patches.      
              Approximation theory combines techniques of special  functions, numerical
              analysis and functional analysis to analyze  complex problems in which closed
              form or simple solutions are not  feasible.  By its very nature, such research
              carries an implicit  goal involving application to questions of the physical
              world,  although some of the work can be highly theoretical.  ***
