Title       : U.S.-Malaysia Cooperative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Physiology of the Toxic
               Red Tide Dinoflagellate Pyrodinium Bahamensa from Malaysia.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9224474

Award Number: 9224474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Anderson danderson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 5927,5978,
Abstract    :
              9224474  Anderson    This proposal requests funds to permit dissertation
              improvement  research, in Malaysia, by Mr. Gires Usup, a Ph.D. student in the 
              Boston University Marine Program, Woods Hole, MA, under the  direction of Dr.
              Donald M. Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic  Institution, within a 24-month
              period, on the bloom dynamics and  physiology of the toxic red tide
              dinoflagellate Pyrodinium  bahamensa.  Recurring outbreaks of toxic red tides
              on the west  coast of Sabah, Malaysia, have caused serious public health and 
              economic problems in that region.  Physiological and toxicity  studies are
              currently underway on a laboratory culture of an  isolate from Sabah.  The
              present study is the field component of  the dissertation project aimed at
              understanding the bloom  dynamics of red tide outbreaks on the west coast of
              Sabah.   Sampling cruises and monitoring programs will be used to 
              quantitatively characterize the spatial and temporal distribution  of this
              toxic dinoflagellate, the movement of its populations,  and the biological
              events that take place during bloom  development.  The relationship between
              bloom occurrence, the  physical characteristics of the water column, and
              meteorological  conditions also will be quantitatively analyzed.    Harmful or
              noxious algal blooms are becoming increasingly common  in many coastal regions
              of the world.  When the causative  dinoflagellate is a toxic species,
              suspension-feeding bivalves  concentrate the potent neurotoxins in their
              tissues.  Consumption  of these shellfish leads to paralytic shellfish
              poisoning which  can be fatal to human beings, especially, children.  Dr.
              Anderson  is a recognized authority on red tide dinoflagellates.  Mr. Usup,  on
              leave from his position as Lecturer, Marine Sciences  Department, University
              Kebangsaan Malaysia, Sabah Campus, also  has research publications in this
              field.  Mr. Norhadi Ismail, a  co-author with Mr. Usup in these studies at
              Universiti Kebangsaan  Malaysia, will collaborate in the present research.  Th
              is project  is relevant to the objectives of the East Asia and Pacific  Program
              which encourages proposals for activities in regions such  as Southeast Asia
              where interactions between U.S. and foreign  investigators have been limited. 
              ***
