Title       : RUI: Study of the Structure and Dynamics of Great Lakes Winter Storms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9224384

Award Number: 9224384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory P. Byrd   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Scala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Weinbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brockport
	      
	      Brockport, NY  14420    716/395-2211

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9224384  Byrd       Precipitation from winter storms in the form of snow and 
              freezing rain are among the most disruptive of meteorological  phenomena. 
              Under a previous award, the Principal Investigators  have used observational
              data and a numerical model to study the  extremely heavy snowfalls that occur
              on the lee side of the Great  Lakes.  Accomplishments have included identifying
              critical boundary  layer and atmospheric parameters that are conducive to
              producing  locally heavy snowfalls.       The Principal Investigators in
              cooperation with the National  Weather Service will continue this research. 
              Planned activities  include developing a more sophisticated numerical model and
               expansion of their investigations to include the local influence of  the Great
              Lakes on cyclonic winter storms.  Research objectives  include:       1. 
              Documenting the spatial and temporal variability of  meteorological fields
              within and upwind of lake-effect snow  regions, focussing on the role of
              boundary layer stability, depth,  moisture and wind shear in modulating these
              disturbances;       2.  Investigating the role of dynamical forcing mechanisms
              in  the formation and maintenance of mesoscale lake-effect snow bands  and
              mesoscale precipitation structures associated with winter  season wave cyclones
              of the Great Lakes region;       3.  Studying the effect of multiple-lake
              interactions on the  formation and maintenance of lake-effect snow bands;      
              4.  Investigating the effects of orography on the distribution  and behavior of
              lake-effect snow bands;       5.  Determining the importance of the Great Lakes
              and the  surrounding topography in the distribution and behavior of  mesoscale
              precipitation features associated with winter season  cyclones in the Great
              Lakes region.  ***
