Title       : Psychological and Physiological Effects of a Natural Disaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9224538

Award Number: 9224538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14179              (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Rotton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to obtain post-disaster measures               
              on the psychological well-being of residents following hurricane               
              Andrew.  The investigator has pre-disaster data on 313 South                   
              Florida students which includes measures of demographics,                      
              distress, health, performance, cardiovascular and biochemical                  
              indices, and other moderators such as dispositional optimism,                  
              personal control, social support, and type of coping.  Post-                   
              disaster data will now be collected and analyzed using the same                
              measures.  Related variables will be grouped together and then                 
              subjected to multivariate analyses of variance and covariance.                 
              The analyses will be complemented by moderator variable                        
              regression analyses aimed at identifying social and personality                
              variables that have helped residents cope following Hurricane                  
              Andrew.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The pre- and post- design that is now possible will allow more                 
              definitive conclusions to be drawn than the vast majority of                   
              studies on natural disasters, which have employed retrospective                
              measures and static control group designs.  The study should                   
              overcome several other limitations of past studies in this area.               
              First, other studies have ignored important theoretical                        
              distinctions such as the difference between threat and harm                    
              appraisal.  This project will compare the reactions of students                
              who live in areas that sustained major damage from the hurricane               
              with those of students who were also threatened but did not                    
              suffer damage.  Second, other studies have done little more than               
              classify respondents as being victims or not victims of a                      
              disaster.  In this study, one can see undamaged residences                     
              standing next to totally destryed homes, and a questionnaire has               
              been designed to assess actual hardship.  Third, other studies in              
              this area have employed reactive procedures.  Respondents have                 
              known that they are being interviewed because they experienced a               
              major catastrophe.  This will be avoided in this study by                      
              obtaining data from students as part of the "standard" program of              
              testing that goes on in psychology departments.  It is only after              
              respondents have answered items on measures of psychological                   
              distress that they will be asked to complete the Hurricane                     
              Questionnaire.
