Title       : Controlled Competitive Vulcanization of Rubber Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1994   
File        : a9224176

Award Number: 9224176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack L. Koenig jlk6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9161,9163,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research proposal involves the controlled use of competitive              
              vulcanization to develop blended elastomeric systems with enhanced             
              physical and mechanical properties.  The only presently viable                 
              technique which offers the opportunity to study the chemical                   
              structure and distribution of crosslinks between the components of             
              the rubber blend is solid state 13C NMR spectroscopy.  It is now               
              possible to obtain high resolution NMR spectra of these insoluble              
              networks and to use these spectra to determine the microstructures             
              and the chemical nature and number of the crosslinks in accelerated            
              vulcanized elastomeric systems.  The role of differential                      
              solubility and reactivity of vulcanizing agents, coupled with their            
              diffusion from one polymer phase to another, in determining the                
              nature and extent of crosslinking in the individual phases of the              
              blend has not been determined.  Our present knowledge of the                   
              specific chemical reactions during vulcanization of rubber blends              
              is insufficient to permit the design of optimum accelerator                    
              systems, mixing processes and the appropriate cure cycles for                  
              rubber blends which will lead to products with specific                        
              improvements in the physical or mechanical properties.                         
                                                                                             
              Competitive covulcanization of polymer blends is playing an                    
              increasing role in rubber production.  To optimize the                         
              vulcanization process they must understand the microstructures and             
              crosslinks developed separately in the components of the blends                
              during the vulcanization process.  Techniques have been developed              
              for the study of the blend composition, blend microstructure and               
              distribution of fillers between the phases of a blend, but no                  
              technique has been developed for estimating the chemical nature and            
              extent of crosslinking in the different rubber phases of the blend.            
              Without a knowledge of how to control the competitive crosslinking             
              process, competitive vulcanization will continue to be empirical in            
              its applications to rubber.
