Title       : Iwawi Ceramic Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1993   
File        : a9224430

Award Number: 9224430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49997              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Isbell huari@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. William Isbell and his            
              colleagues will conduct an archaeological excavation at the site of            
              Iwawi, a small deeply stratified mound located at the mouth of the             
              Tiwanaku River on the Lake Titicaca shore in Bolivia. Preliminary              
              work by Dr. Isbell suggests that the site spans an approximately               
              2000 year period. Excavation through the habitation levels will                
              yield faunal and floral remains as well as stone tools and abundant            
              ceramics. The team's focus will be on this last class. The primary             
              goal of the research is a refined stylistic sequence for ceramics,             
              employing computer assisted descriptions as well as more standard              
              analyses. A suite of radiocarbon dates will add absolute                       
              chronology. Four 10 x 10 meter excavations will be conducted on                
              different sections of the mound. In addition to chronological data,            
              house floor contexts from these large excavations will provide an              
              excellent record of economics, household organization and social               
              differentiation within a changing regional sphere.                             
                                                                                             
              The Lake Titicaca basin saw the rise of one of the earliest                    
              civilizations in the New World. In this formidable high altitude               
              region Native Americans formed an empire marked by monumental                  
              architecture and control of an area which extends over much of                 
              present day Bolivia and Peru. Many archaeologists have worked in               
              the basin to trace the rise, spread and eventual decline of this               
              Tiwanaku culture. They have focussed on such topics as the                     
              agricultural techniques which allowed the support of large                     
              populations. The main problem which researchers face however is the            
              lack of a good ceramic chronology. Because ceramic styles change               
              over time, they can provide a sensitive dating technique which                 
              allow individual sites and levels within sites to be accurately                
              placed. In the Titicaca region however the sequence currently                  
              employed is far from adequate and in need of revision. Dr. Isbell's            
              project will accomplish this goal.                                             
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of how civilizations arise and decline. It will              
              also provide a tool of use to many archaeologists.
