Title       : Discrete Numerical Modeling Techniques: Advance Methods withApplications to
               Optical Pulse Propagation in linear and Nonlinear Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9224946

Award Number: 9224946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George Lea                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas C. Cangellaris   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Ziolkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9224946 Cangellaris  Numerical techniques for the modeling of electromagnetic
              wave interactions in linear and nonlinear photonics devices will be developed. 
              These numerical techniques are for the solution of the full wave vector
              Maxwell's equations coupled with microscopic and macroscopic materials models
              and will emphasize massively-parallel computing environments for any actual
              calculations.  The techniques to be developed includespectrall and hybrid
              spectral/finite difference time domain (FDTD) schemes, aimed at the rigorous,
              efficient and accurate modeling of time-harmonic and pulsed wave propagation
              over long distance in linear and nonlinear media.  More specifically, emphasis
              will be placed on two specific topics: a) the use of spectral techniques for
              the solution of the scalar and vectorial Helmholtz equation in inhomogeneous,
              anisotropic domains with applications to time-harmonic wave propagation in
              integrated optics waveguides and diffraction by two-dimensional gratings; b)
              the use of hybrid spectral/FDTD techniques for the numerical integration of the
              nonlinear time-dependent Maxwell's equations in two dimensions with application
              to optical pulse propagation in nonlinear Kerr media. These numerical
              techniques will be benchmarked against analytical theory in simple geometries
              and experimental results involving more complicated configurations. The direct
              products of this project will be the numerical methods and associated computer
              codes, validation analyses, and supporting document.  The anticipated results
              will lay a foundation for a more rigorous and more efficient set of numerical
              methods that will be used eventually to create realistic numerical simulators
              for the engineering design of integrated optics devices and systems.
