Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Limitation of Transpiration by XylemCavitation and
               Hydraulic Conductance in Riparian and Non-riparian Woody Vegetation of the
               Sonoran Desert
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1993  
File        : a9224259

Award Number: 9224259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14118              (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Pockman  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project examines how desert plants avoid exceeding the limits             
              of their water transport system. Water is lost by evaporation when             
              plants capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere during                       
              photosynthesis. To support continued growth, such losses must be               
              replenished by water pulled from the soil via the roots to the                 
              leaves in a manner not unlike drinking from a straw. If the suction            
              driving water movement becomes to great, as can happen when the                
              evaporation rate from leaves is too high or the soil is too dry,               
              the plant's water transport system can become non-functional. This             
              condition, known as cavitation, results from the entry of air into             
              the vascular system producing an air embolism and interrupting the             
              movement of water. The limits of the water  transport system, and              
              hence the plants maximum drought tolerance, are determined by the              
              structure of its component conduits. The proposed research will                
              determine the limits on water transport in plants from habitats                
              with different patterns of water availability. The ability of each             
              species to maintain water transport by remaining within the limits             
              of its vascular system or controlling the loss of vascular function            
              under harsh conditions will be evaluated. The results will advance             
              our understanding of whole plant responses to water stress.
