Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1993  
File        : a9224365

Award Number: 9224365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8103               (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Stone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Social Security disability's standardized measures and procedural               
                                                                                            
              safeguards are intended to ensure that applicants with similar                 
              injuries or illnesses will be treated similarly in the eligibility             
                                                                                             
              determination process.  These form the basis on which the U.S.                 
              Government can promise its citizens that the Social Security System            
                                                                                             
              will be fair and equitable to all who apply.  It has been argued,              
                                                                                             
              however, that eligibility determination is biased by virtue of the             
                                                                                             
              existence of "gendered" concepts in the official Listings of                   
              Impairments, in the medical judgments made for the record by                   
              physicians, and in the hearings and decisions of Administrative Law            
                                                                                             
              Judges.  It is suggested that these "gendered" concepts result in              
                                                                                             
              some applicants being ignored, categorized or stereotyped based on             
                                                                                             
              gender.  If this argument is correct, the standardized measures may            
                                                                                             
              be biased and the procedural safeguards ineffective.  It is                    
              important, therefore, to determine whether or not such "gendered"              
                                                                                             
              biasing occurs.                                                                
                                                                                             
              This doctoral dissertation will examine the application of the                 
              Listings of Impairments and concomitant medical judgments to 150               
                                                                                             
              closed cases that were denied and then appealed to the federal                 
              courts in order to identify any unstated assumptions and norms                 
              influencing the process.  Cases will be selected from federal                  
              courts in Dallas, San Francisco and Boston (representing three                 
              different geographical regions).  The proposed analysis will                   
              include full transcripts of administrative hearings and judicial               
                                                                                             
              decisions as well as the criteria in the Listings of Impairments               
                                                                                             
              and the internal rules and regulations of the Social Security                  
              System.  These texts will be subjected to various forms of                     
              qualitative analysis, including computerized content analysis based            
                                                                                             
              on appropriate coding categories.                                              
                                                                                             
              This research will make an important contribution toward enhancing             
                                                                                             
              fairness and equity in the Social Security System.  It will also               
                                                                                             
              contribute to our theoretical understanding of how possibly biased             
                                                                                             
              (but conventional) assumptions affect judicial and quasi-judicial              
                                                                                             
              decision-making.
