Title       : SGER: Isolation and Characterization of Dinosaur DNA from Amber-entombed Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9224926

Award Number: 9224926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul J. Cano   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Hedges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9224926 Cano This SGER (Small Grant for Exploratory Research) project will
              attempt to obtain dinosaur DNA from the gut contents of swollen and apparently
              engorged Ceratopogonidae (biting midges) entombed in amber from two Cretaceous
              sites in Canada: Grassy Lake, Alberta and Cedar Lake, Manitoba  These midges
              have mouthparts resembling those of extant midges that are adapted for feeding
              on large animals.  The PI is reasoning that the large animals of the Cretaceous
              Period were dinosaurs and expecting to be able to, thus, obtain dinosaur
              blood/DNA.  DNA sequences from slow evolving nuclear and mitochondrial genes
              will be obtained and compared with those of representatives of extant amniotes
              supplied by co PI Hedges, in order to draw phylogenetic conclusions.  This may
              be the only way that genetic information from this major, extinct amniote group
              will ever be obtained.  If successful, it could be of considerable importance
              in establishing the phylogenetic relationship of the dinosaurs to the rest of
              the amniotes. %%% Gut contents, which are assumed to be blood from dinosaurs,
              will be extracted from biting midges preserved in amber.  These midges in amber
              are from the Cretaceous Period and were collected at two lake related sites in
              Canada.  The Principal Investigator will sequence DNA from the extracted gut
              contents and compare it with DNA from living reptiles, birds and mammals.  This
              is an exciting and novel approach to le arning something about the
              relationships of the dinosaurs to these other groups. ***                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
