Title       : Collaborative Research on Political Culture and Political Participation in
               Mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong: A Comparative Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1993      
File        : a9224257

Award Number: 9224257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40784              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Nathan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research investigation involves surveys on political culture              
              and political participation in mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong                
              Kong during the winter of 1993-1994.  The research provides the                
              first empirical data on behavior and culture under these three                 
              regimes collected under a common analytic program.                             
                                                                                             
              The project is designed around two core analytical issues.  First,             
              in these three political systems rapid changes are occurring in                
              both political institutions and political culture (values and                  
              beliefs).  The political behavior of citizens (voting, contacting              
              government officials for favors, etc.) is also changing.  By                   
              studying members of a single historical culture who are living in              
              settings that have different developmental levels, institutional               
              systems, and political sub-cultures, the project is able to                    
              determine whether cultural changes or insitutional changes have                
              stronger effects on changes in individual citizens' political                  
              behavior.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Second, the project analyzes the cultural dimension of regime.                 
              change.  The investigation looks at citizens' attitudes in each                
              political system toward the political authorities, the regime, and             
              the nation, especially attitudes concerning regime legitimacy and              
              citizen's political identifications.  The researchers explore                  
              whether each political system has internal consensus or                        
              disagreement over major values; what the major issues of political             
              value cleavage are; and, whether disagreements fall along elite-               
              mass lines or are located among sectors of the mass population.                
                                                                                             
              Many of the data are designed to permit comparison with data                   
              collected in the United States, Western Europe, Russia, Japan, and             
              elsewhere.  The project provides a baseline for future studies of              
              change in the three Chinese political systems.
