Title       : Regulation of Complex Behavior by Neuropeptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9224357

Award Number: 9224357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc J. Klowden mklowden@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Although the insect nervous system is relatively simple, it               
              has not prevented these animals from engaging in quite complex                 
              behaviors.  One such insect behavior that has led to much human                
              suffering is the one that allows a mosquito to find a host for a               
              meal of blood.  Using various chemical and visual signals that we              
              humans give off, mosquitos are able to locate us and ingest our                
              blood, and in the process transmit often deadly disease agents.                
              Dr. Klowden is an internationally renown expert on mosquito                    
              behavior in the complex environment.  He has identified times                  
              when the insect itself controls its behavior and does not seek a               
              host.  Using these periods of inaction, Dr. Klowden identified a               
              novel FMRFamide-related neuropeptide, Aedes Head Peptide 1, that               
              specifically inhibits host seeking behavior in the yellow fever                
              mosquito, and prevents them from feeding on blood.  Using                      
              extremely difficult technical/surgical techniques, he can begin                
              to unravel the mechanisms by which Aedes Head Peptide 1 prevents               
              mosquito host-seeking behavior from occurring, and how this                    
              hormone interacts with other factors.  The results from these                  
              fundamental studies are likely to lead to new discoveries that                 
              will substantially impact progress in the neuroendocrinology of                
              insects and insect behavior.  In addition, basic findings derived              
              from this research should provide essential information needed                 
              for the development of better strategies for the control of                    
              populations of mosquitoes and the diseases that they transmit via              
              their blood-feeding activities.
