Title       : Macromolecular Organization of the Contractile Ring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9224083

Award Number: 9224083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joann J. Otto   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Cell division in animal cells culminates in cytokinesis, the                 
              separation of two daughter cells.  The force generating apparatus              
              for this cleavage is the contractile ring, a transient actin-myosin            
              organelle that is attached to and exerts tension on the plasma                 
              membrane.  Many facets of cytokinesis remain to be elucidated.                 
              These include the source, composition, and interaction of                      
              contractile ring components, the regulation of contraction, and the            
              spatial positioning of the contractile ring.  The proposed                     
              experiments address several of these aspects.  Monoclonal                      
              antibodies, which were prepared against actin-associated proteins,             
              have allowed identification of several protein components of the               
              contractile ring in sea urchin eggs.  These proteins will be                   
              purified and characterized in vitro, particularly with regard to               
              the proteins with which they interact.  The functions of the                   
              proteins in vivo will be investigated in microinjection experiments            
              with the antibodies prepared against them.  The regulation of                  
              contraction will be examined by investigating whether changes in               
              myosin phosphorylation occur at cytokinesis when the amount of                 
              myosin in the cytoskeleton increases.  The results of the proposed             
              experiments will allow a molecular description of the functions of             
              several components of the contractile ring and thus increase our               
              understanding of this dynamic structure.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Reproduction is the most fundamental aspect of all living things.              
              Cell division is an intrinsic part of this phenomenon for all                  
              cellular organisms, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic.  For                      
              Protistans (single-celled organisms), reproduction is, simply, cell            
              division.  For multicellular organisms, cell division is key to                
              reproduction, not only for generating germ-line cells (gametes,                
              spores) but also for regenerating whole organisms from spores or               
              zygotes (development).  In multicellular organisms, tight                      
              regulation of the mechanism whereby daughter cell cytoplasms are               
              partitioned from each other during cell division, including the                
              precise position of the cleavage furrow, is invariably crucial for             
              subsequent development of the organism.  Thus, this project                    
              addresses one of the most fundamental aspects of animal life on                
              earth.  The cleavage mechanism is known to involve an actomyosin               
              based contractile apparatus, the contractile ring, which girdles               
              the cell at the cleavage furrow at the cytoplasmic face of the                 
              plasma membrane.  The goals of this project are to discover what               
              other proteins, besides actin and myosin, are in the ring, how the             
              ring components function to cause the constriction of the membrane             
              at the cleavage furrow, and how all this is regulated.  The                    
              approaches to be used will combine rigorous in vitro biochemical               
              analysis with experimental manipulations and observations in vivo.
