Title       : Dendritic and Hybrid Linear-Globular Molecules: Design and Synthetic Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1996     
File        : a9224421

Award Number: 9224421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. J. Frechet   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The objectives of this research are to explore the design,                
              synthesis, and properties of dendritic molecules as well as hybrid             
              polymer structures containing both linear and globular fragments.              
              Main targets include the preparation of regular dendritic molecules            
              with functionalized chain-ends, hyper-branched polymers prepared in            
              a one-step polycondensation reaction, and hybrid linear-globular               
              copolymers in which the dendritic (globular) fragment will                     
              contribute to modify drastically the properties of the linear                  
              polymer fragment.  In order to prepare regular, size monodisperse              
              dendritic structures, both stepwise and accelerated approaches                 
              involving new monomers will be used.  The chemical modification of             
              functionalities located at the chain ends or within the inner                  
              layers of the dendritic molecules will be used for a number of                 
              purposes such as the creation of novel type of micellar structures.            
              These micellar structures are constituted of single molecules in               
              which a hydrophobic outer layer surrounds inner hydrophilic layers             
              (reverse micelle) or vice-versa (normal micelle).  The unique                  
              control over architecture afforded by the convergent method of                 
              synthesis of dendritic molecules will be used to create unusual                
              polymer topologies.  The study of structure-properties                         
              relationships for these molecules will contribute to the                       
              advancement of knowledge may provide novel solutions to current                
              technological problems.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research is directed toward the production of a new form of               
              matter:  polymers with a globular shape that cannot be made by any             
              other known method.  These globular polymers may be uniquely                   
              engineered for applications in a broad array of emerging advanced              
              technologies such as molecular electronics, the design of                      
              microreactors that will allow more efficient chemical processes to             
              be carried out with significant reduction in environmental                     
              problems, or the elimination of highly toxic pollutants from water.
