Title       : U.S.-Western Europe Workshop on Quantifier Elimination and Cylindrical Algebraic
               Decomposition; Linz, Austria; October, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9224304

Award Number: 9224304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bobby F. Caviness caviness@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5914,
Abstract    :
              9224304  Caviness  This award supports the participation of eleven U.S.
              mathematicians  and computer scientists (including seven graduate students) in
              a  small symposium about computer algebra to be held near Linz,  Austria, in
              October, 1993.  The meeting is co-organized by  Professors Bobby F. Caviness of
              the University of Delaware, Jeremy  Johnson of Drexel University and Bruno
              Buchberger of the Research  Institute for Symbolic Computation (RISC) at the
              Johannes Kepler  University in Linz, Austria.  Though established only a few
              years  ago, RISC has become a major center in areas of mathematics and 
              computer science relevant to a process known as cylindrical  algebraic
              decomposition (CAD).  The symposium will bring together  many leading
              researchers from Europe and the U.S. for the first time  to review and
              synthesize current knowledge about (CAD).  There will  be a one-day tutorial
              workshop in advance of the symposium to  introduce the fundamentals to the
              non-expert participants  (principally U.S. and Austrian graduate students and
              recent PhD's.)   Proceedings will be published in a forthcoming RISC series on 
              symbolic computation that will be published by Springer-Verlag.    Cylindrical
              algebraic decomposition is a process devised to obtain  an improved quantifier
              elimination method for the theory of  elementary algebra and geometry.  Many
              important mathematical  problems can be stated in this theory and solved
              through quantifier  elimination.  CAD is therefore a major breakthrough in
              automating  mathematics and it has important applications in many recent 
              technologies (e.g., robot motion.)  As part of the broader field of  symbolic
              computation, requiring extensive training in both computer  systems and formal
              mathematics, it opens some of the most promising  directions for future
              software development.  ***
