Title       : Synthesis of Helical Conjugated Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1995   
File        : a9224634

Award Number: 9224634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Katz tjk1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is made in the Advanced Materials and Processing                    
              Program of the Chemistry Division in support of the research of                
              Prof. Thomas Katz. The focus of this research is the rational                  
              development of ways to make a variety of helicenes, to obtain                  
              them optically active, and to link them together to produce                    
              ones much larger than available before.The Diels-Alder                         
              reactions of enol ethers of bis-acetophenones and related                      
              nitrogen and sulfur compounds will be studied as routes to the                 
              helicenes. A number of ways will be evaluated to obtain the                    
              helicenes optically active, including a new method using amine                 
              adducts of quinones. The methods to be studied for linking                     
              helicenes will include one using the Diels-Alder reaction, a                   
              second using photocondensations, a third involving a unique                    
              trimerization, a fourth using charge-transfer complexes, and a                 
              fifth using coordination complexation. The synthetic approaches                
              will allow helicenes to be made in large quantities which has                  
              not been possible before. The synthesized helicenes should have                
              novel optical properties, including very large rotational                      
              strengths, electronic absorptions at very low wavelengths, and                 
              nonlinear optical coefficients, which may impart unique                        
              material properties to these compounds.                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Professor Katz will focus his work on the rational development                 
              of ways to make a variety of helicenes, which are helical                      
              molecules with unbroken chains of conjugated electrons that                    
              wind in one direction. The synthetic approaches will allow                     
              helicenes to be made in large quantities which has not been                    
              possible before. The novel optical properties of these                         
              helicenes may impart unique material properties to these                       
              compounds allowing them to be used to make high-density optical                
              storage devices and new liquid-crystalline phases.
