Title       : Dissertation Research: Seedling Traits in Collinsia verna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1993  
File        : a9224046

Award Number: 9224046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7285               (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise A. Thiede  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Understanding the process of evolution by natural                              
              selection hinges on mechanistic understanding of two                           
              component processes: 1) differential survival and/or                           
              fecundity of individuals associated with the traits                            
              they possess and 2) the extent to which these traits                           
              are inherited.  Inheritance is the process by which an                         
              individual receives two copies of each gene as well as                         
              the extent to which the genes affect the expression of                         
              a trait.  Maternal inheritance is the special case when                        
              the mother via her own genes can directly affect the                           
              expression of a trait in her offspring.  This maternal                         
              effect is independent of the genes she passes on to her                        
              offspring.  This research is novel in that it will                             
              investigate the extent to which juvenile traits are not                        
              only determined by the genes an individual possesses,                          
              but also by the genes which its mother possesses.  This                        
              phenotypic connection between generation is common in                          
              many organisms and can include parental provisioning                           
              and parental care.  This non-standard form of                                  
              inheritance can alter direction and rate of adaptive                           
              evolution.  The goal of this research is to quantify                           
              the magnitude of this effect and examine how it might                          
              change the outcome of selection as it is observed in a                         
              natural population.  At the most basic level this                              
              research will provide an alternative mechanism for the                         
              evolution of juvenile and maternal traits in natural                           
              plant populations.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Breeders have developed a variety of breeding programs                         
              to enhance their ability to alter juvenile and maternal                        
              traits such as seed weight, emergence date and seed                            
              dispersal in plants and birth weight, gestation length                         
              and milk production in animals.  These programs                                
              maximize the change in the trait of interest by                                
              selection at the individual, sibling group, or family                          
              level depending on the nature of inheritance.  This                            
              research is an outgrowth of these applied problems in                          
              plant and animal breeding, but it will also make a                             
              contribution to this applied field by providing a                              
              mechanistic understanding of these non-standard forms                          
              of inheritance in plants.
