Title       : Conference on the "New Institutionalism" College Park, MD - February 1994
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9224187

Award Number: 9224187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karol Soltan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Uslaner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Haufler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The "new institutionalism" is one of the most promising theoretical            
              developments in social science.  It ranges across disciplines such             
              as political science, economics, legal theory, and sociology.  The             
              early years of political science (from 1900 through the 1940s) were            
              marked by an almost exclusive study of formal institutions such as             
              legislatures, executives, the bureaucracy, and international                   
              organizations.  The study of politics was highly legalistic.  From             
              the 1950s through the 1970s political science shifted gears toward             
              the study of individual behavior.  A useful corrective came since              
              the late 1970s when, prodded by economics, political science                   
              returned to the study of institutions.  This "new institutionalism"            
              went beyond legalisms to study how institutions arose and to                   
              encompass not only formal structures, but also ideas, value                    
              systems, norms, and culture.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The "new institutionalism" is hardly of one piece.  Some of its                
              adherents believe that formal structures matter most, others that              
              informal institutions such as ideas and values are equally                     
              important.  Some institutionalists use an economic approach,                   
              seeking to explain how people manage to cooperate when there are               
              many incentives for them not to do so.  Others abjure this way of              
              thinking, focusing instead on how history shapes policy outcomes.              
                                                                                             
              In this research conference the investigators bring advocates of               
              these many perspectives together.  The objective is to determine               
              the contours of the "new institutionalism," to seek out areas of               
              agreement, and to set out clearly what disagreements remain.  The              
              investigators have broken down the conference into five key areas              
              of concern to political scientists and other social scientists:                
              international regimes; property rights; the state; constitutional              
              design and democracy; and, organizational theory.  The researchers             
              will also have papers and panels presenting overviews of the field             
              and research agendas for the future.                                           
                                                                                             
              The conference organizers will publish the papers and remarks and              
              disseminate them widely.
