Title       : Molecular Collision Dynamics: State-Resolved Studies by "Half-Collision"
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1995   
File        : a9224039

Award Number: 9224039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Kleiber paul-kleiber@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Sando  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Stwalley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9156,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program                 
              of the Chemistry Division, Professors P. Kleiber, K. Sando, and                
              W. Stwalley of the University of Iowa will continue their                      
              investigations of the chemical dynamics of the reaction of                     
              hydrogen molecules with excited metal atoms, especially energy                 
              transfer collisons by means of  state-selective half-collision                 
              techniques.  Also continued are studies of the near threshold                  
              photodissociation dynamics of alkali diatomic molecules.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed experiments on reactions between excited metal                    
              atoms and molecules will serve to test theoretical models for                  
              such processes.  Significant deviations from the theoretically                 
              predicted behavior will require a revision of a model or at                    
              least place limits on its range of validity.  Theoretical                      
              models also exist for the photodissociation of alkali diatomic                 
              molecules.  In these models a dissociation is often viewed as a                
              "half-collision" analog of a full collision process, the latter                
              consisting of two incoming and two emerging particles.  Such                   
              theories are, however, often not amenable to simple physical                   
              interpretation and can not easily be applied to complex                        
              dissociation processes.  In some cases of current interest,                    
              such as collisions between ultra-cold atoms, the underlying                    
              physics is not understood well enough to allow application of                  
              any of the theoretical methods with confidence.  The                           
              experiments done in this research will provide information that                
              will assist in the clarification of many questions in the                      
              domain of collision and photodissociation dynamics.
