Title       : Dissertation Research: Applied Ecological Model of the Multipurpose Tree Species
               Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.) de Wit (Leguminosae) and its Major Pest,
               Heteropsylla cubana...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9224234

Award Number: 9224234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris A. Geiger  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0510600   Integrated Pest Management              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Agroforestry has bound new popularity in many less-                            
              developed countries as farmers and farm researchers                            
              rediscover its potential for conserving tropical soils                         
              while boosting long-term farm production.  However,                            
              pest control in agroforestry has received little                               
              attention.  The importance of such research was                                
              underscored recently when stands of the popular                                
              agroforestry tree species Leucaena leucocephala (Lam)                          
              de Wit in Asia were decimated by an invasion of the                            
              introduced psyllid pest Heteropsylla cubana Crawford                           
              (Homoptera: Psyllidae).  The project proposed herein                           
              offers to outline the scientific basis of the L.                               
              leucocephala/H.cubana problem by linking tree growth                           
              and psyllid population dynamics to energy allocation at                        
              each trophic level.  Central to this effort is the                             
              development of a strategic simulation model.  Data on                          
              energy allocation and maximum age-specific growth rates                        
              for tree and herbivore will be collected under varying                         
              nutrient regimes, primarily using simple dry matter                            
              measurements.  Other growth parameters will be                                 
              determined experimentally or drawn from the extensive                          
              literature on Leucaena leucocephala.  The model will                           
              then be validated against at least one year's worth of                         
              data not used in the original parameterization,                                
              obtained from several sites in Thailand.  Sensitivity                          
              analyses will be conducted on mortality factors,                               
              weather and other variables to deduce those most likely                        
              to promote psyllid outbreaks.  Thailand has had                                
              significant problems with the psyllid epidemic, and the                        
              proposed research will be conducted incooperation with                         
              that country's national biological control program.                            
              The resulting model will find immediate application in                         
              estimating yield losses due to the herbivore, planning                         
              leucaena psyllid biological control programs,                                  
              delineating high-risk areas for leucaena cultivation,                          
              and developing improved cultural controls for the pest                         
              in less-developed countries.  The effort could also lay                        
              the groundwork for analyzing pest problems in other                            
              agroforestry tree species.
