Title       : Attitude Formation and Political Behavior in Response to Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9224036

Award Number: 9224036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70241              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Stern   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Dietz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Guagnano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                   This  project will develop an innovative set of instruments              
              to  study  how  members of the general public react  to  emerging              
              global   environmental  problems.   The  proposal  assumes   that              
              willingness to take action on environmental issues is  influenced              
              by  some combination of the underlying backgrounds and values  of              
              individuals and the way in which environmental issues enter their              
              awareness and are framed for them.  The researchers will design a              
              set  of  questions to assess willingness to take action in regard              
              to  four  specific  environmental problems:  greenhouse  warming,              
              species loss, and two "newly emerging" environmental issues to be              
              chosen  during  the  course of the research.   Vignettes  in  the              
              questionnaire  involving  each  environmental  problem  will   be              
              experimentally manipulated to vary whether they involve claims of              
              harm  to  the  individual, to others, or to  the  biosphere,  and              
              whether  such  claims  of harm are said to be  disputed  by  some              
              experts  or  not.   Willingness to take action will  be  assessed              
              through a variety of questions concerning willingness to pay  for              
              countermeasures and likelihood of joining activities to  pressure              
              private   industry   and  government  agencies   to   deal   with              
              environmental problems.  These vignettes and other parts  of  the              
              questionnaire will be developed through a series of pilot studies              
              and then employed in a small scale (N=200) telephone survey of  a              
              representative sample of adults living in Northern Virginia.   If              
              this  project is successful, the researchers contemplate mounting              
              a  larger  investigation  employing  the  experimentally  varying              
              questionnaire vignettes developed here.                                        
                                                                                             
                    This  project  will contribute to an understanding  of  the              
              conditions  under which members of the general public are  likely              
              to  join  activities designed to deal with emerging environmental              
              problems.    In   addition,  this  research  will   improve   our              
              understanding of the general process by which attitudes in regard              
              to emerging and unstable issues become formed.
