Title       : Modeling the Effects of an Ice Sheet on the Climate of a Supercontinent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1995  
File        : a9224378

Award Number: 9224378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herman Zimmerman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113439             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bette L. Otto-Bliesner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The Gondwanan ice sheets were approximately as large as those             
              in the Pleistocene, but differed in one important respect, they                
              were located on a supercontinent.   The interaction of the ice                 
              sheet with the large seasonal cycle simulated in previous energy               
              balance model experiments for a supercontinent configuration                   
              suggests a response of significant climatic interest.  Extremely               
              cold temperatures over the ice-covered supercontinent of Gondwanan             
              coupled to warm tropical latitudes should result in extreme                    
              baroclinicity and suggest significant melting.  This award will                
              focus research on the climate system response during the time                  
              period of maximum Gondwanan glaciation, with a general circulation             
              model and five different scenarios of glacial ice extent and                   
              Milankovitch orbital configurations.  The influence of Milankovitch            
              orbital variations will be explored in a matrix of simulations                 
              using a present tilt-symmetric orbit, a cool summer-warm winter                
              orbit for the Southern Hemisphere, and a hot summer-cold winter                
              orbit for the Southern Hemisphere.  Analysis of global patterns of             
              circulation, temperature, and the hydrologic cycle will provide                
              data to understand the global climate during glacial periods.                  
              Attention to the regional ice-sheet aspects of the simulations                 
              (e.g. surface heat budget, hydrologic cycle) will clarify the                  
              debate on the compatibility of a glacial ice sheet on a                        
              supercontinent with the large seasonal temperature ranges suggested            
              for large land masses.  Results will be validated against available            
              geologic data.
