Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Mechanistic Insights into
               Chemodenitrification Utilizing 15N-NMR.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9224587

Award Number: 9224587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13292              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Mikita   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St Univ-Bakersfld Fdn
	      9001 Stockdale Highway
	      Bakersfield, CA  933111022    661/664-2252

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5936,
Abstract    :
              9224587  Mikita  This award supports  Professor Michael Mikita of California
              State   University at Bakersfield to collaborate in environmental  chemistry
              research with Professor H.-D. Ludemann of the Institute  of Biophysics and
              Physical Biochemistry of the University of  Regensburg, Germany.  The goal of
              their research is to gain a  better understanding of how soil organic matter
              affects the  nitrogen cycle in soils, by studying the organic reaction 
              mechanisms underlying chemodenitrification.  Specifically, they  propose to
              study the reaction of selected humic substances and  models with Nitrogen-15
              (15N) enriched reagents under conditions  expected in soils.  In addition, they
              will seek to improve  methods for the 15N-NMR analyses of these reaction
              products and  work to discover the mechanisms of these reactions.  Although 
              preliminary studies suggest novel insights into this complex  chemistry,
              further work has been limited by the NMR facilities  available to Dr. Mikita. 
              His German collaborator, Professor  Ludemann, is a recognized authority in this
              area and has a world  class laboratory with all the instrumentation necessary
              to carry  out the proposed research.    The natural chemistry of nitrogen in
              soils and air remains very  poorly understood.  Anthropogenic sources of
              nitrogen oxides  include the burning of carbon-based fuels and the use of 
              nitrogenous fertilizers, both of which have been increasing  rapidly in the
              past century.  In the presence of soil organic  matter, these nitrogen
              compounds undergo reactions (known  generally as chemodenitrification) that
              release gaseous forms  into the air.  Now, there is growing concern over the
              influence  of these nitrogen oxides on ozone depletion and global  atmospheric
              processes.  Through the combination of expertise,  facilities and interests
              brought to bear by this U.S.-German  collaboration, progress will be made in
              understanding soil-based  reactions of nitrogen compounds which are potentially
              relevant to  climate change.    ***
