Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics of Cornus L. sensu lato and
               Putative Relatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1993   
File        : a9224072

Award Number: 9224072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: (Jenny) Qiuyun Xiang  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The taxonomic circumscription and relationships among                          
              members of Cornaceae dogwoods have long been                                   
              controversial.  From one to 15 genera have been                                
              ascribed to this family by various authors.                                    
              Furthermore, little agreement exists regarding the                             
              composition, taxonomic rank, and relationships of                              
              subgroups within Cornus.  To resolve relationships at                          
              several taxonomic levels in this enigmatic group,                              
              nucleotide sequences of both chloroplast and nuclear                           
              genes will be obtained.  Comparative sequencing of the                         
              chloroplast gene rbcL, which evolves slowly, will be                           
              used to test traditional concepts of circumscription of                        
              Cornaceae and to identify close relatives of Cornus.                           
              The rbcL sequence data obtained to date reveal that                            
              Cornus and 11 other genera form a cornaceous clade that                        
              differs from all previously proposed cornaceous groups                         
              and also indicate that some genera traditionally placed                        
              in Cornaceae are only distantly related to Cornus.  To                         
              understand better the closest relatives of Cornus, rbcL                        
              sequence data are needed for additional key genera.                            
              Within the cornaceous clade, comparative sequencing of                         
              the chloroplast gene ORFK, which evolves three times                           
              faster that rbcL, will be used to elucidate                                    
              relationships among Cornus and its close allies.                               
              Within Cornus, our analysis of chloroplast DNA                                 
              restriction site data has already yielded a                                    
              phylogenetic hypothesis based on 24 species.                                   
              Comparative sequencing of the internal transcribed                             
              spacer regions (ITS-1 and ITS-2) of the nuclear                                
              ribosomal RNA genes (rnDNA) will facilitate a direct                           
              comparison of the concordance of nuclear and                                   
              chloroplast DNA phylogenies with Cornus.  In addition                          
              to elucidating relationships within a notoriously                              
              problematic group, this study will be of broad                                 
              systematic importance because it represents one of the                         
              first attempts to employ chloroplast genes other that                          
              rbcL in phylogenetic reconstruction and compare nuclear                        
              and cytoplasmically based phylogenies.  Lastly, the                            
              evolution of certain morphological, cytological,                               
              phytochemical, phytochemical, and embryological                                
              characters will also be examined in light of the                               
              molecular phylogenies obtained.
