Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9224333

Award Number: 9224333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Alford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Graduate School
	      365 Fifth Avenue
	      New York, NY  100164309    212/790-4395

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The socialization of lawyers is an important factor in shaping the             
              legal profession, both with respect to the behavior patterns that              
              characterize legal practice and with respect to the attitudes that             
              underlie the role of lawyers in society.  Since lawyers have a                 
              powerful and pervasive influence on the social fabric, it is                   
              important to understand their professional development.  It is well            
              known that the techniques used by law schools in training students             
              to "think like lawyers" have a formative effect on the ways in                 
              which law school graduates then approach their professional tasks              
              and obligations.  The socializing effects of different kinds of law            
              firms have received far less scholarly attention, in part because              
              of the difficulty of gaining access to firms in order to observe               
              and interview attorneys at work.  Since law firms, like all                    
              organizations, develop their own occupational cultures, it is                  
              argued that cultural expectations and pressures will vary depending            
              on how different professional perspectives dominate from firm to               
              firm.  It is also likely that these perspectives fall into a few               
              distinct patterns that will lead to a systematic way to categorize             
              the socialization of lawyers in firms.                                         
                                                                                             
              This doctoral dissertation will be based on interviews with 25-30              
              first- through third-year associates at each of the 30 largest law             
              firms in New York City, where structural variables such as size,               
              rates of growth, span of control and type of work done are similar.            
              The study hypothesizes that these firms will exhibit one of two                
              distinct types of organizational culture, termed collegial-driven              
              and market-driven.  Six measures of differences in organizational              
              culture will be employed:  date of formation, external and internal            
              spacial relations, professional hierarchy, recruitment and                     
              promotion styles, division of professional labor, and command and              
              control regimes.  Additional interviews will include partners                  
              responsible for hiring, junior associate oversight and training,               
              practice administration, and firm mamagement, as well as former                
              associates of each firm.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The research will make important theoretical contributions to our              
              understanding of the processes affecting professionalization in                
              general, and specifically of the development of professional                   
              identity and values among lawyers.  The latter has important                   
              implications for the design of legal practice and organization, as             
              well.
