Title       : RUI: Contemporary Influences on Political Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9224043

Award Number: 9224043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125272             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Marcus   (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Theiss-Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most people have a standing decision to be tolerant or intolerant.             
              Researchers concerned with tolerance have generally assumed that               
              people rely on these established beliefs when reacting to disliked             
              groups.  Yet outburst of intolerance and repression are part of the            
              United States' historical landscape.  Why have these outbursts                 
              occurred?                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research investigation provides a possible explanation for                
              these fluctuations in tolerance.  When people feel threatened,                 
              which is likely when an unpopular group bursts onto the political              
              scene, a natural response is anxiety.  These feelings of anxiety               
              may subsequently result in political intolerance.  Preliminary                 
              results from a series of pretest studies corroborate the                       
              relationships among threat, anxiety and intolerance:  people's                 
              perceptions of a group's belligerence and treachery result in                  
              increased anxiety and, hence, increased intolerance.  But how are              
              these threat perceptions, shaped?                                              
                                                                                             
              The investigators will examine the impact of threat on tolerance by            
              studying variations in how the media and political and legal elites            
              present unpopular groups and their ideas. To examine these                     
              concerns, the researchers present video stimuli to people in a                 
              series of experiments developed in three phases.  Phase I involves             
              creating realistic videos about the two most frequently chosen                 
              least-liked groups in the pretest studies:  racist and pro-choice              
              groups.  Four videos for each group will contain combinations of               
              the two experimental manipulations:  high and low versions of the              
              probability of the group coming to power, and threatening and                  
              reassuring versions of the group violating the norms of proper,                
              orderly behavior.  They will also create video segments that have              
              legal or political elites priming abstract democratic principles.              
                                                                                             
              Phase II consists of manipulation checks to ensure that the videos             
              actually manipulate the intended qualities.                                    
                                                                                             
              Phase III involves conducting the full experiments.  In the first              
              experiment, subjects will be randomly assigned to a video                      
              presentation that includes the normative violations and probability            
              manipulations.  The second experiment will use these videos with               
              the democratic norms segment added to them.  The third set of                  
              experiments will examine variations on these basic experiments,                
              including placing tolerance in an electoral context, varying the               
              length of media coverage, and varying the nature of exposure to                
              news stories about the group.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The model of political decision making they develop potentially has            
              wide application in the areas of media priming and framing effects,            
              controlled and automatic processing of information, and affective              
              and cognitive reactions to political stimuli.
