Title       : Multi-Disciplinary Investigation of Guyamas Basin Using Manned and Unmanned
               Vehicles Via Shore-based Satellite Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1993   
File        : a9224825

Award Number: 9224825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150017             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Ballard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A multidisciplinary effort will augment a major, multi-media,                  
              educational expedition planned for the Guaymas Basin off the coast             
              of Mexico scheduled for late February and early March 1993.  The               
              educational aspects of this program are being funded by the JASON              
              Foundation for Education and the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations.             
              Scientists will be using a manned submersible and a remotely                   
              operated vehicle system to explore the seafloor and conduct                    
              experiments.  Investigators at sea will transmit live video from               
              cameras mounted on the underwater vehicles via satellite to other              
              scientists and students at several sites across the country.                   
              Concurrently, scientists ashore in their laboratories will also be             
              able to control several functions of the remotely operated undersea            
              vehicles while they are submerged. The expedition amounts to a                 
              significant undersea test of telepresence using modern oceano-                 
              graphic and satellite communications technologies.                             
                                                                                             
              The NSF funds will permit the extended use of these undersea                   
              systems and communications links beyond that required for the JASON            
              Project's educational purposes.  NSF-sponsored ocean scientists                
              will be able to test and assess the effectiveness of these modern              
              undersea capabilities for controlling submerged vehicles and making            
              seafloor observations remotely and for manipulating certain basic              
              ocean science research experiments.
