Title       : Computational Proxies for Genomic Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9224726

Award Number: 9224726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97672              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith B. Cushing judyc@elwha.evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Kutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9224726  Cushing    SDB/RUI:  Computational Proxies for Genomic Databases   
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.   In a perfect
              world output from one program could easily be used as  input to another.  The
              world of scientific computing is far from  perfect, however, and scientists are
              plagued with the task of  writing special purpose data conversion programs. 
              Business data  processing are solving interoperability problems by using shared
               databases.  Unfortunately, current database systems do not serve  scientific
              applications well.  This research addresses the problems  of interoperability
              in the scientific realm by interfacing  databases to computational biology
              programs.  It builds on previous  research in object-oriented databases for
              computational chemistry  conducted jointly by the Oregon Graduate Institute in
              Portland,  Oregon; Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories in Richland, 
              Washington; Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories, New York.  Results of  previous
              research are being extended to cover genomic databases by  using T4
              bacteriophage data (perhaps the most nearly complete  representation of genetic
              information for any individual organism).   The genomic database is extended to
              include a "computational proxy  mechanism", which allows for parameterized
              interface of the T4 data  to existing computation-intensive distributed
              applications.  The  research has three objectives: (1) to demonstrate that
              previous  database work is generalizable to scientific domains other than 
              computational chemistry, and serviceable as a model for database  interface
              with so-called "legacy" applications; (2) to make  computational operations as
              well as genomic data available to the  T4 researchers; and (3) to demonstrate
              that previous genomic  database work in yeasts is transferable to other sites
              and  organisms.  The long term impact of this research is to transfer  the
              current computing environment that the computational scientists  find too
              complex to a data-centered approach  that improves the  interoperability of
              scientific data and programs.   ***
