Title       : Dissertation Research: Brazil Nut Regeneration and Seedling Autecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9224229

Award Number: 9224229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy L. White   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Duryea  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1176,5913,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Global attention has focused on the recently created                           
              extractive reserves in the Brazilian Amazon as a                               
              promising new land use strategy that encourages the                            
              simultaneous use and conservation of the rainforest.                           
              Although the extractive community has utilized and                             
              managed the forest for decades, this new mandate                               
              coupled with increasing population densities demands a                         
              higher level of management sophistication.  The                                
              scientific community can play an important role in the                         
              testing of various production strategies open to these                         
              rainforest producers; however, research has been very                          
              limited.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will assist extractivists in                             
              Acre, Brazil in evaluating technological options                               
              designed to increase sustainable production of the                             
              native species, Brazil nut (Bertholletia excelsa Humb.                         
              & Bompl.), valued for its many traditional uses and                            
              great economic value.  Study objectives are to examine:                        
              (1) Brazil nut seed germination success comparing the                          
              effects of date of fruit fall, seed size, and seed                             
              pretreatment.  These data will provide practical                               
              information for seed collection and storage as well as                         
              specific scientific data on the causes of the observed                         
              slow and uneven germination.  (2) Brazil nut seedling                          
              establishment success in three areas within the                                
              reserves: (a) Forest gaps, (b) Shifting cultivation                            
              plots, and (c) Pastures, employing two inexpensive                             
              planting techniques and post-planting regimes.  These                          
              experiments will determine how Brazil nut responds                             
              physiologically to varied planting environments, and                           
              what factors limit seedling establishment and early                            
              growth.  (3) Role of Brazil nut in the extractivist                            
              production system, comparing traditional uses and                              
              management of the species with changes to the system                           
              created by the introduced Brazil nut enrichment                                
              technologies.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Documentation of traditional management and uses will                          
              assist in understanding indigenous techniques that have                        
              maintained the species over generations and may yield                          
              valuable information for development of potential                              
              market products.  Understanding changes generated by                           
              the new establishment technologies will facilitate                             
              critical evaluation on a socio-economic and biological                         
              level.
