Title       : Neuroendocrine Regulation of Prolactin Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9224804

Award Number: 9224804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Badura   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9224804  Badura    Prolactin, a protein hormone secreted by the anterior
              pituitary  gland, is involved in a large number of physiological and 
              behavioral processes in mammals, including estrus cyclicity,  immune system
              activation, stress, milk production, and maternal  behavior. While this hormone
              is clearly involved in many  different physiological systems, the precise
              mechanism of action  and the ways in which prolactin secretion is controlled
              remains  to be resolved.  It is difficult to study not only because of its 
              multiple modes of action but because prolactin surges and chronic  secretions
              appear to be differently regulated.  Dr. Badura is  using a clever model system
              to examine the neuroendocrine  regulation of prolactin release.  She is taking
              advantage of the  fact that prolactin shows a marked annual fluctuation that 
              corresponds with changes in photoperiod, most likely daylength.   Dr. Badura
              will incorporate photoperiodic cues to examine the  factors the underlie the
              regulation of prolactin secretion.  She  will be concentrating on two
              neuropeptides, vasoactive intestinal  polypeptide and oxytocin.  These peptides
              hormones are likely  modulatory factors since they are located in the
              paraventricular  nucleus of the hypothalamus, a brain region that she has 
              previously shown to play an important role in the stimulatory  modulation of
              basal prolactin release.   Using state-of-the-art  neurochemical and
              neuroanatomical procedures, Dr. Badura will  identify the sites of action and
              the relative contributions of  modulatory factors in the expression of
              photoperiodic changes in  the neuroendocrine control of this physiologically
              relevant  hormone.  Dissecting the mechanisms by which prolactin regulates 
              apparently unrelated physiological systems will increase our  understanding of
              the adaptive significance of evolving hormonal  systems that possess multiple
              targets and functions.    ***
