Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987052

Award Number: 9987052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley G. Prussin prussin@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christos H. Papadimitriou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of California at Berkeley Center for Underrepresented Engineering
              Students (CUES) is administering the "CSEMS at Cal" program under the NSF
              Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program. "CSEMS at
              Cal" is awarding scholarships of $2,500 per year to forty economically
              disadvantaged students, who are being referred to as Cal-CSEMS Scholars.
              Recruitment of the Cal-CSEMS Scholars is targeting three groups: 1) incoming
              freshmen, 2) incoming transfer students, and 3) continuing students at the
              junior level. This group includes students from majors in Berkeley's College of
              Engineering, chemical engineering majors in the College of Chemistry, and
              students in the computer science or mathematics majors in the College of
              Letters and Science. All students targeted for the scholarships demonstrate
              financial need and are being verified by Berkeley's Financial Aid Office.
              Students are being chosen by a committee, which is employing a comprehensive
              approach in evaluating each student's academic merit and professionalism.
              

There is an increasing shortfall in the number of qualified students able
              to fill the need for computer science and engineering professionals in the
              workforce. Students' financial troubles are increasingly likely to interrupt
              and delay their degree completion. Currently, 60% of Berkeley students
              demonstrate some type of financial need, and are receiving need-based support
              in order to attend college. Financial need is perhaps a more serious impediment
              to timely completion of engineering degrees because the technical course load
              is often not compatible with long hours of outside work. The "CSEMS at Cal"
              program is allocating support to financially needy students to assist them in
              completing their Bachelors of Science degrees in engineering and computer
              science fields. The "CSEMS at Cal" scholarships are key incentives for
              attracting and retaining a talented undergraduate engineering student
              population. 

A special emphasis is being placed on recruiting
              underrepresented students, currently the object of the College of Engineering's
              outreach and recruitment activities in the CUES Office. Although CUES'
              expertise is in working with underrepresented student groups, the academic
              services, counseling and advocacy offered by CUES programs are equally useful
              and appropriate for students from low-income, majority groups. Cal-CSEMS
              scholars are participating in a variety of retention-related activities tied to
              the existing CUES student support infrastructure. This includes faculty
              advising, academic excellence workshops, tutoring, mentoring, advising,
              internships in industry and/or research experience, and assistance with
              graduate school applications or job placement. A unifying theme of the "CSEMS
              at Cal" program is to increase student retention by helping each student
              develop into a committed member of the engineering and academic community.
              

The "CSEMS at Cal" program is providing an important opportunity to extend
              CUES practices, academic activities and diversity training to a wider base of
              students and faculty. The Cal-CSEMS scholars is also providing a vehicle to
              strengthen CUES' relationships with its industry partners; namely by increasing
              the number of students CUES can refer for hiring opportunities. 

