Title       : Computer Scinece, Engineering and Math Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987308

Award Number: 9987308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry J. Cole jcole@jscc.cc.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol P. Dougan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Jackson State Cmty College
	      2046 No. Parkway
	      Jackson, TN  383013797    901/424-3520

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Jackson State Community College is conducting a project for recruitment,
              selection, registration, support services, and retention activities for
              students in Engineering Technology, Computer Technology, and Mathematics
              programs.  Jackson State, a state-supported, public two-year college, serves
              the substantially rural fourteen-county area of West Tennessee.  Two of these
              counties are majority African-American with a growing Hispanic population.  Due
              to its location in a predominantly low-income, rural area, many potential
              students require substantial amounts of financial aid in order to attend
              college on a full-time basis.  At this time, Jackson State has no endowment to
              support student scholarships.  Furthermore, some students are reticent to apply
              for financial aid.  Thus, this scholarship program funded by the National
              Science Foundation is improving the perceived image of financial aid and
              encouraging more students to apply.  College leaders are using an enhanced,
              systematic and professional program of public information and recruitment to
              result in forty eligible, full-time students for the three programs
              involved.

The program is supporting students to successful completion of the
              two-year degree programs. These support services include: informational
              recruiting sessions that outline the programs and provide realistic
              expectations for prospects; cohort selection and organization that enhance the
              social and intellectual experiences of students; careful selection of classes
              to ensure progress toward the degree; ongoing support services such as
              tutoring, special feedback groups, field trips, case-based learning in
              professional classes, and assignment of a faculty mentor.

Jackson State's
              technology programs have been structured to offer students a professional
              experience in both engineering and in computer technology along with
              incorporated workplace values and communication skills that are presented
              concurrently throughout the program.  University parallel courses are preparing
              students for success at the receiving institution, where students perform as
              well as native students.  The college provides job placement and career
              guidance to its students, and it maintains close articulation agreements with
              local and state four-year universities.  Scholarship students who participate
              in this program are being given careful attention and support throughout their
              career at Jackson State and beyond to the transfer institution or the
              workplace.


