Title       : Adding Domain Knowledge to Inductive Learning Methods for Classifying Texts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9987869

Award Number: 9987869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Ashley ashley+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to investigate the integration of background
              knowledge into a machine learning approach for automatically indexing text
              documents. Case-Based Reasoning models for utilizing past experiences have been
              developed for domains where the cases are text. The prohibitive cost of
              manually indexing cases has hindered the development and maintenance of large
              systems for applications in the law, ethics, or help-desk settings. New methods
              that learn a text classifier from a small collection of annotated case
              summaries, which will classify large numbers of cases automatically, can help
              overcome this knowledge-acquisition bottleneck. Text learning algorithms used
              elsewhere are not applicable because they require large training sets. Here,
              background knowledge about the domain and a linguistic analysis of the examples
              is employed to develop a better representation of the examples, which will
              allow learning algorithms to better generalize from small collections of text
              cases. The project will also yield a better understanding of what makes a good
              text representation for learning and classification, and the effects of adding
              background knowledge and natural language processing tools. The experiments are
              based on a relatively small collection in a well-defined domain, in which the
              PI and his group have accumulated significant expertise. This unique background
              allows a more thorough analysis of the experimental results than generally
              performed. The classifier is evaluated both on a set of marked-up summaries and
              the corresponding full-length documents. Further experiments explore the use of
              unseen and unlabeled cases, and explain the observed behavior. The results and
              the analysis of the experiments will enable researchers in other domains to
              improve the representation of text cases. Thus, the research results will not
              only be relevant for case-based reasoning and machine learning, but also for
              information retrieval and other text-based applications. 
