Title       : Some Problems in Topological Rigidity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9987185

Award Number: 9987185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125855             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Thomas Farrell farrell@math.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9987185
F. Thomas Farrell

The goal of this project is to resolve some
              questions about 
the structure of manifolds. Manifolds are geometric objects
              
which locally resemble the space of Euclidean geometry; but 
could be quite
              different globally. For example the surface of 
the earth, on a small scale,
              can be thought of as Euclid's plane. 
But on a large scale, it is more useful
              to model it on the
sphere. One way to detect global differences is to travel
              
long distances, return and see if something has changed. For 
example, if
              you walk around the surface of a Moebius band, 
you'll return on the opposite
              side. The collection of all 
travel routes (up to continuous deformation)
              forms an algebraic 
object called the Poincare group of the manifold. A basic
              
conjecture formulated almost 50 years ago by A. Borel is 
that the Poincare
              group of a closed aspherical manifold 
determines this manifold up to a
              continuous bijective 
correspondence. Closed means without boundary but finite
              in 
extent. The Moebius band, for example, is not closed but 
the sphere is.
              Aspherical means that any continuous image 
of a sphere bounds the image of a
              ball.  Spheres of 
dimension bigger than two and correspondingly higher
              
dimensional balls must be allowed in this definition. 
For example, the
              Borel conjecture is true for the surface 
of a doughnut.  However, the sphere
              itself is "clearly" 
not aspherical.

Farrell in collaboration with L.E.
              Jones have verified 
some important cases of Borel's conjecture and will
              continue 
to work on it. One interesting question is whether there is 
a
              "best of all possible" maps giving the continuous bijection. 
It was once
              thought that the unique harmonic homotopy
equivalence does this in the case
              both manifolds are 
negatively curved.  Farrell, Jones, and P. Ontaneda have
              
recently shown that this is not so in general. (Farrell,
Ontaneda and M.S.
              Raghunathan extending this work have 
just produced such examples even with
              pairs of diffeomorphic 
manifolds: i.e. the harmonic map homotopic to the
              diffeomorphism 
is not univalent.) But it is still open whether this harmonic
              
map is always cellular.  Note if so this would contradict 
the Poincare
              Conjecture.  Another problem to be investigated 
is whether any finite group
              of symmetries of the Poincare 
group lifts to a group of symmetries of the
              closed aspherical 
manifold provided the Poincare group has trivial center.
              The 
thrust of this problem is to find interesting cases where 
it is true. 
              The case of surfaces is, for example, the 
classical Nielsen problem solved by
              Kerkhoff. Farrell and 
Jones have already obtained some other positive partial
              
results on this problem. In their work on these geometric 
problems, Farrell
              and Jones have formulated conjectures 
about the structure of the algebraic K
              and L theories of 
an arbitrary group ring. They will continue their work on
              
verifying these conjectures. Again the thrust of this effort 
is to give
              positive solutions for interesting groups

