Title       : STRAW BALE BUILDING: Values, Ethics, and Building Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9987346

Award Number: 9987346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn Henderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1041,9197,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In today's world of rising building costs and concerns over deforestation and
              pollution the technique of building with straw bales is enjoying a renaissance
              from its historic roots in 1880s Nebraska. This study will explore the role of
              building codes as a focus of the struggle between the ecology-oriented values
              espoused by the Straw Bale Building Movement and the health and safety values
              which underlie building codes in general. The research focus will be on the
              construction of definitions of safe and healthy built environments. Attention
              will be given to the normative statements  professionals articulate at the
              specific offices where approval of straw bale building has been sought, what
              kinds of data about straw bale building have been regarded as significant, and
              in what manner these data have convincingly been represented. The research will
              involve comparisons of Arizona and New Mexico, where much of the earliest straw
              bale building innovations took place and the earliest codes were passed, with
              codes in California and Texas where early straw bale activism also occurred.
              Further research objectives are to understand: 1) the construction and role of
              "green building" ethics (those oriented to preserving the environment by
              consuming fewer products and less energy in the building process as well as in
              the built product) in the heterogeneous network of people and resources
              underlying the contemporary Straw Bale Building Movement and 2) how the straw
              bale community expresses these ethics through actual building practices.
              Research will use participant observation at community building projects, and
              open-ended interviews, and document analysis. Participant observation provides
              the necessary contextual data to track the transfer of unarticulated knowledge
              between individuals. Photographs will document work practices during building
              construction and inspection. In-depth interviews with owner-builders,
              architects, contractors, and building officials will help elicit the values,
              ethical judgments and underlying meanings. Documentary materials will be
              analyzed to trace communication patterns and networks. Qualitative examination
              of the manner in which the everyday practices of grass-roots innovators and
              building code officers  embed values will use the struggle over building codes
              and standardization of straw bale building techniques to reveal the
              construction and negotiation of definitions of a healthy and safe built
              environment and to identify successful and unsuccessful citizen strategies to
              foster sustainable practices. It will also advance understanding of models of
              alternative technical knowledge and its transfer outside conventional and
              corporate design and development contexts, expanding and testing theory from
              science and technology studies. Findings will be disseminated in two book
              chapters of a volume on the socio-technical aspects of the Straw Bale Movement
              and in journal articles. Beyond scholarly publications, wider audiences will be
              addressed through design, architecture and engineering journals and Smithsonian
              and green building publications.
