Title       : Undergraduate Research Experience in Molecular and Cellular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9987937

Award Number: 9987937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan E. Wells dwells@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory M. Cahill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Dan E. Wells                                                                  
                                 Proposal # 9987937



Abstract

The Department of
              Biology and Biochemistry at the University of Houston proposes to establish a
              Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) site in the field of Molecular and
              Cellular Biology.  Along with a substantial cost-sharing from various
              administrative units at the University of Houston, NSF funds are requested
              which together will support twelve undergraduate students who will have the
              opportunity to conduct research and participate in other science-related
              activities during the summers of 2000-2002.  The objectives of the Program are
              (1) to provide incentives for students to pursue a career in science by giving
              them the opportunity for a realistic and rewarding experience in a research
              environment, and (2) to make this opportunity accessible to a great diversity
              of students, in particular those from minority groups and those from
              Institutions with limited research resources.  Through this multi-faceted
              experience, students will be provided with a rigorous, but stimulating training
              that will convey not only excitement about science, but also expose them to the
              realistic aspect of conducting basic research.  Students will work closely with
              their mentors, who have designed realistic projects that will teach the
              practical and conceptual aspects of molecular and cellular Biology.  In
              addition, during their 10-week training, the students will also become familiar
              with searching and assessing scientific literature, exchange of scientific
              ideas, and techniques for verbal and written presentation of scientific data. 
              Workshops that expose students to issues such as ethics, safety, and career
              choices will also be organized.  The Program will end with a poster session
              similar to those featured at scientific meetings, to be attended by the entire
              faculty and students.  The participants who present the two best posters will
              be awarded with travel funds to attend a national meeting.  The success of the
              Program will be evaluated through student and faculty questionnaires, and by
              long-term tracking of student participants.

