Title       : Integrated Graduate Program in the Physical Biosciences: From Molecular Machines
               to Neural Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a9987623

Award Number: 9987623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3242000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Rokhsar rokhsar@physics.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ehud Y. Isacoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos J. Bustamante  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987623
Daniel Rokhsar - University of California at Berkeley
IGERT: Physical
              Biosciences: From Molecular Machines to Neural Imaging

This Integrative
              Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the
              establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and
              research on the development and application of physical and computational
              methods for the study of biological problems at the molecular, cellular, and
              systems levels.  The program is a joint effort of 31 faculty and research
              scientists drawn from seven Departments at the University of California at
              Berkeley and three Divisions at the neighboring Lawrence Berkeley National
              Laboratory. It will transcend traditional academic boundaries to produce the
              next generation of physical bioscientists, equally conversant with physical and
              biological methods and problems.  Research thrust areas include biomolecular
              structure, dynamics, and design, and cellular signaling networks and systems
              neuroscience, with an emphasis on the development and application of novel
              molecular microscopy and detection devices and theoretical and computational
              modeling approaches.  Students enrolled in any of nine existing Ph.D. programs
              will participate in personalized training, including new courses on
              single-molecule methods, bioinformatics, molecular biophysics, and hand-on
              laboratory courses in physical bioscience.  Research and career placement
              seminars, retreats, summer internships and intensive courses, and a dual
              mentoring program will provide a rich environment for multidisciplinary
              training.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
              educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds
              and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
              demands of the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change
              in graduate education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the
              program, awards are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The
              intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the Directorates for
              Biological Sciences, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Engineering, and
              Education and Human Resources.

