Title       : US-South Africa Cooperative Research: Studies of Phase Transformations in Fe
               Fischer-Tropsch Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2000   
File        : a9987415

Award Number: 9987415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhaya K. Datye datye@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 1066,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a cooperative research project between Abhaya Datye, Center
              for Micro-Engineered Materials, University of New Mexico (UNM), and Neil
              Coville, Department of Chemistry, University of the Witwatersrand (WITS),
              Johannesburg, South Africa.  The project will involve the exchange of graduate
              students for short-term research visits.  The investigators plan to study iron
              catalysts for Fischer-Tropsch (FT) syntheses.  The work will be aimed at
              overcoming problems such as catalyst deactivation and low activity.  After
              subjecting catalysts to several different environments, detailed
              characterizations, using X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy,
              and other surface analyses will be performed.  Reactor studies will be
              performed simultaneously to determine the effects of catalyst preparation on
              selectivity.

Previous work performed jointly by Professors Datye and Coville
              led to improved understanding of the nature of the active phase in FT
              catalysts.  In this collaboration the WITS group will perform the synthetic
              inorganic chemistry, in-situ Mossbauer spectroscopy, and the reactor work.  The
              UNM group will carry out characterization studies using transmission electron
              spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction.  They will also be involved in sol-gel
              synthesis of the catalyst materials.  FT catalysts are used to convert
              coal-derived synthesis gas to liquid fuels.  This process is currently employed
              in South Africa and could become more important in the United States if
              petroleum-based fuels become scarcer.



