Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a9987230

Award Number: 9987230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasha J. Karant   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph D. Chavez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerstin Voigt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josephine G. Mendoza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen A. Kolehmainen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      5500 University Parkway
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    909/880-5929

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21), Computer Science (31), Engineering Technology (58)
              This project is providing scholarships to economically disadvantaged students
              in the disciplines of Computer Science and Mathematics. Since Applied Physics
              majors experience a curriculum that is oriented towards engineering technology
              and/or computer technology, these students are also receiving support. The
              project builds upon the institution's Research Career Integration Program
              (RCIPro), which is an NSF Minority Institutions Infrastructure (MI-I) award, as
              well as other programs such as the Student Assistance in Learning (SAIL),
              Alliance for Minority Progress (AMP), and McNair Scholarship. The program is
              serving as a pipeline between the University and the regional community
              colleges and high schools. A number of community colleges have direct
              coordinated participation in the project, along with the San Bernardino
              Superintendent of Public Instruction who oversees all of the regional high
              schools. In addition, local companies and industries such as Packet Engines are
              contributing four scholarships each of equal value to each of the approximately
              40 scholarships being supported NSF funds. Senior personnel on the project
              include chairs of all involved Departments, the Director of the University AMP
              program, and the Vice President of Student Services. Through the University
              Career Center and vendor partners, meaningful workplace career opportunities
              are available for all of the CSEMS scholarship recipients. Additionally,
              personnel both from Academic Affairs and Student Services are involved in all
              aspects of the program, including recruiting, evaluation, mentoring, support,
              and dissemination. The University is a member of the Hispanic Association of
              Colleges and Universities (HACU) and has earned recognition as a
              Hispanic-serving institution.
