Title       : NSF Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a9987057

Award Number: 9987057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Braja M. Das   (Principal Investigator current)
              Madeleine Fish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Sacramento Fdn
	      6000 J Street
	      Sacramento, CA  95819    916/278-7381

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31), Engineering - Civil (54), Engineering - Electrical (55),
              Engineering - Mechanical (56), Engineering - Technology (58), Engineering -
              Other (59) 
The NSF Scholars Program is providing approximately 53
              scholarships to low-income engineering and computer science students who are
              within two years of graduation, with special attention being given to those
              students from historically underrepresented groups including women, disabled
              students, and those from identified ethnic and racial groups. Each recipient
              receives an award equivalent to the cost of his/her full-time tuition and fees.
              The objective of the NSF Scholars Program is to provide a holistic model of
              student support, including guidance, mentoring, peer networking, financial
              assistance, and professional development to ensure the students' academic
              success, retention, shortened time to graduation, and permanent career
              opportunities in engineering and computer science after degree. The first
              cohort of students to begin the program in January 2000 is being recruited from
              the 160 upper division students who are already enrolled in the College of
              Engineering and Computer Science and meet the low-income and underrepresented
              eligibility focus, with future cohorts being recruited from outside the
              University as well. Potential recipients are selected based on their academic
              merit as well as on indicators of professional success. Each candidate fills
              out an application, submits letters of recommendation, and engages in a
              behavioral interview. Award recipients attend an orientation, participate in
              monthly meetings with all other NSF Scholars, meet with the Retention Counselor
              bi-weekly to assess academic progress, and take part in study groups and
              tutoring sessions, if necessary. In addition, program participants engage in a
              minimum number of hours of community service within the College to share their
              knowledge with lower-division students and reinforce their own skills. NSF
              scholars also pursue professional development by attending career guidance
              courses, resume writing and interviewing workshops, as well as a full-time paid
              co-op/internship placement for a semester with an industry sponsor in the
              student's field. One of the great strengths in the NSF Scholars Program is the
              dual financial support provided by NSF scholarships as well as paid co-op
              employment. Without having to work during the semester, students can
              concentrate on their studies, achieve academic success, and graduate sooner.
              This program clearly enables a greater number of students from groups
              historically underrepresented in Engineering and Computer Science to earn
              degrees in their fields of study. 

