Title       : Integration of Neuroendocrine and Vocal Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9987341

Award Number: 9987341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $614405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew H. Bass ahb3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              These studies will identify how the neuropeptides (arginine vasotocin, AVT and
              isotocin, IT) and steroid hormones influence neural circuits that generate
              vertebrate social behaviors, in this case vocalization. The project will
              investigate: (1) the development and steroid-dependent plasticity of
              neuropeptide modulation of vocal-related neurons, and (2) the role of
              aromatase, an enzyme that converts testosterone to estradiol, in regulating
              steroid effects on vocal neurons either directly and/or indirectly via their
              influence on neuropeptides. The goals will be achieved using
              neurophysiological, neuroanatomical, biochemical and behavioral methods.
              


Vocalization behaviors are central to mediating social interactions in
              animal groups as diverse as fish and humans. This lab studies the
              neuroendocrine control of vocalization in fish with two male types or morphs. 
              Among midshipman fish, "singing" males court females with a "song", while
              "sneaking" males neither sing nor court females but instead steal
              fertilizations from singing males that have attracted females to their nest.
              Although all adults produce agonistic calls, sound production differs here too
              with social context for the male morphs and females. The neurophysiological
              properties of a pattern generator that establishes sex- and morph-typical
              vocalizations is directly influenced by the action of AVT and IT (the fish
              equivalents of arginine vasopressin and oxytocin in mammals) in the preoptic
              area-anterior hypothalamus, a brain region implicated in the control of
              social/vocal behaviors across all vertebrates. The pattern of AVT and IT
              modulation is dependent on social/vocal behavior, not gonadal sex. These
              patterns are also paralleled by differences in aromatase levels in vocal brain
              regions. Together, these findings provide a unique opportunity to investigate
              the separate and/or interactive effects of peptides and steroid hormones on
              brain circuitry that determines social behaviors. 



