Title       : A Multi-Faceted First-Year Program to Recruit and Retain Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987118

Award Number: 9987118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Kee rkee@engr.udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes a set of student-support programs designed and
              implemented by the University of Dayton's School of Engineering to address the
              need to recruit and retain greater numbers of talented students who receive
              baccalaureate degrees in engineering fields. Created in the last four years,
              these programs have been successful in achieving the goal of increasing both
              recruitment and retention rates of students enrolled in engineering programs at
              the University of Dayton. This project is providing scholarships for
              financially disadvantaged students who are benefiting from participation in
              these successful student-support programs. Scholarship support is giving
              students the financial assistance they need to sustain full-time enrollment in
              engineering programs, to complete their baccalaureate degrees, and to pursue
              post-graduate employment or advanced study in the engineering professions.
              

During the 1990s, the School of Engineering (SOE) was confronted with low
              enrollments and retention rates of engineering students. Because first-year
              retention rates were especially low (69.5%) compared to retention rates in
              second, third or fourth years, the SOE decided to focus its retention
              improvement efforts at the first-year. A survey was conducted of students
              leaving the program after the first year, revealing these reasons: (1)
              difficulty with calculus, chemistry, and physics; (2) lack of association with
              other engineering students and faculty in the first year; and (3) inadequate
              first-year advising. 

To increase enrollments and first-year retention
              rates, the SOE has created several programs emphasizing student development and
              academic support in the first year. These programs consist of the First-Year
              Program, designed to assist and retain all first-year students; the Enriched
              Engineering Program, designed to recruit and retain "at-risk" students who
              normally would not be permitted to enroll in engineering because of low ACT or
              SAT scores; the Minority Engineering Program, designed to recruit and retain
              under-represented minorities; and the Introduction to Engineering Design
              course, providing all first-year students with an overview of all engineering
              fields offered at the University in a laboratory environment. Some of the
              effective elements of these programs include collaborative learning workshops,
              cohorted classes in calculus, chemistry, and physics, specialized advising,
              professional development sessions, and professional mentors paired with
              students. 

In each of the two years of the grant, scholarships is 
              benefiting 40 engineering students who meet eligibility requirements and who
              successfully compete for the scholarships based on academic merit and
              professionalism. Special effort is made to ensure full consideration of
              students who are members of under-represented groups in engineering fields. Of
              the currently enrolled students who qualify for a scholarship, 18 percent are
              members of under-represented minority groups and 22 percent are female. 

