Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Integrative Human Evolutionary Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9987590

Award Number: 9987590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2674059            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Wood bwood@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison S. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah A. Tishkoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Lieberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987590
Bernard Wood - George Washington University
IGERT: Integrative Human
              Evolutionary Biology

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research
              Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary,
              multi-institutional, graduate training program of education and research on
              human evolutionary biology. The Human Evolutionary Biology Doctoral Program
              (HEBDP) is a graduate program linking anthropology with molecular and
              organismal biology, chemistry, engineering and geology that promotes
              interdisciplinary research emphasizing experimental and comparative methods for
              studying human evolutionary history. HEBDP is a collaboration between George
              Washington University, Howard University, the University of Maryland, the
              Smithsonian Institution, and other Washington DC area researchers.  The
              evidence for our species' evolutionary history is well studied and of
              unquestionable social and scientific importance.  Yet, despite a wealth of
              fossil, archaeological, molecular, paleoecological and comparative data, issues
              as basic as hominid phylogeny, the evolution of bipedal locomotion, diet,
              language and cognition, and the effects of environmental change on human
              evolution, and vice versa, remain poorly understood.  These gaps in our
              knowledge partly occur because few students are trained in the new range of
              analytical, experimental and conceptual skills needed to test evolutionary
              hypotheses. HEBDP will combine coursework with innovative problem-based
              learning seminars, internships and research to train students in new methods
              for studying our species' fossil, archaeological and genetic records.  Because
              human evolutionary research has broad social and medical implications, HEBDP
              includes training in skills required for the effective public dissemination of
              science.  

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
              educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds
              and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
              demands of the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change
              in graduate education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the
              program, awards are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The
              intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the Directorates for Social,
              Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; Biological Sciences; Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences; Engineering; Geosciences; and Education and Human
              Resources.


