Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training in
               Advanced Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9987586

Award Number: 9987586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2597613            (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott F. Midkiff midkiff@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Abrams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Patrick Koelling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987586
Scott Midkiff - Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University
IGERT: Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training in
              Advanced Networking

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research
              Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary,
              multi-campus, graduate training program of education and research on advanced
              networking.  In this program, students from computer engineering, electrical
              engineering, computer science, industrial and systems engineering, and business
              will work with technology developers and advanced users from industry and
              government on multidisciplinary research targeted at the vision of the future
              Internet as the common, ubiquitous and global communications infrastructure. 
              The program will integrate research on broadband wireless access, mobile access
              to Internet resources and applications, Internet appliances, quality of
              service, heterogeneous network security, and management of large-scale
              networks.  The educational program develops students' ability to conduct
              research, integrate technical, business, regulatory, and global issues, work
              effectively in distributed, culturally diverse, multidisciplinary teams,
              communicate effectively, and conduct themselves in an ethical and professional
              manner.  The program leverages existing university investments to create this
              state-of-the-art distributed graduate education and research training program
              at two sites. Virginia Tech's Alexandria Research Institute provides access to
              industrial and government partners and a foundation in multidisciplinary and
              international programs. The main campus in Blacksburg provides access to the
              university's traditional research strengths and advanced networking
              infrastructure.  Steady-state enrollment is to be at least 19 students, with an
              average of five to six U.S. Ph.D. graduates per year.

IGERT is an NSF-wide
              program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future. 
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards are being
              made to nineteen institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this
              specific award reside in the Directorates for Computer and Information Science
              and Engineering; Engineering; Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; and
              Education and Human Resources.


