Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987121

Award Number: 9987121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond D. Bellem   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Embry Riddle Aero Univ
	      600 S. Clyde Morris Blvd.
	      Daytona Beach, FL  32114    386/226-6319

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU) is an independent, non-sectarian,
              not-for-profit co-educational university which serves culturally diverse
              students pursuing degrees in a number of  disciplines, including aerospace
              engineering, computer science, computer engineering, and electrical
              engineering, all disciplines which NSF seeks to support under this Program
              Announcement (NSF 99-121).  The applicant in this case is the Prescott campus
              of the University and is referred to as ERAU-Prescott.

	The NSF is offering
              to fund scholarships to low income students, who may also be ethnic minorities,
              in  pursuing degrees in the fields mentioned above.  ERAU-Prescott believes
              that it is perfectly positioned to offer these NSF scholarships for a number of
              reasons:  1)  Arizona and New Mexico are at or near the bottom of the 'poverty'
              level meaning that there are many financially-disadvantaged students,
              particularly ethnic minorities, who are in the  'target' population which the
              NSF Program seeks to help;  2). ERAU-Prescott is a relatively small private
              'teaching' University, dedicated to preparing undergraduates for entry into
              industry or graduate school; it has a history of helping students to become
              successful;  3).  a number of current students in the relevant degree programs
              are 'Pell Grant' eligible;  4).  the applicant has a positive relationship with
              a number of aerospace and electronics firms,  which affords special
              opportunities for its students for summer research, co-operative assignments,
              and new graduate hiring;   5).  the applicant has made a substantial financial
              commitment to the NSF program, agreeing to augment the NSF funds with major
              institutional  scholarships, offering material leverage to NSF funding

The
              proposal seeks to accomplish the Outcome Objectives of having the NSF
              scholarship recipients: 1).   complete their chosen undergraduate degree at the
              rate of 85%; 2) gain employment in their chosen fields upon graduation at the
              rate of  95%; and,  3). gain entry into graduate school at the rate of 90% of
              those who apply.  It undertakes to achieve these Outcome Objectives by using a
              series of Process Objectives which include: a).  aggressive recruitment,
              primarily at community colleges, of academically superior, low-income students;
              b).  a plan to orient, motivate and ready the students for rigorous academic
              performance; c). a plan to support the students through a professor-Mentor and
              advising program and, d). a plan to help them gain employment in their degree
              fields, or be accepted in graduate school.

	The Plan of Operation sets forth
              how and where recruitment will be done, how individual students will be
              assessed, monitored and assisted, how high quality scholarly activities will be
              incorporated in their experience, what type of faculty will be involved in
              mentoring and providing guidance for the students to prepare for the rigors of
              industry or graduate school, including research and project preparation and
              presentation, and how ERAU-Prescott plans to inform industry about the NSF
              program. 

Highly qualified personnel have been selected as personnel to
              carry out the Project and a plan is in place to ensure proper and efficient
              management of the Project.  An Evaluation Plan, which includes both formative
              and summative evaluations, write-ups,  and reports on the quantified measures
              selected, will help the applicant and NSF to properly evaluate the success of
              the Project.


