Title       : Experimental Investigations of Laboratory Markets Under Conditions of
               Substantially Increased Time Frame, Scope and Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9987352

Award Number: 9987352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Plott cplott@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project continues an exploration of the properties of experimental markets
              that operate on a time frame, scope and scale substantially beyond market
              systems that have been studied to date. Advances in technology, coupled with
              significant scientific progress, have made possible the implementation and
              control of laboratory experiments that could not be imagined a few years ago.
              The NSF funded project, which was initiated in late 1997, increased the number
              of markets operating in the software during an experiment from the two or three
              market maximum, typical of current studies, to over two hundred and the number
              could be increased many multiples of that number. The time devoted to an
              experiment was increased from two or three hours to two days but the technology
              and methodology could support experiments that last weeks. The number of
              subjects was to be increased from the dozen or so typical of current laboratory
              experiments to ninety in an actual experiment but the technology could support
              thousands. The research purposed removes constraints, opens new economic
              phenomena for study by laboratory experimental methods, develops new
              methodology and enhances the relevance of laboratory experimental results for
              applied purposes.

The research is focused on three broad objectives. The
              first is to initiate a process of identifying and classifying the roles of
              market time frames, scope and scale in shaping market behavior. The first
              phases of research involve the creation of large scale/scope experiments that
              incorporate critical aspects of well-researched, small-scale experiments. While
              the proposed large-scale experiments are substantially new, the links to
              previous work will make them 'anchors' that can be used for orientation in a
              variety of different experiments in large environments.  The second, and major
              objective is to open for scientific inquiry issues that cannot be studied
              within the context of existing technology, methodology and scale of operation.
              Completely new research topics and variables will be addressed as the possible
              influences of limited time, scope and scale are better understood. Both
              classical theory and applied theory involve the interaction of multiple
              markets, interdependencies, information asymmetries and mixed institutions
              including multiple organizations. However, experimentation on such topics has
              been limited because appropriate environments could not be created. The
              research project will create them, interpret the experimental implementation
              and analyze the results. The third objective is to develop the methodologies,
              procedures and technologies needed to support such experiments. The basic
              technology and management have been demonstrated as feasible but many issues
              remain. Subject screens, information feedback and general decision making
              environments, when operating in complex experiments, require research. Data
              displays and new methods of viewing results of experiments are also needed to
              facilitate the analysis from the new data source. Additional experimental
              management technology is needed, especially if the methodology is to pass the
              test of portability to other experimentalists.
