Title       : Ceramic-Based Multisite Microelectrodes for Electrochemical &
               Electrophysiological Recordings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a9987807

Award Number: 9987807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg A. Gerhardt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9987807
Greg A. Gerhardt
University of Kentucky 
Ceramic-Based
              Multisite Microelectrodes for Electrochemical and Electrophysiological
              Recordings

There is a great need in many areas of science for small devices
              that can be used to understand the chemical signaling that occurs between
              organisms and cells.  Such microelectrodes can be used for experiments
              involving chemical communication in biology, which is a fundamental process
              that has been poorly understood.  However, the development of microelectrodes
              has been hampered by the difficulty in manufacturing extremely small devices
              that are strong and affordable.  The goal of this award is to develop a
              multisite ceramic-based microelectrode that is sufficiently inexpensive to be
              disposable and can be applied to chemical recordings in biological systems such
              as plants, animals and even the ocean.
The present award has two major
              specific aims.  First, a series of biological recordings in the rat brain will
              be done using an existing microelectrode prototype. Following these initial
              measurements, several site mask designs will be implemented to determine the
              design that optimizes the recording site geometry for chemical measurements. 
              In addition, procedures will be investigated that allow for the formation of
              microelectrodes using thinner materials.  Second, a new generation of
              ceramic-based sensors will be developed to investigate the recording properties
              of platinum iridium (Pt-Ir) and carbon recording sites.  All of these will
              contribute to the development of a new generation of affordable microelectrodes
              for chemical measures in biological systems.
The ceramic-based microelectrodes
              that will be developed with this award have a number of potential uses in
              biology.  The new microelectrodes will be shared with other scientists to
              explore these potential uses.  In addition to collaborations with scientists,
              the microelectrodes will be used in numerous education programs that center on
              the dynamics of chemical signaling in biological systems.  These include
              programs to educate local businesses and high schools about the uses of rapid
              chemical measures in biological systems, a program for high school students to
              participate in summer research, and a short course, held at Woods Hole, MA,
              that involves the training of graduate students, postdoctoral students and
              faculty in the use of the microelectrodes. 

	 


