Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Materials Lifetime Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9987548

Award Number: 9987548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2699971            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Liaw pliaw@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Buchanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987548
Peter Liaw - University of Tennessee at Knoxville
IGERT: Materials 
              Lifetime  Science  and  Engineering

This Integrative Graduate Education and
              Research Training [IGERT] award supports the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary, multi-institutional, graduate training program of education
              and research in materials lifetime science and engineering. The participating
              institutions are the University of Tennessee and its team members: Lehigh
              University; Rutgers University; Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Engineering
              Technology Center of Analysis & Technology, Inc.; Boeing Company; General
              Electric Company; Haynes International, Inc.; and the Institute of Nuclear
              Energy Research, Taiwan.  The program is a joint effort of 30 scientists and
              engineers, with faculty participants drawn from nine Departments: Materials
              Science and Engineering; Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, and Engineering
              Science; Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics; Chemistry; Civil and
              Environmental Engineering; Industrial Engineering; Biochemistry, Cellular, and
              Molecular Biology; Statistics; and Education.  The program consists of four
              integrated components: [1] major research efforts with emphases on
              environmental/mechanical synergistic interactions; [2] a new Ph.D. curriculum;
              [3] industrial and national-laboratory internships, and a university
              student-exchange program; and [4] advanced, computer-based education/research
              technologies.  The goal is to provide Ph.D. graduates who can assume leadership
              roles in the solutions of complex technological problems involving materials
              lifetime science and engineering. Solutions of these problems will result in
              accurate lifetime predictions and significant lifetime extensions of aging
              structural materials, and the development of new materials with improved
              lifetimes.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
              educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds
              and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
              demands of the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change
              in graduate education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the
              program, awards are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The
              intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the Directorates for
              Engineering, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and Education and Human
              Resources.


