Title       : IGERT Full Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9987576

Award Number: 9987576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2530874            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan J. Kovenock kovenock@mgmt.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie C. Thursby  (Principal Investigator former)
              Louis A. Sherman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Woodson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren H. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987576
Marie Thursby - Purdue University
IGERT: Innovation Realization
              Laboratory: Integrating Science and Engineering with Economics and
              Management

This Integrative Graduate education and Research Training (IGERT)
              award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training
              program of education and research on the realization of innovation.  The
              innovation Realization Lab (IRL) is designed to: (1) graduate Ph.D.s in science
              and engineering who are technically proficient and understand economic and
              management principles critical to industrial research and development; (2)
              produce science and engineering thesis research of scientific merit and market
              relevance, and (3) train management graduate students in research and
              development project management.  Faculty from six graduate programs (Plant
              Biology, Agricultural and Biological Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical
              and Computer Engineering, Management and Mechanical Engineering) will develop
              this unique approach to graduate education.  Thirty NSF-funded Ph.D. students
              and their major professors will be teamed with faculty and 30 Purdue
              University-funded Master of Science students from the School of Management to
              engage in collaborative technical and market research concerning potential
              market applications of the Ph.D. students' research.  Complementary classes,
              workshops, and industry internships will introduce students to intellectual
              property, business, regulatory, and ethical issues that are critical to the
              industrial application of fundamental research in science and engineering.  The
              IRL experience will provide learning by doing in commercialization and
              behavioral aspects of project management -- preparing Ph.D. for varied
              entrepreneurial or intrapreneurial careers as leaders in the realization of
              innovation.


IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
              of education Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary
              backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
              career demands of the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
              change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative models for
              graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
              research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.  In the third
              year of the program, awards are being made to nineteen institutions for
              programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported
              by NSF.  The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
              Directorates for Engineering; Biological Sciences; Computer and Information
              Science and Engineering; and Education and Human Resources.

