Title       : Los Rios Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9987213

Award Number: 9987213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine McLain mclaink@crc.losrios.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice Murillo  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Los Rios CC System Distric
	      1919 Spanos Court
	      Sacramento, CA  958253905    916/920-7881

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Los Rios Community College District, which consists of the three colleges of
              American River, Cosumnes River, and Sacramento City, is awarding at least 38
              scholarships, of up to $2,500 per year, to academically talented, eligible
              students.

The scholarships awarded through the NSF Scholars Program is
              allowing students to reduce their required work hours and loan package and
              allowing them time to pursue the rigorous curriculum with sufficient
              study/tutor time and time to participate in applications oriented experiences.
              Some of those who are part-time students can now enroll full-time. Those who
              are full-time are advancing more quickly by increasing their load and/or by
              enhancing their performance. 

The NSF Scholars Program is linked to the
              student support infrastructure of the Math, Engineering, and Science
              Achievement (MESA) Program, which is located at each of the three Los Rios
              colleges. This national model provides students pursuing majors in computer
              science, math, engineering, or engineering technology with the student support
              infrastructure necessary to enhance their transferability to four-year schools
              and their continuance in the major. This infrastructure includes the components
              of recruitment, academic support and mentoring, applications oriented
              experiences, retention, and transfer support. Activities within these
              components include tutoring, faculty and student mentoring, counseling,
              internships, field trips and job shadowing, leadership training, technology and
              math/science bootcamps, enrichment programs and the opportunity to provide
              community service to enhance the profession. All this is done under the
              umbrella of the Los Rios District and the MESA Industry/Education Advisory
              Council. 

The NSF Scholars Coordinating Committee, a 13-member committee
              consisting of Los Rios faculty, managers, and staff is monitoring and
              evaluating the program. The administrative plan includes close monitoring of a
              well-defined selection process and clearly defined and measurable outcomes.
              Reporting, as required by NSF, is the responsibility of the Principal
              Investigator in coordination with five other instructional deans, each having
              responsibility for one or more of the specified majors. 

The NSF Scholars
              Selection Committee, a 12-member committee, with representatives from the three
              colleges, the three MESA programs, industry professionals and local K-12 and
              four-year institutions, is screening and selecting the NSF Scholars. 

