Title       : REU: Project O.A.K. (Opportunities Alliance Network)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9987900

Award Number: 9987900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Camellia M. Okpodu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT       Camellia Okpodu        DBI# 9987900

This proposal requests
              three years funding for an REU Site at Hampton University in the Department of
              Biological Sciences (Hampton, Virginia).  The Department of Biological Sciences
              proposes to provide laboratory research experience in Plant Physiology,
              Pathology and Molecular biology to undergraduate students, particularly women,
              minorities and the disabled, from other HBCU's in the established
              Washington-Baltimore Hampton Roads Alliance for Minority Participation in
              Science (WBHR-AMPS) consortium.  The summer research experience, Project O.A.K.
              (Opportunities Alliance network), will center on tissue culture propagation of
              disease-free seedlings from offspring of the "Emancipation Oak".

The
              "Emancipation Oak", a Quercus virginiana, is located on the campus of Hampton
              University in Hampton Virginia.  A member of the Fagaceae family, over 450
              species of ornamental trees and shrubs make up the genus.  Oaks can be
              propagated easily from acorns and grown well in rich, moderately moist soil or
              dry sandy soil.  Oaks are hardy and long-lived but not shade-tolerant and may
              be injured by leaf-eating organisms or oak wilt fungus.  The program has used
              acorns to propagate a few trees however they will still be susceptible to
              diseases.  The program proposes to train students in the use of tissue culture
              to propagate disease-free cultures from the Emancipation Oak.

The Project
              O.A.K. REU will have three main features it will: 1) offer research
              opportunities; 2) offer course work with transferable credit hours to the
              participants home institution; and 3) provide minority students the opportunity
              to participate in plant research
  at an HBCU.  Participants will be exposed
              to many  microbiological, biochemical and 
  molecular techniques.


