Title       : REU-Site: Undergraduate Research in Field Biology at the Rocky Mountain
               Biological Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a9987953

Award Number: 9987953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian C. Billick ibillick@rmbl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taber D. Allison  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              




ABSTRACT       Allison         Proposal  DBI- 9987953

	The Rocky
              Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL)  has a strong tradition of field research
              and education, and it has been providing education and research opportunities
              for  undergraduates in field biology for 71 years.  More than 30 senior
              investigators are in residence each summer at RMBL and many of them have agreed
              to supervise undergraduates in the REU program.  Students will be given
              guidance in experimental design, project selection and initiation, and report
              preparation.  Students will have the opportunity to participate fully in the
              rich intellectual life of summers at RMBL by attending scientific seminars,
              REU-related activities, interacting with RMBL scientists, and living in a
              residential field biology community.  The intellectual progress of each student
              will be monitored carefully as the summer proceeds and as students move from
              relative dependence to relative independence in their  research program.. 
              Participants will be encouraged to submit final papers to a new peer-reviewed
              electronic journal of undergraduate research that will be maintained on the
              RMBL web site.

A strength of past RMBL REU programs is the diversity of
              scientists, the rich intellectual tradition present each summer, and the social
               atmosphere that promotes student-scientist interactions.  Senior scientists
              and graduate students come to RMBL from over 40 institutions ranging from small
              colleges to major research universities to conduct research in a wide range of
              evolutionary and ecological disciplines and terrestrial and aquatic foci.  The
              RMBL is proud of its success in educating  women interested in field biology
              and in attracting senior female scientists.  Efforts to increase minority
              student representation at RMBL and in the REU program have been successful in
              the past and will continue to be a principal focus of recruitment efforts.


