Title       : Dynamics of Electronically Excited States: Models for Chemical Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a9987048

Award Number: 9987048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $508400             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Pratt pratt@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor David Pratt of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry program to perform high resolution electronic
              spectroscopy on molecules and solvated molecules in molecular beams.  The high
              resolution spectroscopy provides structural details that reveal fundamental
              information about low barrier intramolecular hydrogen bonds, chiral
              identification and solvent reorganization in the gas phase.  Some of the
              systems proposed in this study include benzene-water and the benzene dimer,
              weakly bound complexes of enantiomers, and twisted internal charge transfer
              molecules.  The methods include supersonic expansion, continuous wave molecular
              beams, frequency-doubled tunable single frequency lasers, spatially selective
              fluorescence detection and high speed data acquisition.  Unparalleled
              resolution is obtained approaching 1 MHz in the ultraviolet.

High resolution
              spectroscopy can provide the "final word" on debates that arise from
              low-resolution spectroscopy experiments, and thus serve as benchmark
              measurements for the identification of the structures some gas phase species
              and complexes.  The bonding of molecular complexes can provide insight on how
              molecules recognize each other, and can improve the design, for example, of
              separation media for chiral purification of drugs.  Electronic spectroscopy is
              a mature field, however,  Pratt's type of work is only performed by several
              groups in the world.  Pratt continues to build collaborative ties to research
              groups at smaller universities in the US, industrial and government labs, and
              at universities abroad.

