Title       : Magnetic Resonance of Metal Hydrides and Transfer of Laser-Generated
               Polarization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9987888

Award Number: 9987888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Conradi msc@howdy.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The position and atomic motions of H and D atoms in the trihydrides (and
              trideuterides) YH3, LuH3, and LaH3 are important to understanding the
              electronically insulating nature of these 'switchable mirror' materials.
              Deuterium NMR will be used to identify the sites occupied and will be
              particularly important in LaDx, where the deuterium/metal ratio can be varied
              continuously from x=2 (metallic) to x=3 (insulating). NMR will also be used to
              look for cell-to-cell inequivalences in the lanthanum species and to study the
              phase transition at 240K in ZrBe2D1.5.  High power diode laser-based optical
              pumping techniques will be used to produce 129Xe in liter quantities with
              nuclear spin polarization up to 40%.  This polarization is up to 100,000 times
              that of Xe gas in thermal equilibrium at typical fields and temperatures. The
              goal is to devise methods for transferring the spin polarization from 129Xe to
              spins of analytical interest, such as hydrogen, 13C, 15N, etc. Such transfer
              methods could revolutionize the sensitivity of analytical NMR, allowing samples
              of 1 microgram or less to be examined.
%%%
Many metals absorb hydrogen
              readily, making them useful for applications such as hydrogen fuel storage
              devices and batteries. In this project the various aspects of the behavior of
              such metal hydrogen systems, 'metal hydrides,' will be investigated by means of
              the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technique.  An example is the 'switchable
              mirror' behavior of the metal trihydrides involving the metal yttrium,
              lutetium, or lanthanum.  The fundamentals of this phenomenon need to be better
              understood in order to utilize this behavior in practical devices. Other
              properties of the metal hydrides will also be investigated. In recent years it
              has become possible to use laser light to orient the nuclear spins of certain
              isotopes of xenon and helium gases, which thereby have become 'nuclear spin
              polarized.'  The resulting enhancement of NMR signal strength by factors up to
              100,000 has already found applications in medical diagnostics.  Further
              applications are envisioned by transferring the spin polarization to the
              nuclear spins of atoms in molecules of biological and/or chemical interest,
              such as carbon, hydrogen, or nitrogen. This research is directed to explore the
              possibilities of such polarization transfer.  Graduate and undergraduate
              students will participate in this research.  They will thereby acquire
              knowledge and skills that will prepare them for employment in forefront areas
              of condensed matter physics and materials science.
***


