Title       : Hydrogen-Induced Transformation Superplasticity of Titanium and Ti-6Al-4V
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9987593

Award Number: 9987593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289391             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Dunand dunand@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9987593
Dunand

The recently discovered phenomena of transformation-mismatch
              plasticity and superplasticity induced by reversible chemical cycling are
              investigated experimentally and theoretically in titanium. As a general
              deformation mechanism, transformation-mismatch plasticity and superplasticity
              are known to occur as a result of biasing by an external stress of internal
              mismatch stresses produced during an allotropic transformation. These
              mechanisms are well known in metals subjected to a phase change by temperature
              cycling around their allotropic temperature. Recently, it was shown that the
              same mechanism could be induced by cycling the chemical composition at constant
              temperature, upon repeated addition and removal of hydrogen in titanium. This
              novel deformation phenomenon is examined in pure titanium and in a titanium
              alloy by performing unidirectional creep experiments, where the applied stress
              and the hydrogen cycling characteristics are systematically varied. Based on
              the fundamental mechanisms controlling the micromechanics of mismatch strain
              development and the diffusion of hydrogen in metals, continuum-mechanics,
              closed-form models and finite-element, numerical methods are developed to allow
              a quantitative, predictive description of the phenomenon. Experiments are
              targeted to support these models, which will describe the instantaneous and
              average strain-rate during deformation as a function of experimental
              parameters.
%%%
This is the first systematic investigation of the novel
              phenomenon of hydrogen-induced transformation-mismatch plasticity in a simple
              metal (titanium) and one of its alloys (Ti-6Al-4V) as a function of all
              relevant chemical and mechanical parameters. The program will demonstrate that
              superplasticity can be induced under chemical cycling (i.e., accumulation of
              strains in excess of 100% upon repeated cycling and linear proportionality
              between average strain rate and applied stress). Models will be developed that
              provide a theoretical and predictive understanding of this new deformation
              mechanism, based on the mechanics of internal stress creation and biased
              relaxation. This knowledge will advance the basic scientific understanding of
              plasticity and superplasticity under non-equilibrium conditions, and will
              eventually allow the development of superplastic industrial processes based on
              hydrogen-induced transformation-mismatch superplasticity. 
***


