Title       : Massively Parallel Nanorobotics With Multi-Tip Scanning Probe Microscopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9987977

Award Number: 9987977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aristides A. G. Requicha requicha@lipari.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The potential applications of nanometer-scale devices and systems are
              revolutionary. They range from miniscule computers and nanoelectromechanical
              systems (NEMS), to programmable artificial cells and nanorobots capable of
              entering cells and repairing them. A promising approach for building such
              nanostructures consists of assembling molecular-sized building blocks by using
              Scanning Probe Microscopes (SPMs) as robots.  Techniques for SPM
              nanomanipulation, which are being developed at USC and a few other
              laboratories, appear to be of wide applicability, but suffer from poor
              throughput because single-tip SPM operations are sequential. 

The primary
              goal of this project is to develop high-throughput, massively parallel SPM
              techniques for nanomanipulation with multi-tip arrays, which are currently
              being developed at several 
laboratories, worldwide. A secondary goal is to
              investigate novel nanomanipulation techniques that use an SPM tip array to
              shape an electrostatic potential over a sample surface, thereby moving single
              nanoparticles or groups of particles in a controlled fashion.

The emphasis
              of the research is on algorithm development, by using methods from the fields
              of algorithm design, geometric modeling, robotics and computational geometry.
              The algorithms 
will be tested by simulation studies, and also by
              implementation with physical tip arrays when these become available.

