Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987382

Award Number: 9987382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagdish John john_j@hccs.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Holden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Houston Cmty College
	      P.O. Box 667517
	      Houston, TX  772667517    713/718-5059

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Houston Community College System (HCCS) CSEM Scholarship Program provides
              scholarships, curriculum enrichment, a full range of student support services,
              and summer internships to give participants field experience in the business
              community. The program prepares talented students to compete successfully in
              baccalaureate degree programs and in the workplace while encouraging the
              institutionalization of program student supports and extending partnerships
              within the business community for the benefit of future students studying in
              CSEM disciplines. 

The objectives of the program are: Objective 1. Recruit
              40 students into an Associate of Science and Associate of Applied Science
              scholarship program. Objective 2. Retain at least 75% of participants to the
              completion of a degree and transfer to a baccalaureate degree program through a
              strong program of curriculum enrichment that addresses the needs of
              underrepresented students. Objective 3. Provide 100% of program participants
              with real-world experience and enthusiasm for their chosen field of study
              through a summer internship program in partnership with corporations in the
              local community. 

Key features of the program include the following: 
 *A
              six-week summer program, the CSEM Summer Academy, that integrates CSEM
              disciplines and stimulate participants to explore career opportunities through
              a variety of hands-on activities, speakers, and field trips.
 *Paid summer
              internships with businesses in the Houston community to increase enthusiasm and
              motivation to pursue CSEM careers.
 *Integration with other HCCS programs to
              provide participants with a range of enrichment activities, including a
              programs of the Department of Computer Science and a System-wide NASA Challenge
              Enrichment Program. 
 *A strong mentoring program of assigned faculty advisors
              and faculty mentors to guide and advise the participants and to ensure that
              they receive all the support services they need. 

