Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Innovative Cross-Disciplinary Training in Neuroscience and
               Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9987588

Award Number: 9987588
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1880852            (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Touretzky dst@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
9987588
David S. Touretzky - Carnegie Mellon University
IGERT:
              Cross-Disciplinary Training in the Neural Basis of Cognition

This
              Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the
              establishment of a new multidisciplinary, multi-institution, graduate training
              program of education and research within the Center for the Neural Basis of
              Cognition at Carnegie Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh.  The
              CNBC offers interdisciplinary training to students in a variety of fields who
              seek to understand how cognitive processes arise from neural mechanisms. 
              Participating departments at Carnegie Mellon are Computer Science, Psychology,
              Robotics, and Statistics.  At the University of Pittsburgh they are
              Mathematics, Neurobiology, Neuroscience, and Psychology.  The IGERT training
              program is a new kind of cross-over training experience in which students
              develop professional competence in an area outside their home discipline.  For
              example, a computer science student whose research involves computer modeling
              of the hippocampus could work in a neurophysiology lab, learning to do parallel
              multiunit recording from the hippocampus of behaving rats.  A psychology
              student doing functional brain imaging could receive cross-over training in
              statistical analysis techniques for functional imaging data.  During their
              first year in the IGERT program, students will acquire necessary background
              knowledge through a combination of coursework, directed reading, and
              observation in the lab.  In the second year students will work half-time in
              their host lab to complete a small research project of their own.

IGERT is
              an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
              scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards
              are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
              this specific award reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences;
              Computer and Information Science and Engineering; Social, Behavioral, and
              Economic Sciences; Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and Education and Human
              Resources.

