Title       : The Organization of the Input to Olivocochlear Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9987660

Award Number: 9987660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nobuyuki Kuwabara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The central auditory system consists of a chain of cell groups, nuclei, that
              carry and process auditory neural signals from the cochlea, the peripheral
              sensory organ where sound wave is first converted to neural signals, to the
              cortex, the highest center, forming the ascending neural pathways.  There are
              also descending pathways in the auditory system along the ascending pathways. 
              The terminal part of the descending pathway is the olivocochlear system, so
              called because it arises from part of the lower brainstem auditory center, the
              superior olivary complex, and sends direct feedback neuronal projections to
              hair cells of the cochlea.  Although not well understood, the general consensus
              regarding its function, based on physiological and behavioral studies, is the
              enhancement of signal detection in noisy environment and the protection of the
              auditory system from noise-induced damage, both of which have significant
              survival value in mammals.  While location of the origin of the olivocochlear
              system is clear, inputs to this system and their organization are still not
              well known.  Physiological and some anatomical studies have allowed speculation
              that neurons in this system may monitor ascending auditory signals while being
              controlled by descending inputs from higher centers. 
    This project is
              designed to clarify the organization of inputs, both from the distant and local
              sources, to olivocochlear system at the single cell level, using anatomical
              methods in which a combination of single cell labeling and neural tract-tracing
              techniques is employed.  It is aimed to demonstrate clearly precise input
              connections, including possible convergence of ascending and descending
              pathways on the olivocochlear system. 
    The outcome of this work will be
              significant to understanding the functional role of this feedback system,
              especially what auditory inputs this system receives, thus processes and passes
              on to the periphery.  Furthermore, the technique established in this project
              can be used to study other parts of the complex auditory center. 

