Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Interdisciplinary Traineeship in High Performance Computing
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a9987598

Award Number: 9987598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2559318            (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Hase wlh@cs.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy Edjlali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vipin Chaudhary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn M. Goldfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Bernhard Schlegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
9987598
William Hase - Wayne State University
IGERT: Interdisciplinary
              Traineeship in High Performance Computing Applications

This Integrative
              Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the
              establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and
              research in high performance computing. This project will integrate ongoing
              interdisciplinary research efforts in our new Institute for Scientific
              Computing into a cooperative traineeship program.  The program will build upon
              existing high-performance computing related projects, many with industrial
              collaboration, to develop a concerted thrust in the area of scientific
              computing, a growing research strength at Wayne State University.  Active
              programs in computer intensive, data intensive, and real-time computing will
              form the core research that will be the hallmark of a new interdisciplinary
              Masters/Ph.D. curriculum.  The curriculum will consist of an integrated series
              of hands-on (lecture and laboratory) courses and seminars on scientific
              computing developed by university and industrial participants.  Graduate thesis
              training will be based on teaming where students work individually on different
              components of a major interdisciplinary project.  Programs using high
              performance computing in the following strategically important areas are
              envisioned:  (i) Medicine, Genetics, and Biochemistry, (ii) Chemistry, Physics,
              and Materials Science, and (iii) Automotive and Aerospace Systems.  This
              research-educational initiative has the active support of industry,
              particularly Ford, IBM, SGI, SUN, and CFD Research, who will provide
              substantial resources as a match to initiate this program and who will
              participate in lectures, research training, and oversight/assessment of the
              project.  Wayne State University will commit more than $2,320,000 in resources
              to support this program.  To ensure the success of this training program and to
              be competitive with the many opportunities in scientific computing, Wayne State
              University is supplementing the graduate stipends to give a total stipend of
              $23,266/year.  With this stipend and the strength of the training program, we
              will be able to recruit outstanding students.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers
              with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and
              personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.  The program is
              intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing
              new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile
              environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
              boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards are being made to nineteen
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Engineering, Biological
              Sciences, and Education and Human Resources.


