Title       : IGERT: Dynamics of Complex Systems in Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9987577

Award Number: 9987577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2533846            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Davis sdavis@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara A. Solla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Silber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hermann Riecke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987577
Stephen Davis - Northwestern University
IGERT: Dynamics of Complex
              Systems in Science and Engineering

This Integrative Graduate Education and
              Research Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research on the
              dynamics of complex systems. Nonlinear science has increasing impact on many
              disciplines in the natural sciences, engineering, and medicine, and requires
              training that bridges traditional departmental and school boundaries. This
              graduate training program emphasizes the unity of fundamental concepts
              underlying a broad range of scientific research areas: nonlinear optics,
              computational neuroscience, pattern formation, chaos, ergodic theory; and
              applications to engineering and materials science problems: interface motion,
              combustion, and mixing. The goal is to prepare the students for today's rapidly
              evolving professional environment. Students will be equipped with the tools and
              intuition needed to tackle complex nonlinear problems arising in various guises
              and technical fields. Cross-disciplinary research and communication skills will
              be developed through an intensive year-long course, in which small
              graduate-student teams will investigate a topic guided by two faculty members
              with complementary perspectives. This early research experience will be
              followed by a thesis on a different topic; in the case of IGERT fellows the
              thesis project will be co-advised and cross-disciplinary. Internships will
              provide additional training experience. Cross-departmental research seminars
              and student-run seminars, regional workshops, yearly retreats, and an active
              visitor program will foster a highly cooperative, diverse, cross-disciplinary
              training environment.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future.  The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the third year of the program, awards are being made to nineteen
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences; Engineering;
              Computer and Information Science and Engineering; and Education and Human
              Resources.


