Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Computational Neurobiology Graduate Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a9987614

Award Number: 9987614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence J. Sejnowski   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Kleinfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Kristan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry D. I. Abarbanel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987614
Terry Sejnowski - University of California, San Diego
IGERT:  Graduate
              Training Program in Computational Neurobiology 

This Integrative Graduate
              Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research in
              computational neurobiology.  The goal is to train a new generation of
              scientists and engineers with a broad range of scientific and technical skills
              who are equally at home measuring large-scale brain activity, analyzing the
              data with advanced computational techniques, and developing new models for
              brain development and function. This integrative training program is centered
              in the Department of Biology at UCSD and the Salk Institute, but includes
              faculty members from physics, chemistry, psychology, cognitive science,
              electrical engineering, computer science, and mathematics, as well as from
              biology and neuroscience.  The training program will give all students hands-on
              experience in a wide range of advanced experimental and computational
              techniques through collaborative research between laboratories, industrial
              internships, and the opportunity to pursue research abroad. The faculty will
              participate in outreach programs to encourage and prepare underrepresented
              minorities for a career in computational neurobiology.  Research areas in the
              training program include: (1) synaptic growth and plasticity; (2) neural
              dynamics; (3) neural population coding; (4) visual perception and memory; (5)
              stochastic learning algorithms; and (6) functional brain imaging.

IGERT is
              an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
              scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards
              are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
              this specific award reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences;
              Computer and Information Science and Engineering; Social, Behavioral, and
              Economic Sciences; Mathematical and Physical Sciences; Engineering; and
              Education and Human Resources.


