Title       : Analysis and Design of Computational Systems for Three-Dimensional
               Electromagnetic Modeling and Inversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9987779

Award Number: 9987779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Zhdanov mzhdanov@mines.utah  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal contributes to the development of the underlying physical and
              mathematical methods and principles of a new technology of electromagnetic (EM)
              imaging the objects in nontransparent media based on EM forward and inverse
              problem solutions. EM inverse methods are widely used in different technical
              and engineering applications, including determining the internal defects in the
              metal or concrete constructions, for studying the underground geological
              structures in mineral, hydrocarbons and groundwater exploration, in the
              solution of environmental clean up problems, for imaging of the internal
              structure of human body in medical applications, in remote sensing, etc. The
              image reconstruction is based on the numerical solution of the inverse
              scattering EM problem. This problem requires development intelligent
              computational systems for EM forward modeling and inversion in inhomogeneous
              media. These problems are extremely difficult, especially in three-dimensional
              case.
 	In this proposal we suggest to analyze and design the computational
              systems which make the numerical methods more flexible and more powerful tool
              for the solution of practical forward and inverse problems in media with a
              complex distribution of EM parameters. This system will be based on applying
              compression and numerical image enhancement and sharpening in the solution of
              EM problems. The compression allows transforming the original Maxwell's
              equations into a compressed domain, and the solution is obtained there in a
              compact form. Using compression, we convert the original dense matrix of the
              forward and inverse problems to a sparse matrix. This reduces the memory
              required for storage and speeds up computations.
Image processing and
              restoration is one of the important problems in EM imaging. It requires
              developing a stable inverse problem solution that at the same time can produce
              a sharp and focused image of the target. We plan to consider a new way of
              focusing EM images using specially selected stabilizing functionals. In
              particular, we will use a new stabilizing functional, which minimizes the area
              where strong model parameter variations and discontinuity occur. We plan to
              demonstrate that focusing stabilizer will help to generate a stable solution of
              EM inverse problem for complex objects, and will help to generate much more
              ''focused'' EM images than conventional methods. In summary, the main goal of
              this project is to develop new methods and ideas that will result in a new
              enabling technology for EM inverse imaging.
This new technology will address
              the following problems: 1) to increase the resolution and stability of inverse
              imaging by applying regularization method based on focusing stabilizers; 2) to
              speed up computations and to enable solution of large EM forward and inverse
              problems using data and image parameters compression technique; 3) to enable
              general application for solution of different type of scientific and
              engineering problems involving inverse EM imaging of the objects in
              nontransparent media.
The proposed work will be significant for several
              reasons including
a) fast and accurate computational system for 3-D EM forward
              modeling in the media with
the arbitrary distribution of conductivity will be
              constructed using compression
principles;
b) a new generation of fast 3-D EM
              inversion techniques will be developed based on
compression and focusing
              stabilizing functionals;
c) improved methods for analysis, design and
              evaluation of electromagnetic data in complex
structures will be developed.

