Title       : A Knowledge Discovery Framework for Civil Infrastructure Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a9987871

Award Number: 9987871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241263             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Garrett garrett@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sue McNeil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos Faloutsos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: CMS-9987871
PI: James Garrett
Institution:  Carnegie Mellon
              University
Date: April 20, 2001

ABSTRACT CMS-9987871 " A Knowledge
              Discovery Framework for Civil Infrastructure Contexts" PI: Garrett, James,
              Carnegie Mellon University; Christos Faloutsos, Carnegie Mellon University; and
              Sue McNeil, University of Illinois at Chicago.

The primary objective of this
              research is to specialize the abstract CRISP-DM (Cross-Industry Standard
              Process for Data Mining) process model being developed within the Knowledge
              Discovery in Databases (KDD) community, into a framework for use in civil
              infrastructure problem domains.  With the recent accumulation of domain data,
              civil infrastructrue researchers have turned to data-intensive techniques to
              aid their understanding of deterioration mechanisms and usage patterns.  During
              roughly the same time period, researchers in the machine learning, database,
              and statistical communities began to develop a set of new tools and techniques,
              known as CRISP-DM, to analyze very large databases.  This framework will assist
              civil infrastructure researchers in systematically applying the CRISP-DM
              process for their data analysis needs.  Such a framework will become vital for
              civil infrastructure researchers as they begin to analyze the enormous amounts
              of infrastructure data they have collected.  The research team will identify
              the analyze preliminary case studies in civil infrastructure using the CRISP-DM
              process.  Case studies will be chosen based on the uniqueness of their KDD
              problem characteristics.  Special attention will be paid to those case studies
              that present challenging issues in data quality and data preparation, the most
              time-consuming and difficult stages of the process as well as the
              least-studied.  The research team will classify civil infrastructure data
              analysis needs in terms of CRISP-DM process characteristics.  All phases of the
              process will be addressed, but the data understanding (including data quality),
              data preparation, and modeling phases will be treated in-depth.  The research
              team will then develop a more specific framework for applying the CRISP-DM
              process to civil infrastructure analysis needs.  The research team will also
              identify and conduct case studies with which to validate the framework. 
              Finally, the development and deployment of a web-based course and a web
              repository based on this research will be completed during the final year.

