Title       : Silicon Forest Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987145

Award Number: 9987145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Micheal E. Morgan morm@chemeketa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chemeketa Community Col
	      P O BOX 14007
	      Salem, OR  973097070    503/399-5121

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31), Computer Engineering (32), Engineering - Engineering
              Technology (58), Engineering - Other (59), Mathematical Sciences (21)
The
              Silicon Forest Scholarships (SFS) Program seeks to increase retention,
              graduation, employment, and transfer success in Computer Science, Computer
              Technology, Engineering, Engineering Technology, and Mathematics. Forty-four
              scholarships for full tuition and books are being awarded to low-income,
              academically talented students with special efforts to recruit women, disabled,
              and ethnic minority students. To increase retention and program completion, an
              infused system of supports and experiences spans the recipients' time in the
              program. Each scholarship recipient receives mentoring and tutoring,
              participates on a number of field trips to industry sites, attends
              presentations by industry leaders, and completes an integrated capstone project
              of applied learning. Mentoring is provided by the highly-qualified and
              industry-standard faculty at Chemeketa and tutoring by certified tutors. On
              site visits Silicon Forest Scholars hear presentations from each of the Silicon
              Forest industry partners, including Intel Corporation, Cisco Systems
              Incorporated, Pittsburgh Plate Glass, and ISM Group. The State of Oregon is
              presenting informational sessions for the recipients. During the integrated
              capstone project at the end of the scholarship term, recipients complete an
              academically demanding applied learning project from their individual fields of
              study. These provide opportunities for hands-on, experiential learning that
              will prepare students for work in the high-tech industry. The program expects
              to retain 90% of SFS recipients each year of the project and to graduate 85% of
              SFS recipients in their fields of study. Furthermore, the program provides
              assistance with a goal of ensuring that 95% of SFS graduates are employed in
              their field of study or transfer to a four-year college or university to
              continue their field of study. In addition to striving for these graduation and
              successful transfer goals, the SFS program is enhancing networks between
              Chemeketa Community College, local, national, and international industry, and
              four-year schools; strengthening partnerships between institutions of higher
              education and related employment sectors; and increasing its focus on the needs
              of industry and on cross-disciplinary studies that enhance student learning and
              worksite readiness.

