Title       : NSF Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a9987003

Award Number: 9987003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric E. McDowell eemcdowell@csupomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Hudspeth  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project awards scholarships to upper- division students in engineering,
              engineering technology, computer science, and mathematics. While the
              applications are to be open to all who seek the support, special mailings and
              contact is to be made to all upper-division Latino, African American, and
              Native American students in the designated majors, encouraging them to apply.
              

The university is a large, urban, Hispanic-serving, polytechnic university
              with a diverse population of largely first-generation college students. The
              pool of economically disadvantaged under-represented students in engineering,
              engineering technology, computer science, and mathematics is large. The
              well-established, comprehensive retention programs for Latinos, African
              Americans, and Native Americans serve to provide the advising, mentoring,
              tracking, and professional development support so necessary to shorten the time
              to graduation for the scholarship recipients. The active collaboration among
              program staff and faculty in the two colleges provides a comprehensive support
              system for the scholars. 

Through this scholarship program, the recipients
              have an incentive to become more efficient in their course scheduling and they
              are given timely advising to make wise choices in structuring their remaining
              course work. The active involvement of industry partners in resume critiques,
              mock interviews, an "evening with industry," and a scholars reception all serve
              to increase their job readiness. The NSF Scholars receive first consideration
              for summer job placement from the campus' industry partners. 

Thus the NSF
              Scholars Program increases the likelihood that financially needy students
              decrease their hours worked while in school, that they have closer contact with
              their academic advisors, and that they have increased interaction with high
              tech employers. Therefore, the program should greatly increase the likelihood
              that highly qualified CSEM students graduate in a timely fashion and exit
              college ready to assume positions of responsibility in industry. 

