Title       : Model Reference Current Injection: A High-Speed Next-Generation Dynamic Clamp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9987074

Award Number: 9987074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Butera rbutera@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Butera

The "dynamic-clamp" is an electrophysiological technique
              developed in the
past decade that utilizes real-time voltage-measurements from
              electrically
excitable cells, such as neurons and cardiac myocytes.  These
              measurements
are used by a computational model running in real-time to compute
              artificial
ionic currents that are injected into (the same or another)
              excitable cells. 
Applications of this technique include augmenting the
              intrinsic electrical
properties of a single cell or using the computer to
              connect isolated cells
to create an artificial network consisting of real
              neurons and computed
synapses.  This approach has seen growing use in the
              neuroscience and
cardiac electrophysiology communities.  However, the
              technique is nontrivial
to implement and off-the-shelf (turnkey) approaches
              have not kept pace with
rapidly changing computing technologies.  Furthermore,
              although many
laboratories have used this technique, little research has been
              done to
evaulate its accuracy and validity.

The objective of this
              application is to develop a next-generation system
that implements the
              dynamic-clamp tecnique and utilizes currently avaiable
computing technologies.
               This technique will be low-cost, using computers
and electrophysiolgical
              hardware available in most neurophysiological
laboratories; fully-featured,
              allowing for very high speeds (with a goal of
100 kHz), arbitrary model
              specifications, and real-time data logging on the
control computer; and
              open-source, meaning that the software and operating
system upon which it is
              based are freely distributable and freely modifiable
to suit a laboratory's
              specific needs. Conventional desktop operating
systems are unsuitable for
              real-time performance in the 10's of kHz range,
thus this project will use
              Real-Time Linux, a derivative of the Linux
operating system modified for
              performing real-time tasks, to achieve these
goals.  The specific objectives
              of this project are to develop a core
real-time control computational engine
              based on Real-Time Linux, develop a
user interface and mechanism for arbitrary
              model specification, and perform
rigorous testing of the accuracy and validity
              of the technique.

This technology will impact the neuroscience and
              electrophysiology fields of
research in several ways.  First, it will make the
              technique available to
more researchers, with a greater array of features
              available.  Second, the
increased speed of this approach will allow new
              experiments to be performed
using the dynamic clamp, such as those involving
              membrane processes with
submillisecond time-constants, such as sodium currents
              in cardiac myocytes
and synaptic currents from fast AMPA synapses.



