Title       : Advanced Optical Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9987618

Award Number: 9987618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2564635            (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Pine pine@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicola A. Spaldin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987618
David Pine - University of California at Santa Barbara
IGERT: Advanced
              Optical Materials

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training
              (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate
              training program of education and research on advanced optical materials.  The
              program will train students in emerging areas of optical materials technology
              and engineering, bridging new materials development with device fabrication and
              testing.   This effort will benefit from and augment existing strengths at UCSB
              in science and engineering education, which derive particularly from the highly
              collaborative inter-disciplinary research environment and internationally
              leading efforts in advanced optical materials.  Graduate research training will
              focus on two areas of great scientific interest and commercial promise: (1)
              photonic optical circuits; and (2) nitride-based semiconductors.  The IGERT
              program involves faculty and students from five departments and will be
              structured to promote interactions among multidisciplinary teams; the UCSB
              research groups involved have a strong and prolific track record for working
              together.  A major plank of the program is a strong outreach effort to
              encourage women and under-represented minority students to pursue careers in
              science and engineering, with emphasis on their recruitment, mentoring, and
              training in advanced optical materials technologies.  An important component
              for all IGERT students will be scientific exchange and cooperation with
              industrial and national laboratory partners, as well as the fostering of
              entrepreneurial perspectives and initiatives for high-technology small-business
              creation.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
              educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds
              and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
              demands of the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change
              in graduate education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the
              program, awards are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The
              intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the Directorates for
              Engineering, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and Education and Human
              Resources.



