Title       : Enhancing Student Graduation Success in Computer Science, Engineering and
               Mathematics at North Carolina State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987203

Award Number: 9987203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah A. Rajala sar@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Gilligan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tony L. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Scroggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

The program will provide 90 scholarships in engineering, mathematics, and
              computer science over a two-year period to high-achieving undergraduate and
              graduate students who have demonstrated financial need. The scholarships should
              allow the university to make notable impact on the overall success of our
              student to complete the degree. These need-based scholarships are comparable to
              the engineering college's more lucrative merit-based awards.

At the
              undergraduate level, we will target upper division junior and senior scholars,
              and those who transfer into our engineering and mathematics programs at this
              level. At the graduate level, the need-based awards will supplement
              assistantship offers made to outstanding students. This significant enhancement
              to our recruitment package will allow us to become more competitive in
              attracting the best and brightest U.S. citizens into our graduate
              program.

Our major objective in this project is to reduce the time to degree
              completion of high-achieving engineering, computer science, and mathematics
              scholars. We will involve scholarship recipients in program activities that
              will help them to improve interpersonal skills, serve as mentors to other
              students, and reduce or remove the need to work off-campus during the academic
              year.

