Title       : Computer Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Scholarships at CSU, Chico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987031

Award Number: 9987031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Villegas pvillegas@csuchico.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Chico Res Fdtn
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Chico, CA  959290870    530/898-5700

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A group of 40 students majoring in Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics
              will be recipients of an NSF funded Computer Science, Engineering and
              Mathematics (CSEM) scholarship which will enhance their opportunity to complete
              a degree in a technical major.  The scholarships will be administered by the
              Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) Engineering Program (MEP),
              whose major objectives are to recruit, retain and graduate educationally
              disadvantaged students pursuing technical majors.

Criteria for receiving a
              CSEM scholarship include the following:

1. An essay from the applicant
              explaining why he or she wants to be an engineer, computer scientist or
              mathematician.
2. A letter of recommendation from a faculty member describing
              the student's potential to succeed in the technical field.
3. The student's
              grade point average and an assessment of his or her coursework taken in the
              major discipline.
4. Other criteria include involvement in academic student
              organizations, parents' education, number of siblings in school, full-time
              enrollment in school, financial need and U.S. citizenship (national or alien
              admitted as refugees at the time of the application) or permanent
              residence.
5. Strong consideration will be given to students coming from
              groups with historically low entrance rates into four-year institutions and
              which are under-represented in engineering professions (i.e., Mexican-American,
              African-American, American Indian, women, etc.). 

A committee consisting of
              faculty and staff from the College of Engineering, Computer Science and
              Technology, College of Natural Sciences, and a member from the MEP Industry
              Advisory Board, will decide the scholarship selections.

The students
              selected for a scholarship will be expected to progress in their chosen
              technical discipline and required to meet with an advisor in the MEP program to
              discuss progress, academic advising and other retention efforts administered by
              the office.


