Title       : Scholarship Program for Computer Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987232

Award Number: 9987232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis E. Davenport                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Driscoll driscoll@ee.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed scholarship program at would be part of a larger school-wide and
              statewide effort to increase the numbers of students graduating from computer
              science and engineering programs by 25% or more. 

The project will award 40
              $2,500 scholarships to qualified upper division students enrolled in
              engineering or computer science programs as full-time students. Recruitment and
              outreach for awards will target low-income, academically talented students from
              groups under-represented in appropriate fields who will be able to enroll full
              time and complete their degree within two years if they receive the support of
              an award as part of their financial aid package.

 The addition of a targeted
              scholarship program to the school's existing scholarship and student support
              offerings will enable the university to: 
    Increase transfer student
              enrollment by 20% in SEAS programs in computer science and engineering; 
   
              Increase the percentage of upper division students enrolling full-time by
              10%;
    Increase retention of upper division students to graduation within
              two years; 
    Improve diversity of upper division student body by targeted
              recruitment for under-represented groups by 15%; and 
    Improve geographic
              diversity of upper division student body by 5% to expand enrollment of
              economically disadvantaged students from rural Oregon. 

The school as part
              of its overall recruitment activities will lead recruitment for applicants.
              Special consideration will be given to working with community partners, such as
              the Oregon Math, Engineering, and Science Achievement (MESA) K-12 enrichment
              program for under-represented students, and the Society for Women Engineers, to
              identify and recruit students under-represented in appropriate fields. The
              school will also work with other administrative units, such as the financial
              aid and admissions office, to identify and encourage application from qualified
              applicants who meet the basic program criteria. 

Awards decision factors
              will include academic indicators such as lower division GPA and class rank, as
              well as indicators of professional success (motivation, communication skills,
              and leadership) provided by the required letters of recommendation from faculty
              or employers, and by student essays. 

Once students have accepted their
              awards, SEAS will coordinate its student service efforts with support services
              offered through other units to provide each student with a support
              infrastructure which is tailored to meet their needs in order to assure their
              success through graduation and post-graduation employment.

