Title       : Pennsylvania State Consortium for Education in Many-Body Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a9987589

Award Number: 9987589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2539953            (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Anderson jba@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lyle N. Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Plassmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jayanth R. Banavar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristen A. Fichthorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987589
James Anderson - Pennsylvania State University
IGERT: Consortium for
              Education in Many-Body Applications

This Integrative Graduate Education and
              Research Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research in
              many-body applications.  For many traditional problems in science and
              technology, the fundamental interactions are well understood.  The challenges
              are in the complexities that arise when there are more than a few electrons or
              atoms or particles involved.  Included among these many-body problems are
              predictions of the electronic structure of molecules, molecular dynamics, the
              interactions of molecules with solvents, protein folding, catalytic reactions
              at surfaces, ferroic materials, the flow of fluids in porous media and the
              coupling of gas dynamics with chemical reaction.  The solution to these and
              related problems lies in the effective use of high performance and massively
              parallel computers by scientists and engineers developed through a
              cross-disciplinary graduate training program in many-body problems.  The
              Consortium for Education in Many-Body Applications (CEMBA) IGERT program is a
              joint effort of nine faculty from the Departments of Aerospace Engineering,
              Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Computer Science and Engineering, Materials
              Science and Engineering, Mathematics, and Physics.  CEMBA incorporates new
              courses, research projects, summer internships, seminars and tutorials to train
              students for leadership roles in advanced computational methods for many-body
              systems. The program will give students extensive experience in many-body
              approaches and their implementation on high-performance computers.  CEMBA is
              designed to train a new generation of scientists and engineers with breadth and
              interdisciplinarity, with the technical skills and the experience to lead in
              the solution of these many-body problems.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers
              with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and
              personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.  The program is
              intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing
              new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile
              environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
              boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards are being made to nineteen
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences; Engineering;
              Computer and Information Science and Engineering; and Education and Human
              Resources.



