Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Science on the Outside Looking In: Can 'Local'
               Scientists Negotiate a Habitat Conservation Plan When 'Cosmopolitan' Scientists
               Take Part?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9987683

Award Number: 9987683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7429               (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith E. Innes JINNES@uclink4.Berkeley.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Clinton Administration has approved hundreds of habitat conservation plans
              (HCPs), taking an obscure provision of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and
              making it the centerpiece of their strategy to resolve the raging conflicts
              between species advocates and defenders of private property rights. This
              dissertation research project will study efforts by a group of local experts to
              assemble a set of ecological facts, theories, and models that are acceptable
              both to cosmopolitan scientists and to political stakeholders who have agreed
              to reach consensus on an HOP. Once accepted, these technical claims will serve
              as a basis for agreement on how much money and land private landholders have to
              provide in order to be allowed to kill endangered animals or eliminate a
              portion of their habitat, which is otherwise forbidden under the ESA. Using
              participant observation, videotaping, interviews, and documentary analysis, the
              project will examine the preparation of two HCPs in California. More
              specifically it will examine how interaction at different temporal scales
              shapes how each local experts attempt to reach consensus on technical claims,
              ranging from everyday achievements such as data standards to long-range
              achievements such as developing a highly abstract ecological model from a
              collection of heterogeneous ecological data. The project will also trace how
              the interpretation of these technical claims by cosmopolitan scientists is
              shaped by the narratives and representational techniques that regulatory actors
              use to communicate the timing and extent of their interaction.
