Title       : University of North Dakota Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
               Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987130

Award Number: 9987130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Allery alan_allery@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. O'Neil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold F. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Gilsdorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of North Dakota School of Engineering and Mines, the Computer
              Science Department at the Center for Aerospace Studies, and the Mathematics
              Department in conjunction with the Office of Native American Programs has
              established a scholarship program designed to assist students in the computer
              science, math, and engineering fields. 

The goal of the University of North
              Dakota Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program is to
              raise the number of disadvantaged students, women, and minorities students
              pursing majors and minors in technological fields to the highest possible
              level. To accomplish that goal, the Principal Investigator, Co-Principal
              Investigators, and the Management Team at the University of North Dakota have
              established the following three objectives:
	
1.  To recruit and support 40
              students in the Computer Science, Engineering and Math fields that meet the
              financial need and project criterion, have the potential of obtaining their
              degrees in the aforementioned fields by December 31, 200l, and have
              demonstrated academic merit in their application for a scholarship.
2.  To
              provide a high quality and sustained faculty/student relationships between all
              40 scholarship recipients and their mentors within the Computer Science,
              Engineering, and Math faculty, and closely monitor their progress.
3.  To
              provide support/enhancement activities and opportunities to all 40 scholarship
              recipients during each of the four academic terms of the project.

The
              primary method being used to achieve the aforementioned goal and objectives is
              by establishment of a high quality faculty/student mentoring relationships that
              are supported by existing administrative, social, and academic support
              currently available at the University of North Dakota. The method has been
              highly successful in previous projects at the University.  The University of
              North Dakota has been and continues to be a national leader in producing
              graduates among women, ethnic and cultural minorities, disabled students, first
              generation college students, and those that are financially
              disadvantaged.

The project is increasing the number of diverse graduates in
              each of the computer science, engineering, and mathematics fields.  In
              addition,  the project is providing access to scholarship opportunities for
              rural and farm country students who have been affected by the depressed farm
              economy, natural disasters, or long-time impoverishment.


