Title       : GOALI: Design and Evaluation of Room Temperature Ionic Liquids for Green
               Chemical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9987627

Award Number: 9987627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan F. Brennecke jfb@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grant Proulx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Maginn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Hutchenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9987627
Brennecke, Joan
University of Notre Dame

Ionic
              liquids (ILs) are organic salts that in their pure state are liquids at ambient
              temperature. The typical IL is based on a bulky pyridinium or imidazolium
              cation paired with a variety of anions. The bulkiness and asymmetry of the
              molecule prevents the easy packing that promotes crystallization, and hence
              these materials exhibit low melting points. Although ILs are organic solvents,
              they exhibit vanishing small vapor pressures, and thus the most prevalent route
              for escape to the atmosphere and also exposure to workers -- evaporation -- is
              absent. Low vapor pressure also renders these solvents safer, as flash points
              will be much higher than for traditional  organic solvents. Research has shown
              that ILs are excellent solvents for a variety of industrially relevant
              reactions. However, the use of ILs is limited by the paucity of literature data
              on their physical properties and phase behavior. The number of permutations on
              the structure of even simple ILs based on 1-methyl imidazolium is extremely
              large and correlations between structure and properties do not currently
              exist.


The immediate goal is to explore the relationship between the
              chemical structure of an IL and its physical properties, including its phase
              behavior with CO2, other small molecules, water, and organic solutes. 
The
              methodology is to use molecular simulations in concert with experimental
              measurements to develop structure/property relationships that could be used to
              guide the design, desired properties. In particular, we propose to synthesis a
              variety of imidazolium-based ionic liquids and measure their pure component
              melting points and densities.  It is proposed to develop molecular forcefields
              for Monte Carlo  simulations that adequately reproduce the pure component data.
               It is proposed to measure the phase behavior of some of these ionic liquids 
              with organics, water, CO2 and O2  or H2 using several different high pressure
              vapor/liquid equilibrium apparatuses, gravimetric techniques, and
              chromatography.  To complement these experimental efforts, it is proposed to
              use Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo to simulate the phase behavior of an ionic
              liquid with small molecules such as CO2 or H2.  Base upon the measurements and
              modeling, we propose to develop relationships between the IL structure and its
              physical properties and phase behavior. This information will be vital to the
              evaluation of ILs for a variety of important industrial applications (to be
              developed in future projects.  Some examples include the use of Ils as
              environmentally benign solvents for reactions and separations, as a medium for
              efficient hydrogenation, oxidation and hydroformylation chemistry, with CO2 as
              a safe adsorption refrigeration system to replace CFCs and HFCs, as a hydrogen
              storage medium, and as a solvent for the gel-spinning of polymers.


