Title       : NSF Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987269

Award Number: 9987269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Ward tjward@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Fleury  (Principal Investigator former)
              Joseph D. Torres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposed program would have a dramatic impact on the time that it takes a
              student to graduate and in the overall academic profile of the student.
              Students in this project will be able to take advantage of undergraduate
              research opportunities that are often available to only a few select students.
              The five University of New Mexico (UNM) School of Engineering (SOE)
              departments, the Department of Mathematics and the MEMS program are proposing
              to use NSF CSEMS funding to create a comprehensive program to ensure retention
              to degree completion, professional development and career placement upon
              termination. The program will stress the relationships between academic studies
              and workplace needs.

The program provides the opportunity for students,
              faculty and staff to concurrently assume responsibilities as researchers,
              educators and students as they pursue joint efforts that infuse their
              engineering and science education. The undergraduate research experiences
              especially provide a sense of excitement and discovery. In our PI, Dr. Paul
              Fleury, Dean of the School of Engineering, we have a leader who is totally
              committed to our goal of increasing the numbers of Hispanic, African-American
              and Native American students academically prepared to enter the workplace after
              academic achievements that have shown the close relationships between academia
              and the workplace, as well as the relationships between academic studies and
              research ??how all of these complement and reinforce one another symbiotically.
              Our years of experience have convinced us that effective mentors are key to
              producing outstanding engineers and scientists. The passionate devotion to
              research is contagious as students and faculty work together on research
              projects. 

Another key aspect of our programs is our close relationships
              with corporate, government and other organizations that provide the students
              with opportunities to participate in exciting activities that make them aware
              of the vast opportunities that await them as a result of their completion of BS
              and advanced degrees. Summer internships and co-op placements provide the
              students with exposure to a wide variety of real world engineering experiences
              that reinforce their dedication to their academic work at UNM. We are
              especially concerned that, through our evaluation and documentation processes,
              other programs nationwide can replicate our successes and avoid our failures.
              In summary, we sincerely believe that this program can enable our extant
              programs to make even greater future achievements in preparing
              African-American, Hispanic Americans and Native Americans to receive their
              rightful place in the American economy. 

