Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987227

Award Number: 9987227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90894              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christie L. Gilliland cgillila@grcc.ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin G. Gomez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Kinholt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donnie Hallstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey F. McCauley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Green River Cmty College
	      12401 South East 320
	      Auburn, WA  980923699    206/833-9111

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through an established scholarship activity under the NSF Computer Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships (CSEMS) program, Green River
              Community College (Green River) is enabling the achievement of higher education
              degrees in computer science, computer technology, engineering, engineering
              technology, and mathematics by talented but financially disadvantaged students.
              This program is also improving scholarship student's opportunities for
              professional development and employment. The CSEMS program is serving as a
              reproducible model that demonstrates the positive outcomes of financial and
              academic support and student support infrastructure as they relate to student
              retention toward degree completion and adequate preparation for the workplace.
              On an institutional level, this program is strengthening partnerships between
              Green River and other institutions of higher education and computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics employment sectors. 

A Program Advisory
              Committee is overseeing the program's activities and evaluating its ongoing
              effectiveness. This committee includes representatives from industry, local
              area high school computer science, engineering, and mathematics teachers, Green
              River alumni, and four-year university faculty. A Scholarship Selection
              Committee is evaluating success of scholarship applications. This committee
              includes faculty representatives from Green River's computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics departments, and a scholarship office
              representative. Scholarship students are being chosen based on academic merit,
              professionalism, and potential to complete their degree in a CSEMS discipline
              by the close of the grant period. 

The academic and student-support
              infrastructure for successful graduation of scholarship recipients includes
              classes and programs through Green River's high quality computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics departments, faculty advisors for each student in
              his/her discipline, one-on-one mentor relationships with area leaders in the
              student's field of interest, and student support groups and organizations.
              

The CSEMS scholarship program is enabling Green River to further enhance
              the existing community infrastructure for the recruitment, attainment, and
              increased educational and employment opportunities of students of diverse
              backgrounds with diverse career goals while also creating a reproducible model
              for other community colleges. Ultimately, this program is improving
              undergraduate education at Green River, other community colleges, and four-year
              universities. 

