Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships (CSEMS) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987215

Award Number: 9987215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Williams lwilliams@utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lex A. Akers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfonso Castro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Sincovec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An NSF Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS)
              program is being implemented within the College of Sciences and Engineering and
              targets academically talented but low-income students pursuing Bachelor of
              Science degrees in computer science, engineering, and mathematics. Because the
              student population at the institution is nearly 50% minority, the university is
              in a unique position to use the UTSA-CSEMS program to broaden the opportunities
              of underrepresented minorities in the fields of computer science, engineering,
              and mathematics. Forty students are receiving support under the program, and
              the program provides faculty mentors, academic enhancement opportunities,
              career planning assistance, and other activities designed to increase
              employment opportunities and encourage students to pursue advanced graduate
              study. Faculty mentors are advising the students on career opportunities and
              opportunities in graduate school in their fields of study and introducing the
              students to research. Local organizations which hire a significant number of
              computer science, engineering, and mathematics majors are arranging visits to
              the companies' facilities by the students, and representatives of various
              companies are also meeting with the scholars to make presentations about
              aspects of their organizations. The outcomes of the program are being tracked,
              with the goal being to implement the successful aspects of the program on a
              college-wide and university-wide basis. 

