Title       : Vibrational Dynamics & Spectroscopy in the Gas Phase and in Superfluid Helium
               Droplets: Molecules, Radicals, Clusters and Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a9987740

Award Number: 9987740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Miller remiller@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Roger Miller of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is
              funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry program to perform experimental
              studies on clusters in superfluid helium droplets.  It was recently discovered
              that superfluid helium is the most homogeneous condensed phase medium.   Miller
              is among the first to utilize this knowledge to conduct spectroscopic
              measurements at very high resolution on molecules within this medium.  Miller
              has discovered novel cluster structures that form from small molecules such as
              cyanoacetylene and water  in these droplets.   The present work extends the
              helium droplet spectroscopy for novel synthetic uses, for the study of
              pre-reactive free radicals such as O, H, OH, and CN, for the study of molecules
              bound to metal clusters, and for the study of solvation of small
              molecules.

Continued exploration of molecular aggregation in liquid helium
              droplets will play an important role for assessing the opportunities to extend
              this new self assembly method to larger scale growth processes in bulk liquid
              helium.  Novel cluster synthesis provides valuable data for theorists who
              attempt to model behavior of molecules such as water in aggregate form. 
              Modeling water and solvation is an important goal for more accurate
              calculations of biological systems and drug design.











