Title       : Project PISCES: Providing Integration and Support for Computer Science and
               Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987263

Award Number: 9987263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68750              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Mangini jmangini@metropo.mccneb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Metro Comm College
	      P O BOX 3777
	      Omaha, NE  681030777    402/449-8400

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project PISCES is designed to provide financial assistance, academic support,
              and encouragement to individuals from underrepresented populations: women,
              African-Americans, Hispanics and persons with disabilities. The project has a
              dual focus as it delivers services to these populations. The first emphasis is
              on those students who have participated in the articulated Tech Prep programs
              facilitated by Metropolitan Community College (MCC) in the College's
              four-county service area in eastern Nebraska. The second emphasis targets
              former and current students from the Omaha Public School (OPS) District's
              Banneker Partnership. 

MCC's Tech Prep program delivers career opportunities
              to hundreds of high school students from twenty-eight high schools in the
              College's service area. This program helps students to identify and explore
              potential careers of interest. 

The Banneker Partnership is an NSF Urban
              Systemic Initiative Grant with OPS that focuses on preparing high schools for
              success at the postsecondary level in math and science courses. 

Project
              PISCES is providing scholarships to twenty-five individuals who are enrolled as
              full-time students at Metropolitan Community College, majoring in computer
              science or pre- engineering. These students are, upon attainment of their
              two-year Associate's Degree, either transitioning into the workforce or
              transferring into a four-year Bachelor's Degree at the University of Nebraska
              at Omaha. In addition to scholarship support, Project PISCES includes a student
              support infrastructure that includes a variety of support activities, such as
              mentoring, tutoring, job shadowing, internships, and cohort support groups. 

