Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Carbon, Climate, and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a9987607

Award Number: 9987607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2698131            (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. White jwhite@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Townsend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987607
James White - University of Colorado at Boulder.
IGERT: Graduate
              Training Program in Carbon, Climate and Society 

This Integrative Graduate
              Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research on the
              carbon cycle and climate change.  We will construct and test a highly
              interdisciplinary educational structure designed to better train graduate
              students interested in human interactions with the environment.  As humans have
              been far more adept at causing environmental change than at understanding the
              impacts of those changes, we in the education arena need to quickly adapt and
              change how we train students, particularly graduate students, in how to
              effectively address and solve environmental problems. Our current
              disciplinary-based graduate educational structure does not effectively meet
              that need.  Students are not learning how to cross disciplinary boundaries,
              particularly across the social and natural sciences, and how to work
              effectively in teams.  Neither are they taught how to effectively communicate
              with the press and the public in order to make their research findings more
              broadly known and accepted.  Thus, our proposed program merges students from
              natural sciences, social sciences and journalism into cohorts that will focus
              on carbon and climate issues.  We combine formal coursework with research
              internships and a team based approach to problem solving in an attempt to
              explore new mechanisms of graduate education in environmental issues.

IGERT
              is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
              scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards
              are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
              this specific award reside in the Directorates for Geosciences; Biological
              Sciences; Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; Education and Human
              Resources; and the Office of Polar Programs.

