Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987284

Award Number: 9987284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Jacobsen jacobsen@ea.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique A. Ainsworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53), Engineering - Civil (54), Engineering - Electrical
              (55), Engineering - Mechanical (56), Computer Science (31)
This Computer
              Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships (CSEMS) plan builds on
              existing support mechanisms established by the Center for Excellence in
              Engineering and Diversity (CEED) for upper-division students. The most powerful
              CEED retention strategies are being extended to upper-division, low-income
              students, providing a focused intervention program for the academic, personal,
              and career development of the forty selected CSEMS students. The plan supports
              a collaboration between School of Engineering and Applied Science senior
              faculty, CEED programs, and industry partners to provide the authority,
              expertise, management and resources to effectively develop, graduate, and place
              CSEMS students into career or graduate school positions. The objectives are: 1)
              to increase the number and professional attributes of CSEMS students entering
              the senior year and graduating in engineering and computer science; 2) to
              improve the academic performance of CSEMS and other CEED students in their
              major area; and 3) to provide a comprehensive plan for 100% of CSEMS targeted
              students to successfully transition to the high tech workforce or to graduate
              study. The Associate Dean/Principal Investigator (PI) chairs an NSF Academic
              Support Committee, with faculty members assigned as advisors for the all NSF
              CSEMS Scholars. Each NSF Scholar is matched to a faculty advisor/mentor. The PI
              and Co-PI meet with these faculty advisors every three weeks to assess the
              progress and needs of the NSF Scholarship recipients. Additionally, a
              Professional Development sub-committee is organizing career planning and
              corporate readiness workshops with members from the CEED Industry Advisory
              Board. These activities include: 1) critiqued video-taped mock job interviews,
              2) resume critique sessions, 3) a career interest testing program, 4) a live
              interview and evaluation session with CEED Industry Advisory Board Members, and
              6) corporate situational problem-solving activities designed by CEED Industry
              Advisory Board Members. The project leadership is collecting committee reports
              on student participation in programs and tabulating academic performance
              results. In addition, efficacy of program components is being assesed with the
              help of the following indicators: 1) a database for tracking course progress
              and time to graduation for NSF Scholars; 2) attendance at workshops and
              performance on quizzes provide monitoring and efficacy of workshops; 3) NSF
              Scholar GPA and number of scholars exceeding the 3.2 GPA norm for SEAS
              graduating seniors; and 4) the number of scholars securing summer internships
              and offers for career positions before graduation. The project aims to impact
              80 underrepresented minority CSEMS students over the duration of the two-year
              grant. 

