Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987423

Award Number: 9987423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj S. Pamula rpamula@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore J. Crovello  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Los Angeles
	      5151 State University Dr
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-0111

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Sciences (31), Engineering - Other (59), Mathematical Sciences (21) The
              goal of the NSF-CSEMS Scholars Program is to enable computer science,
              mathematical sciences, and engineering students participating in the program at
              the Associate, Bachelor's, or Master's degree level to complete their relevant
              degrees in two years. Furthermore, students are receiving support, information,
              and encouragement to pursue continuing educational opportunities even as they
              join the CSEMS workforce. The program features a partnership that includes
              Pasadena City College (PCC) and East Los Angeles College (ELAC), two long time
              Cal State L.A. community college collaborators. Given the demographic data of
              all three institutions, the NSF Scholars Program automatically serves one of
              the most diverse and traditionally under-served student populations in the
              country. The Cal State L.A. NSF-CSEMS Scholars Program has three distinguishing
              characteristics: 1) all NSF scholars pursuing any one of the three degrees have
              opportunities to share experiences, with senior scholars acting as mentors for
              the younger ones; 2) shared activities encourage students to move from AAs and
              BAs to Master's degrees and beyond; and 3) the Program is expanding
              collaborative programs and activities both among the partners and within each
              institution. Program activities include: For Cal State L.A. students, a
              specifically designed one-unit course required during the fall quarter of each
              academic year (or each quarter of the academic year) to promote academic,
              leadership and interpersonal skills. Faculty from the targeted disciplines are
              also introducing ongoing state-of-the-art research projects which students can
              join. The collaborating campuses are sponsoring special CSEMS CAREER DAYS, in
              addition to offering regular, ongoing support services. A set of periodic
              special event meetings allows all scholars to come together, promoting the
              Program theme of advancing through the A.A. to graduate school and a career.
              Forty scholarships are awarded annually: 10 at PCC; 10 at ELAC; and 20 at Cal
              State L.A.
