Title       : Interdisciplinary Graduate Education and Research Training in Meso-, Micro- and
               Nano- (MMN) Scale Thermalfluid Systems Engineering and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a9987616

Award Number: 9987616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2740600            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Roemer roemer@me.mech.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              JoAnn S. Lighty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy A. Ameel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Jacobsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Hwu-Sadwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987616
Roemer - University of Utah
IGERT: Extremely Small Scale Thermal-Fluid
              Systems

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT)
              award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training
              program of education and research on extremely small scale thermal-fluid
              systems. The applications of extremely small scale thermal- and fluid-systems
              are expanding exponentially, including: silicon microfabrication technology
              based turbines; microscale heat exchangers for cooling high-power electronics,
              and micro- and nano- scale chemical and biological analyses systems. The
              objective of this program is to create the first integrated, multidisciplinary
              educational program in extremely small scale thermal-fluid systems. The program
              emphasis will be on (1) the fundamental engineering physics and chemistry that
              are important at these small scales; (2) fabrication technologies; (3) design
              for manufacturing; and (4) testing and analysis of complete systems. An
              interdisciplinary faculty will provide a comprehensive education and research
              training program, including six new, specialized courses and integrated
              research experiences.  These classes will involve a diverse set of topics such
              as scaling issues, micromachining, interfacial phenomena, and thin-film energy
              transport.  Between 50 and 60 Ph.D. students will be enrolled in this program
              over its five-year life. These students will participate in formal classroom
              and laboratory training, industrial and government laboratory internships, a
              monthly interdisciplinary seminar, and international educational experiences.
              The concentration on thermal-fluid systems is a unique feature that will
              provide critical training in an important discipline within the broader micro-
              and nano-systems technology field.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
              meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future.  The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the third year of the program, awards are being made to nineteen
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Mathematical and Physical Sciences;
              and Education and Human Resources.



