Title       : High-Speed Optical Sectioning Microscope for Cell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9987393

Award Number: 9987393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Lanni lanni@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT / #9987393 / High-speed optical sectioning fluorescence
microscope
              for cell biology.

Many exciting directions in cell and molecular biology
              today are
converging on the use of high-resolution fluorescence microscopy
              for
both structural and functional studies of living cells.  In addition
              to
the intensive use of hundreds of types of fluorescent molecular probes
and
              indicators, genetic engineering has opened the door to widespread
use of green
              fluorescent proteins (GFP and variants) as direct
fusion-protein tracers. 
              This revolution has spanned research at all
levels from yeast to mammalian
              cells and transgenic animals.  Unlocking
the vast potential of quantitative
              image analysis in these experiments
depends upon "optical sectioning
              microscopy";  obtaining images in which
out-of-focus zones of the specimen are
              strongly attenuated and in-focus
features are accurately retained.  In living
              brain sections, for
example, measurements of neuronal calcium transients with
              fluorescent
indicator dyes is meaningful only if the emission background due
              to
cells in out-of-focus strata is eliminated.  In yeast, which are small
but
              never thin, the out-of-focus component in images of the cytoskeleton
or of
              organelles is often brighter than the in-focus structures in any
plane of
              focus.  The need for improved resolution, including optical
sectioning, under
              conditions compatible with specimen viability and the
rapid time scale of cell
              dynamics places stringent requirements on the
speed and efficiency of
              computerized microscope systems.  The aim of
this project is the development
              of a versatile, fast and reliable
optical sectioning fluorescence microscope
              as a widely-useful instrument
for this work.  

The unique feature of the
              high-speed microscope is an incoherent grating
imager, a relatively new
              concept in biological fluorescence microscopy. 
In brief, a moveable grating
              mask (a Ronchi Ruling) within the
incident-light illuminator is projected with
              finite depth-of-field into
the specimen;  With high numerical aperture optics
              and a fine mask, the
depth-of-focus of the projected grating image can be less
              than 0.5
micron.  Transverse movement of the grating therefore modulates
              the
fluorescence of exclusively in-focus features, so that true
              optical
sections can be derived by very simple and fast digital image
              processing
operations.  For a single plane of focus, the grating need only
              be
shifted between three defined positions to get sufficient data to
subtract
              away the out-of-focus image component and demodulate the
in-focus features. 
              Only low-cost components are needed in addition to a
digital imaging
              microscope system.  In preliminary work, the grating
imager has outperformed
              confocal scanning in terms of speed of image
acquisition for comparable
              optical sections in cellular specimens.  The
technical plan of the proposal is
              to incorporate the grating imager into
an automated multi-mode microscope
              equipped with a fast, high-precision
cooled CCD camera.  Research will focus
              on design and automation for
speed, improvement of precision and accuracy, and
              development of image
processing and analysis capability.  Key component and
              system designs
will be disseminated so that other research groups can
              duplicate the
instrument.

The high-speed grating imager located in the NSF
              Center for Light
Microscope Imaging and Biotechnology will have an immediate
              impact on
the research of a number of Principal Investigators.  Experiments
              range
from time-lapse imaging of fibroblast dynamics in a
              collagen-based
extracellular matrix gel to Golgi fragmentation and
              reassociation
dynamics during mitosis in mammalian cells.  More than a dozen
              PIs at
Carnegie Mellon University and at University of Pittsburgh carry
              out
basic research in molecular cell biology and cell physiology in
              which
there is a need for high-speed, high-resolution fluorescence
              optical
sectioning microscopy.  Several in this group of PIs work in the area
              of
tissue engineering, where imaging living cells clearly in
              polymeric
scaffold materials is of fundamental importance.  Because of its
              speed,
simplicity, and versatility, the grating imager will make possible
              many
cell-biological experiments that cannot be carried out at present. 
              It
will displace confocal microscopy in living-cell applications where
speed
              is an important constraint, and will quickly become the optical
system of
              choice for computational deconvolution (computational optical
sectioning
              microscopy).  Overall, the field of cell biology has lacked a
robust method
              for optical sectioning that is camera-based, therefore
able to capture image
              data in a massively-parallel manner.  The
high-speed microscope based on the
              incoherent grating imager is a
solution to this problem.



