Title       : GOALI: Structure/Property Relationships for POSS-Based Nanoreinforced Plastics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9987613

Award Number: 9987613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Feher fjfeher@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph D. Lichtenhan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9166,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI award, co-funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Divisions of
              Materials Research and Chemistry, involves research on siloxane-type polymeric
              networks.  Polyhedral oligosilsesquioxanes (POSS) are an interesting class of
              three-dimensional Si/O clusters derived from the reaction of organiosilicon
              monomers with water.  Since their discovery in 1946, the syntheses of many
              well-defined POSS have been reported, but only recently have application for
              POSS is the production of "hybrid plastics", which combine the best features of
              organic polymers with the best features of ceramics.  In addition to being
              lighter, more durable, and able to withstand higher temperatures then
              conventional plastics, POSS-containing plastics exhibit many other
              substantially improved properties.  Since 1991, the Feher Group at UCI and the
              Lichtenhan Groups at the Air Force Research Laboratory (1991-98) and Hybrid
              Plastics (1998-present) have worked to develop the methodology require to
              manufacture POSS from inexpensive feedstocks, as well as the technology
              required to transform common plastics into high-performance POSS-containing
              plastics.  The research outlined in this proposal is a natural consequence of
              the highly successful work by both groups over the past two years.  The goal of
              this project is to develop a fundamental understanding of structure/property
              relationships for POSS-based nanoreinforced plastics.  This goal will be
              achieved by: (1) defining and synthesizing families of POSS monomers that can
              be used to probe the effects of size, shape and chemical composition of the
              POSS additive; (2) preparing and evaluating a variety of POSS-reinforced
              plastics in order to establish preliminary structure/property relationships;
              and (3) establishing a feedback loop to test hypotheses and guide future
              work.

In addition to resolving many questions relating to the origin of the
              property enhancements observed for POSS-reinforced plastics, this project is
              expected to create a foundation for the development of other families of hybrid
              inorganic/organic polymers.  There are many other three-dimensional molecules
              that may be suitable as nanoreinforcements or functional additives to plastics.
               Exploration and developmental work on these systems would be greatly
              facilitated by the kind of detailed structure/property relationships that
              should emerge from this work.

