Title       : Third Harmonic Microscopy: Dynamic, High-Resolution, Three-Dimensional Imaging
               Without Bleaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a9987257

Award Number: 9987257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344773             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Squier   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Kleinfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A high-resolution, real-time, microscope that is based on third-harmonic
              generation and provides unique possibilities to visualize interfaces in
              refractive index or third-order nonlinear susceptibility in optically
              transparent media, and biological systems is being developed. The thin optical
              sections produced in the third harmonic microscope can be used in conjunction
              with standard surface rendering techniques to produce three-dimensional images.
              No fluorophore is necessary to label the specimen as is used in traditional
              laser fluoresence microscopy, as the signal is generated by endogenous
              interfaces. Thus, in third harmonic microscopy the images do not fade due to
              bleaching, and can be viewed for extended periods without loss of intensity or
              clarity. This imaging technique is therefore particular useful for imaging
              three-dimensional dynamics in microscopic systems. For dynamic measurements,
              imaging volumes must be repeatedly addressed in order to develop a reliable
              time series of transient phenomena. In the past, the effectiveness over which
              dynamic systems could be measured was limited by the bleaching characteristics
              of an exogenous label. Third harmonic imaging relies on naturally occurring
              boundaries within the sample to generate image contrast, and therefore does not
              fade, and is highly suitable for visualizing dynamic three-dimensional
              systems.
A diode-pumped, femtosecond Nd:glass oscillator optimized for
              microscopy will be constructed. The laser will produce third harmonic signals
              that are 16-21 times greater than can be achieved with commercially available
              lasers. The laser will also be beneficial for 2-photon imaging. Operating at a
              wavelength of 1.06 micro meter, this light penetrates tissue ~20% deeper than
              present femtosecond lasers that commonly operate at 800 nm. A novel microscope
              design will be constructed that can simultaneously capture fluoresence images
              and third harmonic images with perfect registration. This is important for
              fully quantifying the image contrast mechanisms in third harmonic microscopy,
              and enables a quantitative analysis of this new imaging process. 
The third
              harmonic microscope will be used in conjunction with an image correlation
              spectroscopy technique developed specifically to allow rapid measurements of
              macromolecular aggregation within an intact cellular environment. By combining
              temporal and spatial autocorrelation analysis of an image time series, it is
              possible to obtain information on the molecular dynamics and transport
              properties as well as measuring the state of aggregation of the molecules as a
              function of time. The combined information can provide insight into the
              molecular mechanisms that govern many biochemical reactions in living cells.
              Measurement of molecular interactions and dynamics is integral for a full
              understanding of how cells build functional macromolecular assemblies as well
              as how they transduce signals across the plasma membrane following binding of
              external ligands to receptors localized to the cell surface. 


