Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987279

Award Number: 9987279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Wilding wilding_m@mail.coc.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Canyons
	      26455 Rockwell Canyon Road
	      Rancho Santa Clarita, CA  91355    805/259-7800

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              College of the Canyons, the second fastest growing community college in the
              State of California, is awarding Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
              (CSEMS) scholarships to low income, academically talented students majoring in
              computer science, computer technology, mathematics, engineering, and
              engineering technology. The one and two year scholarships are providing an
              opportunity for College of the Canyons (COC) to financially support students
              while providing them with a quality education. Fifteen $750 scholarships are
              being awarded annually through a competitive selection process. 

As the sole
              community college serving the fast-growing Santa Clarita Valley, COC is
              reaching out to individuals interested in obtaining a college education.
              Scholarships are essential for low-income families who simply cannot afford to
              send their children to college. A $750 scholarship is covering the cost of
              tuition, assessed fees, and some books for an entire year, and is providing an
              opportunity for a low income student to complete the first two years of
              undergraduate education at nearly no cost. 

Awarding scholarships is
              assisting the College in fulfilling its mission of providing programs and
              services to those who can benefit from quality and accessible learning
              opportunities. Through the NSF Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics
              Scholarships program, the College plans to increase the number of low-income
              students enrolled in math and science programs, retain these students, and
              successfully transfer them to four year institutions or into the job market.
              COC ranks 19th in full time transfers to the University of California and
              California State University systems. 

The College is providing various
              resources and services to NSF scholarship recipients, including tutoring,
              mentoring, career services, counseling, and internship experience. NSF
              Scholarships will provide the financial aid many disadvantaged students need to
              pursue their education. 

