Title       : IGERT Full Proposal: Integrated Bioinformatics Training at UCLA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9987641

Award Number: 9987641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2693344            (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Fred Fox fredfox@microbio.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Lange  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987641
Fred Fox - University of California at Los Angeles
IGERT: Training
              Program in Bioinformatics

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research
              Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary
              graduate training program of education and research in bioinformatics.  As part
              of a major new bioinformatics initiative at UCLA, the IGERT bioinformatics
              program will provide rigorous training for Ph.D. candidates in thirteen
              participating departments, supporting them with tools for creating robust new
              bioinformatics applications.  It also will engage undergraduates from UCLA and
              feeder institutions in summer research internships and support accelerated
              bioinformatics training that can bypass the baccalaureate and proceed directly
              from undergraduate admittance to an advanced degree.  IGERT trainees will
              satisfy all major subject area requirements of their Ph.D.-granting departments
              and also the core components of the newly established, certificate-granting
              interdepartmental program in bioinformatics.  This core consists of courses in
              genomics and bioinformatics, statistical methods in computational biology, and
              a weekly seminar in which students and faculty discuss specific examples of how
              biological problems map to are solved by approaches from multiple disciplines. 
              The interdepartmental program also requires a subject area minor in molecular
              life science for trainees in computer science, mathematics and statistics;
              trainees in life sciences must satisfy a minor in mathematics-statistics or
              computer science.  IGERT trainees will work in matrix environments that force
              regular, collaborative contacts; these are provided by the Keck
              Foundation-supported Bioinformatics User Centers adjacent to the UCLA-DOE
              Macromolecular Structure Laboratories and the Human Genetics core DNA
              sequencing and microarray facilities. The User Centers can be made available to
              visitors who wish to apply powerful, integrated bioinformatics approaches in
              their research.  The UCLA-IGERT bioinformatics program will develop a proactive
              industry liaison that contributes to programmatic vision, helps test the
              preparedness of trainees in private sector challenges and provides networking
              support.  The IGERT program will also collaborate with the UCLA-based,
              NSF-sponsored national Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics in seminars
              and conferences that help define the evolution of bioinformatics as a
              fundamental discipline. 

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future.  The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the third year of the program, awards are being made to nineteen
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences, Computer and Information
              Science and Engineering, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and Education and
              Human Resources.


