Title       : The NSF Industrial Fellows Program in Computer Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987216

Award Number: 9987216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo E. Hanifin hanifinl@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Triplett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry G. Greenleaf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (31), (59) The university and its corporate partners are implementing a
              unique NSF Fellows program aimed at increasing the enrollment, professional
              development and graduation of high quality, low income engineering and computer
              science students. This program is effective because it incorporates an
              integrated combination of scholarship support, co-operative education
              assignments and mentoring. The combination of real work experience and both
              financial and academic support not only attracts excellent students, but is
              providing access to and supporting success in a top quality technical
              education. 

This effective program involves direct and active participation
              of many offices of the university and at least two major corporate partners,
              Ford Motor Company and Delphi Automotive Systems. The corporate partners not
              only provide co-operative work experiences involving real engineering and
              computer science functions, but they also match the NSF scholarship support
              with equal amounts of funding for each student.  As such, this represents a
              model of partnership between academia, industry and government to meet an
              urgent national need: the attraction and graduation of increased numbers of
              technological professionals. 

The location of the university and its history
              of success in attracting large proportions of women and minority students to
              engineering and science are sound indicators of success in attracting a diverse
              group of NSF-Industrial Fellows. The mission of the university to educate
              diverse teams that value all contributors and the NSF priority on increasing
              diversity in CSEMS education are both factors in the selection of fellows.  
