Title       : Computer Science, Engineerinng, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987153

Award Number: 9987153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela A. Eibeck Pamela.Eibeck@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mason H. Somerville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fully 55% of Northern Arizona University (NAU) engineering students are eligible
              for financial assistance under federal guidelines.  Additionally,
              underrepresented groups comprise 37% of the engineering college's student body
              of 900, including approximately 100 Native American students. Most of these
              students struggle under the burden of inadequate financial support and/or poor
              K-12 academic preparation for college.  This project at provides 40
              scholarships to undergraduate and graduate students in the College of
              Engineering and Technology.  Scholarship recipients receive $2500 per academic
              year for up to two years and  have additional paid tutoring/teaching
              assistantship opportunities. 

Recipients of the NSF scholarships are
              undergraduate and graduate students who, in addition to the many institutional
              support programs, are supported through the following activities in the College
              of Engineering and Technology.  The Engineering Scholars Seminar and Pizza
              series enhances the scholars' professional development, develops peer support,
              and offers an informal environment in which to interact with college faculty
              and administrators.  The Engineering Scholars participate in workshops
              dedicated to internship and career placement, including training in resume
              writing and interview skills.  All undergraduate Engineering Scholars
              participate in the Multicultural Engineering Program, and upper-division NSF
              Engineering Scholars receive work-study positions as tutors with the MEP
              program.  Graduate students receiving scholarships also receive a paid
              quarter-time teaching assistantship to partner with full-time engineering
              faculty members in teaching undergraduate courses.  Engineering Scholars are
              eligible for summer internship opportunities at Raytheon Defense Systems
              Segment in Tucson, AZ as part of a proposed Raytheon/NAU scholarship/internship
              partnership. 

The program will be administered by the Principal
              Investigators (the Master of Engineering Director and the Dean of the College),
              and coordinated by the College's Director of Internships and Cooperative
              Education/Scholarship Coordinator. A Scholarship Administrative Board,
              consisting of the engineering dean, relevant department chairs, and the
              Multicultural Engineering Program Director, will provide leadership and
              guidance for the program. 

