Title       : NSF Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987182

Award Number: 9987182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shannon L. Hellard shellard@valencia.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Regis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nasser Hedayat  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Valencia Community Coll
	      P O BOX 3028
	      Orlando, FL  328023028    305/299-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To facilitate the development of an internationally competitive U.S. engineering
              workforce and to better meet the current and future workforce and educational
              needs of the nation, a Pre-Major for Engineering A.A. Degree program has been
              designed for students who plan to complete a Bachelor's Degree in Engineering.
              In this unique and innovative program, academically rigorous Statewide Common
              Course Prerequisites for engineering count as elective credits for the A.A.
              degree, better preparing the student for upper division study in engineering at
              a four-year institution. Project objectives focus on: improving academic
              preparation, supplementing academic and student support services, establishing
              higher retention and placement rates, and strengthening the institution's
              relationship with business and industry and other higher education institutions
              through their involvement in maintaining academically rigorous curriculum.
              

Economically disadvantaged but academically talented students who are
              likely to receive their degree by the close of the two-year grant period will
              benefit from scholarships for full-time study, supplemental advisement,
              learning-centered curriculum and instruction, recruitment/retention
              intervention, and industry-based internships. Scholarships will be distributed
              as follows: 35 in Year One (25 new and 15 returning students) and 15 in Year
              Two (all returning students), for a total of 50 scholarship for full-time
              students pursuing the A.A. Pre-Major for Engineering. Grant-supported
              recruitment activities will prioritize efforts to recruit under-represented
              groups (e.g., targeting high schools in areas with high minority populations).
              Collaboration with other institutions of higher education and with business and
              industry will ensure that information disseminated about this model program
              will demonstrate the importance of partnerships in research and education.

