Title       : Development of a Pyruvate Sensor and Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a9987273

Award Number: 9987273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale A. Baker dbaker@bioeng.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              NSF Proposal 9987273
Development of a Pyruvate Sensor and Instrumentation
Dale
              A. Baker, Ph.D.

Project Abstract 

	Pyruvate is a chemical, which is
              involved in many biological pathways and their regulation. The knowledge of its
              concentration is important not only in studies of human and animal physiology,
              but also in the control of industrial processes, such as fermentations.
              Currently, pyruvate is most often measured by a chemical procedure that takes
              several minutes to complete and requires pretreatment of turbid samples, e.g.
              blood, microbial growth media or food samples, in order to remove particulate
              matter for accurate measurement. Furthermore, the chemicals used in this method
              are washed away and cannot be re-used after this single measurement. Continuous
              measurements are not possible with this technique. To overcome these
              disadvantages, the pyruvate sensor in this project will use a membrane that
              embeds (immobilizes) an enzyme, and in conjunction with an electrode, measures
              the concentration of pyruvate. 
	A pyruvate sensor  will be developed that can
              quantitatively and continuously monitor pyruvate concentration by using the
              immobilized enzyme, pyruvate oxidase, in a membrane, which is coupled to an
              oxygen sensitive electrode. A mathematical model that describes the chemical
              processes within the sensor and subsequent simulations will be used to design
              the sensor and better understand its operation. Experiments will be conducted
              with sensors that are fabricated having the design features suggested from the
              modeling studies. The purpose of the initial experiments is to characterize the
              sensor response to changes in pyruvate concentration under well-controlled
              conditions. These experiments will also allow validation of the sensor
              performance before the sensor can be considered for use in more demanding
              physiology studies or in bioreactors. Additionally, the role of the two major
              properties of the enzyme membrane, the enzyme reaction kinetics and the
              substrate transport, will be investigated with an experimental apparatus for
              membrane characterization. An engineering analysis of the predominant
              mechanisms affecting the enzyme performance can be completed from the data
              collected with this apparatus.
	The pyruvate sensor will be used for basic
              biological research applications and has potential for studies of physiology in
              animals and humans. Many bacterial cultures depend on the level or control of
              pyruvate concentration to enhance growth or augment the production of valuable
              chemicals or enzyme products. In mammalian physiology, conditions of low blood
              flow (ischemia) or lowered oxygen levels (hypoxia) can cause significant
              changes in blood pyruvate concentration. The sensor will dynamically indicate
              any accumulation in pyruvate, which can reflect a transition from normal
              (aerobic) metabolism during these pathological conditions. It is anticipated
              that an acceptable biosensor can be developed to continuously monitor pyruvate
              concentration. These research studies will provide a systematic way to enhance
              the enzyme membrane, which is an essential component of the sensor used to
              detect and quantify the pyruvate. Improvements in the membrane will refine the
              sensitivity and stability of the complete sensor.



