Title       : Growth, Crisis, and the Evaluation of Financial Systems: Micro Underpinnings for
               Macro Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9987855

Award Number: 9987855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Townsend rtownsen@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      1155 E. 60th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research utilizes data collected by the PI in Thailand to understand
              financial markets and institutions, their role in providing safety nets during
              the recent crisis, and their role during the previous period of high growth.
              Both informal institutions (e.g., the extended family and networks of friends
              and relatives) and formal institutions (e.g., village level financial funds and
              national level private and public banks) are considered. More specifically,
              various models of saving, credit, and insurance widely used in the literature
              are used here to examine the micro underpinnings of the Thai economy and its
              actual financial system. This examination is based not only on institutional
              data but also on data from households and firms, directly. Econometric tests of
              risk-sharing, efficiency in production, more limited consumption smoothing, and
              occupation choice are extended to the Thai context, and generalized so as to
              allow an analysis of the potential role of these financial institutions. The
              various models are compared to another, via nesting or other means. The
              estimated underpinnings and associated parameter values are then used in
              various of the models of growth, inequality, and financial deepening and the
              predictions tested against the Thai Socio-Economic Survey and other
              national-level data. The larger goal here is to improve the science of
              macro-economics, and evaluation and policy recommendations based on macro
              data.
The project began with a review of existing theoretical and empirical
              literature. This led to the design of a series of questionnaires, to measure
              the key variables suggested by all these models and related theoretical and
              empirical literatures. A large cross-sectional survey was fielded in May of
              1997, of 2880 households, 606 small businesses, 192 village headmen, 161 local
              financial institutions, 262 joint liability groups, and soil samples from 1920
              agricultural plots. Using a cross-section to mimic aspects of growth, we picked
              two provinces close to Bangkok, including semi-urban and industrial zones, and
              two in the relatively poor and semi-arid northeast.
With the devaluation of
              the Thai baht in July 1997, an unanticipated resurvey of 33% of this
              cross-section was accomplished in May 1998, 10 months into the crisis. We
              completed in May 1999 a third resurvey, and thus we have an extensive household
              and business panel covering household composition, occupation, income,
              consumption, physical assets and consumer durables, saving, lending, borrowing,
              inputs and output in agriculture and in business, the use of networks, and
              other variables as well as information on local financial institutions and the
              history and contemporary situation of the villages. The yet more intensive
              monthly survey began in July 1998 and covers 16 villages, 45 households per
              village, or 720 households per month. In five villages every single household
              is sampled, giving us an excellent opportunity to study networks. The variables
              are as listed above, but here with more detail on labor supply, weekly
              consumption, barter versus monetary transactions, and so on. These annual and
              monthly data are to be examined using the standards suggested by a complete,
              perfect markets hypothesis or an equivalent set of institutions (e.g., an
              optimal allocation risk-bearing and efficiency in production), by the permanent
              income model (and as alternatives the buffer stock model, against fluctuations,
              and limited credit models), by models with entrepreneurship constrained by
              credit and human capital, and by models which are explicit about private
              information and incentives with an emphasis on the moral hazard problem at the
              level of individual borrowers.. Econometric tests build on the literature, but
              go beyond what can typically be done, making use of the information on
              institutional affiliation, actual institutional use, or a non-institutional
              alternative, all measured in the data on savings, borrowing, risk
              contingencies, and sharing (rice, money, labor, and equipment). More generally,
              these models with the various alternative micro underpinnings will be nested or
              otherwise compared.
The parameters of some of the better known models of
              growth with inequality and financial deepening can be estimated with the Thai
              project data, and then dynamic simulations used to forecast the movement and
              changing shape of the income distribution and macro variables. Mean-squared
              error,
 Cremer-von Mises, and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistics will be used
              to compare the models' predictions against SES data and national income
              accounts. The micro, econometric tests of the permanent income model, buffer
              stock model, human capital occupation choice models, and mechanism design
              models suggest alternative micro underpinnings for the construction and testing
              of new micro/macro models of growth. Going from micro underpinnings to macro
              phenomena and back again, we will come to see more clearly the picture of
              actual financial markets and institutions in Thailand. This will be important
              for policy recommendations on structural adjustments and reformation of the
              financial system, e.g., bank regulation. The method applied here will be
              useful, in addition, for other countries, including the U.S.

