Title       : Increasing Degree Opportunities for Low-income Computer Science, Engineering,
               and Mathematics Students in Montana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987246

Award Number: 9987246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Marley rmarley@coe.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The principle objective of the project is to extend access to computer science,
              engineering and mathematics programs to low-income, but academically talented
              students, as well as to increase their retention to degree.  The proposed
              project builds upon existing efforts at the university to achieve similar
              goals, particularly for women and minority students. 

The project includes
              the following key activities: Award of forty scholarships to high-achieving but
              financially needy juniors, seniors and graduate students enrolled in computer
              science, engineering, and mathematics degree programs; Participation by each
              scholarship recipient in fifty hours of supervised work experience
              (mini-internship) in an active research laboratory or extension center relevant
              to their degree area and personal interests; Participation of each recipient in
              their second year as a mentor to younger students; Special emphasis on
              increasing the retention of women and Native American students in computer
              science, engineering, and mathematics degrees; and Assessment of individual and
              program success in achieving project goals.

The sponsoring university is in
              a unique position within the northern Rocky Mountain and northern plains states
              to offer such a program.  Both the academic qualifications and financial need
              of its student population is high.  Furthermore, there is no other single
              campus in Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, or the Dakotas that offers comprehensive
              (B.S. through Ph.D.) degrees in computer science, engineering and mathematics,
              as well as the B.S. and M.S. degrees in engineering technology.  Together with
              the other successful support programs already in place at the university, the
              activities proposed can achieve the project's objectives.

