Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Molecular Biology and Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9987835

Award Number: 9987835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves V. Brun   (Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam E. Zolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT          Yves V. Brun             DBI#  9987835

In the last two
              years, with funding from Indiana University-Bloomington, the members of the MBG
              Program  have introduced 20 undergraduate students, mostly from small colleges,
              to the fascinating world of scientff ic research by allowing them to
              participate in research at the frontiers of molecular biology and genetics.  An
              REU Site Grant will allow the to continuation of a very successful
              Undergraduate Research Program to benefit students mainly from groups
              traditionally underrepresented in research and students from regional
              undergraduate institutions.  Ten students will conduct research in laboratories
              that use molecular biology and genetic techniques to study problems including
              the regulation of gene expression, the mechanisms of cell differentiation and
              development, host-parasite interaction and disease resistance in plants, gene
              evolution, signal transduction, DNA repair, and virus infection and
              replication.
This program is designed to develop both the technical and the
              intellectual abilities of the participants.  The  philosophy is that one learns
              how to do research by doing it but that this only occurs under the appropriate
              guidance.  The program will emphasize the "doing R" aspect of research by
              involving the students in a research project under close supervision.  Students
              will learn about the different stages and aspects of scientific investigation
              by interaction with their mentors and in sessions on scientific writing and
              research ethics.  Students will also be exposed to the research conducted in
              the other host laboratories during weekly lunchtime seminars given by faculty
              mentors.


