Title       : Research and Development Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987138

Award Number: 9987138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wolfe wolfe@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The baccalaureate is the terminal technical degree for many talented students at
              the University of Houston and across the country. Because of this, most of our
              graduates find employment in software development, manufacturing, plant
              operations, or sales, far from the process of creating either fundamental
              knowledge or new technology. However, Research and Development (R&D),
              particularly in the CSEMS fields, is the engine that drives productivity growth
              and increases our standard of living. It is important, therefore, that we
              motivate and prepare more of our students for careers in R&D. 

The faculties
              of computer science, engineering and mathematics at the University of Houston
              have joined to propose the R&D Scholars Program, whose goal is to increase the
              number of students pursuing R&D careers. We will provide the following
              student-support infrastructure: a) An undergraduate research experience on a
              funded research project, b) A $2,500 summer research stipend in addition to the
              CSEMS scholarship, c) A special summer school course to develop basic research
              skills (planning, technical writing, presentations, and mathematical software
              tools), d) A seminar series on the nature of academic and industrial R&D, the
              historical importance of R&D to society, career planning and educational
              preparedness amid the uncertainties of the modern workplace, and R&D career
              opportunities, e) An undergraduate research advisor and graduate student
              mentor, f) Support for developing personal educational and career plans, g)
              Support for applying to graduate school, h) Job placement for graduates who
              elect to enter the workplace after graduation. 

Promising students will be
              selected on the basis of clearly defined criteria and provided with scholarship
              support from both NSF and UH sources. These students will participate in an
              intensive, advanced-level enrichment program, characterized by the development
              of research and communications skills and special mentoring opportunities, all
              within the context of high quality undergraduate and graduate programs in
              Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics. The proposed program complements
              several effective academic enrichment programs at UH that serve mainly freshman
              and sophomore students. The proposed program has enthusiastic faculty support,
              and the support of the Deans of the two Colleges involved. The program
              administrative organization is well-defined, and the evaluation protocol
              includes dynamic elements that will serve not only to document effectiveness,
              but to provide feedback for continual improvement and success of the program.
              

