Title       : Descriptive Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9987437

Award Number: 9987437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander S. Kechris kechris@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-998-7437
ABSTRACT

This general aim of this project is the development of
              the theory of
definable equivalence relations, and the closely related study
              of definable
actions of Polish groups, and the structure and classification of
              their
orbit spaces. This theory takes place within the context of descriptive
              set
theory, which provides the basic underlying concepts and methods. On
              the
other hand, in view of the broad scope of this theory, there are
              natural
interactions with other areas of logic and mathematics, such as
              model
theory, recursion theory, the theory of topological and
              transformation
groups, topological dynamics, ergodic theory, and operator
              algebras.

One of the fundamental questions that arises in many areas of
              mathematics is
that of classifying a given collection of objects that is being
              studied in
some particular field. This amounts to providing a "catalog" or
              "listing" of
these objects, in principle not unlike that of cataloging species
              in biology
or stars and galaxies in astronomy. If such a classification is
              possible,
one has a "complete" understanding of the mathematical structures
              involved.
Otherwise a more or less "chaotic" behavior is expected. It is thus
              very
important to understand under what circumstances a classification
              is
possible. This difficult foundational question is further complicated by
              the
fact that what constitutes an acceptable classification is very
              much
dependent on the particular field of mathematics studied, so the
              criteria
for a "good" classification in one area might not be appropriate in
              another.
At its basic level, this project aims to develop a general
              quantitative
theory, which in many situations can precisely measure the
              complexity of a
classification problem and thus provide objective means by
              which one can
decide, in any given field, whether a satisfactory
              classification of the
objects in question is possible. This is achieved by
              associating with each
collection of objects to be classified an appropriate
              concept of "magnitude"
or "size", which in a precise sense measures the
              difficulty of its
classification problem. This new theory of "magnitude" is
              investigated in
this project.

