Title       : NSF-CSEM Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987287

Award Number: 9987287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane M. Fraser jfraser@uscolo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Chacon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Colorado
	      2200 Bonforte Blvd
	      Pueblo, CO  810014901    719/549-2100

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves a regional university with a polytechnic emphasis
              enrolling many low-income and first generation students. It is also an Hispanic
              Serving Institution, with 25.7% of the enrollment of Hispanic descent. The
              students typically work many hours per week, and often at more than one job. In
              many cases the demands of life outside the university cause their studies not
              to be their first priority. There are limited institutional scholarships
              available and even very talented students find themselves having a difficult
              time meeting both the demands of school and the demands of work and family.
              

The project provides scholarships to US citizens with demonstrated
              financial need, enrolled full-time in computer information systems,
              engineering, engineering technology or mathematics at the baccalaureate or
              masters level, with a 3.0 or above GPA, who demonstrate professionalism through
              personal statement and letters of support.  The university has in place an
              integrated system of support services for students. The scholarship students
              are further supported in their development by the PIs and by faculty mentors in
              each remaining area. Regularly scheduled meetings between students and mentors
              allow the kind of intrusive advising that is so often necessary. 

To further
              increase the scholarship recipients' motivation to graduate and their placement
              potential after graduation, each recipient is required to take a 1-credit
              course involving the exploration of technical careers. The primary activity in
              the course is close interaction with visiting speakers who talk about their
              careers, education, and research. Speakers are drawn from professionals in
              local business, industry and universities. The anticipated results include
              reduced times to graduation, increased completion rate, increased numbers of
              transfer students recruited to these majors and  higher levels of student
              achievement for low-income and academically talented students in the fields of
              computer information systems, engineering, engineering technology, and
              mathematics. 

