Title       : Controlled Cavitation for Ultrasound-Mediated Drug Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a9987698

Award Number: 9987698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Prausnitz mark.prausnitz@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9987698
Prausnitz
One of the greatest challenges in drug delivery is the
              delivery of molecules to precise locations in the body.  Recent studies in our
              laboratory and in the laboratories of others have shown that ultrasound can
              temporarily disrupt biological membranes, thereby delivering large compounds
              such as proteins and DNA into cells and across tissues.  By transiently
              disrupting biological membranes using ultrasound, chemotherapuetic agents could
              be targeted to tumors thereby reducing side effects elsewhere in the body of
              cancer patients and drugs like insulin could be delivered across the skin and
              thereby reduce the pain of needle-sticks endured by diabetics. 

The focus of
              this proposal is to develop a robust method to control cavitation and thereby
              control its bioeffects.  Our approach is to use the acoustic spectrum (i.e.
              sounds) given off by cavitation bubbles to characterize the cavitation and then
              identify correlations between features of the cavitational acoustic spectrum
              and bioeffects on cells.  Preliminary work in our lab using bovine red blood
              cells and DU145 prostate cancer cells have shown that both the pressure
              measured at one-half the driving frequency (a signal known to be associated
              with stable cavitation) and the broadband noise between peaks in the spectrum
              (a signal know to be associated with transient cavitation) correlate with
              measured bioeffects over a wide range of different acoustic conditions.  This
              validates the idea that cavitation-based signals in the acoustic spectrum
              correlate with bioeffects.  The central question posed in this proposal asks
              whether this correlation identified over a certain range of experimental
              conditions can be generalized to include a much broader range of conditions and
              thereby might serve as a universal correlation to apply in any physical
              scenario, whether in the laboratory or the clinic.  

To determine if there
              is a universal correlation between features of the acoustic spectrum and
              bioeffects which can be used for real-time feedback control, we will correlate
              features of the acoustic spectrum with two bioeffects of significance for drug
              delivery (molecular uptake and cell viability) over a broad range of acoustic
              conditions (including a range of frequencies) and a broad range of
              environmental conditions (notably, different numbers and types of cavitation
              nuclei).  Then, using this data in combination with other data collected
              through other studies, we will determine if there is a "universal" correlation
              for all the many different experimental conditions studied.  Our experiments
              will use DU145 prostate cancer cells as a model cell line, calcein and Texas
              Red-labeled bovine serum albumin as fluorescent model drugs, and propidium
              iodide as a viability stain.  A custom-designed apparatus will apply ultrasound
              under well controlled and characterized conditions and permit accurate
              collection of acoustic spectra.  Analysis will be done using flow cytometry. 
              

