Title       : Recruiting, Retaining, and Supporting Two Year College Students: An Engineering
               Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987101

Award Number: 9987101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Wenger cwenger@it.cc.mn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron K. Wenger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Ulseth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Itasca Community College
	      1851 East Highway 169
	      Grand Rapids, MN  55744    /   -

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
Itasca Community College has the fifth largest
              engineering program in Minnesota and serves an area that, by any measure, is
              far below the economic average of the rest of the state. This service area is
              also under-educated in terms of the number of households holding one or more
              college degrees when compared to the rest of Minnesota. Over 70% of entering
              Freshmen at the college qualify for PELL grant financial aid, and over 80% of
              entering Freshmen hold jobs of 20-30 hours per week in order to pay for college
              and living expenses. Also in the service area is a Native American population
              virtually unserved by any educational agency that stresses technology or
              engineering careers. Although recruiting and summer initiatives already make
              sustained contact with these groups of students, to a student from a first
              generation college home, to a female student with little peer support for
              engineering, or to an Anishanabe student with little or no family contact with
              engineering, these efforts have not proven sufficient to enable degree
              completion. Through this project NSF funding is providing an escalating system
              of financial support for both entering and second year students in order to
              bring the career of engineering to the student groups mentioned above.  We
              expect to demonstrate that scholarships aimed at capable students among these
              groups can serve to overcome low peer and family expectations for engineering
              career access. Based on this experience and a strong educational research and
              assessment program, we seek to redirect college foundation funds and tribal
              funds towards continued scholarship support of these groups in engineering.

