Title       : Clark Atlanta University NSF Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
               Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987208

Award Number: 9987208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaw D. Yeboah yyeboah@cau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Earvin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Clark Atlanta University (CAU) is establishing a Computer Science, Engineering
              and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) Program for students pursuing degree
              programs in computer science, engineering and mathematics. Since its inception,
              Clark Atlanta University has been vitally concerned with ameliorating the acute
              underrepresentation of African Americans and other minorities in technical
              fields such as science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET). Over
              the past ten years, the University has made a significant, positive impact on
              this important issue through implementation of a variety of research
              initiatives and educational programs. Clark Atlanta University has set a goal
              to play a major role in reversing the decline in African American and minority
              enrollment in undergraduate and graduate SMET programs. Over the past ten
              years, an undergraduate program in general engineering was added to the SEM
              curriculum and the Department of Computer and Information Sciences was spun off
              from the Department of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, creating six
              undergraduate majors in physical sciences, mathematics, computer science, and
              engineering. Each of these departments has been successful in securing major
              multi-year funding from the private and public sectors that has resulted in the
              creation of six research centers and institutes. 

The University's goals and
              outcomes for SMET education by the year 2004 are as follows: 

Increase the
              total enrollment of SMET students from 930 to 1500;
Increase the retention
              rate of SMET freshman students to 80%;
Increase the annual SMET graduation
              rate from 100 to 250; 
Increase the percentage of SMET students entering
              research institutions for advanced degrees by 60%; and
Increase the number of
              SMET students who successfully bridge the transition from high
              school/undergraduate, undergraduate/graduate and graduate/job market by 15% per
              year.
 
This project will assist the University in achieving these goals by
              significantly increasing the number of scholarship opportunities available to
              undergraduate SEM students. Additionally, the grant award will act as a
              catalyst to reinforce other SMET curricula enhancement programs at the
              University.
