Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987137

Award Number: 9987137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica O. Matson jmatson@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy C. Loutzenheiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this program is scholarship support for low-income students to
              enable them to pursue baccalaureate and graduate degrees in computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics majors. The program components -- recruitment,
              selection, mentoring, and professional development of the scholarship
              recipients -- build on the existing infrastructure for student support and
              industry support within the College of Engineering, the College of Arts and
              Sciences, and the University, as well as existing articulation agreements with
              local community colleges. 

There is a growing industry base in the region,
              and graduates in computer science, engineering, and mathematics (CSEM) are
              highly recruited for their excellent preparation and strong work ethic. Many
              students are financially disadvantaged, and two thirds of all students receive
              some form of financial aid.

Recruitment will focus on existing students,
              transfer students from community colleges that serve the region, and
              prospective graduate students at universities that have a significant
              enrollment of members of groups underrepresented in SMET. A web page with
              application materials and program information will be developed. Brochures and
              posters will also be utilized to recruit applicants. In addition, a Community
              College CSEM Day will be held for key community college faculty in mathematics
              and the sciences to communicate the need for and opportunities available to
              CSEM graduates. This approach will strengthen partnerships with community
              colleges. 

The selection criteria and process for awarding CSEM scholarships
              have been designed to encourage applications from students from diverse
              backgrounds and with diverse career goals. The selection process will ensure
              that scholarship recipients are academically talented, demonstrate financial
              need, and meet the citizenship and full-time enrollment requirements. Criteria
              to be used for evaluating qualified applicants include grade point average, an
              essay, work history, leadership activities, and references. The CSEM
              Scholarship Selection Committee will consist of CSEM faculty and/or industry
              representatives. 

A Student-Support Program will be provided to CSEM
              scholarship recipients. The Program is designed to encourage retention and
              career awareness and will include faculty, student, and external
              (employment-sector) mentors. After an orientation, the mentors will work to
              provide on-campus assistance, academic and career information, and
              career-related opportunities for the scholarship recipients. Web-based
              communications will be utilized for all participants. Monthly meetings or
              activities will be scheduled for the scholarship recipients. Participation in
              an annual leadership seminar will be encouraged. A feedback system has been
              designed to identify problems as they occur. 

Program evaluation will be
              conducted with the help of evaluation specialists in the College of Education.
              A series of surveys will be utilized to gather quantitative and qualitative
              information. Dissemination will be both internal and external through
              presentations at conferences related to CSEM education. 

This program
              addresses the integration of research and education. Some of the scholarship
              recipients will have the opportunity to participate on research projects with
              their faculty mentors. The goal of broadening the representation of
              underrepresented groups is also addressed through recruiting efforts targeted
              at universities that have a large number of students in these groups. The
              Program outcomes are expected to be improved educational experiences, increased
              retention to degree, improved career awareness and choices, and strengthened
              partnerships with CSEM employment sectors and community colleges.

