Title       : IGERT Program in Nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9987620

Award Number: 9987620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Viola Vogel vvogel@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Stuve  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie A. Olmstead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987620
Viola Vogel - University of Washington
IGERT: Nanotechnology

This
              Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the
              establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and
              research
in nanotechnology.  This field draws from revolutionizing advances in
              science and enabling technology to build extremely small structures and
              devices.  Nano-scale structures are several billionth of a meter long, about a
              thousand times smaller than the human hair.  Expertise to build these
              structures is growing rapidly, and capitalizes from fundamental advances in
              physics, electronics, chemistry, material sciences, biology, biotechnology and
              medicine. This interdisciplinary approach to nanotechnology requires close
              cooperation among fields of science and technology that are traditionally
              separated.  The new graduate education program in Nanotechnology at the
              University of Washington will thus educate a new generation of scientists and
              engineers who will cross those disciplinary boundaries. Graduate students will
              enroll in one of the seven participating departments and become involved with
              the Center for Nanotechnology through additional course work, research
              experiences, hands-on training on modern nano-analytical tools, seminars,
              symposia, and social interactions.  Additional options include an industrial
              internship program, and various certificate programs.  The student will
              graduate with a Ph.D from a home department and Nanotechnology, for example in
              Physics and Nanotechnology.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
              the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future.  The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the third year of the program, awards are being made to nineteen
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Engineering, Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
              and Education and Human Resources.




