Title       : Undergraduate Scholarship Program in a Technogenesis Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987200

Award Number: 9987200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith G. Sheppard ksheppar@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Trevor G. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Whittaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This scholarship program for financially disadvantaged students facilitates
              their success through faculty-mentored summer research for credit at Stevens
              that represents a departure from the standard mode of undergraduate research.
              An alternate route is for the scholars to engage in industry-sponsored design
              projects during the academic year for those students not inclined towards
              research. The distinguishing feature of the program is its relationship to an
              Institute-wide initiative that Stevens is implementing known as Technogenesis.
              Technogenesis refers to an organizational orientation that seeks to foster
              interdisciplinary collaboration in scholarship and learning that spans the
              continuum from the discovery of knowledge to its application in technology,
              from conception through to commercialization. 

The Undergraduate
              Scholarships Program for Technogenesis (UPT) builds on our extensive experience
              of engaging undergraduates in research, but with the added innovative dimension
              of also educating students in the transitioning of research to technology
              realization. It also builds upon the wealth of successful experience at Stevens
              in helping disadvantaged students succeed in college and their careers.

