Title       : Problems in Muldimensional and Nonlinear Systems Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9987636

Award Number: 9987636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81098              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Ball ball@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9987636
Ball

A fundamental object of study since the 1960s from a number of
              points of 
view has been that of a ``Schur-class function'' and its
              operator-valued 
generalizations, i.e., a holomorphic function defined on the
              unit disk 
whose values are contractive operators mapping one Hilbert space to
              
another.  Schur-class functions arise as the characteristic function for a
              
contraction operator in the operator-model theory of Livsic-Brodskii,
              Sz.-
Nagy-Foias and de Branges-Rovnyak, as the transfer function of a unitary
              
colligation (or energy-conserving discrete-time, input-state-output linear
              
system), and as the scattering function of a discrete-time scattering system
              
in the sense of Lax-Phillips and Adamjan-Arov.  A major theme of the
              
project is to develop this same confluence of ideas for various
              
multivariable systems.  In the first such multivariable setting, the
              
generalized Schur-class function is analytic and contractive on the unit
              
polydisk in multidimensional complex Euclidean space, and is the transfer
              
function of an energy-conserving multidimensional system of the type
              
considered by Roesser.  The geometry of which scattering systems 
actually
              arise from a conservative Roesser input-state-output system lends 
insight
              into which contractive functions on the polydisk satisfy a von 
Neumann
              inequality (i.e., induce a functional calculus which maps tuples 
of commuting
              contraction operators to another contraction operator).  In 
the second
              incarnation, the generalized Schur-class function is a power 
series in
              finitely many noncommuting variables, and is the transfer 
function for a
              system with time parameter taken to lie in a free semigroup 
with finitely
              many noncommuting generators.  This analysis will give 
additional insight (on
              the system and scattering theory side) to recent work 
on model theory for row
              contractions and function theory on the ball in 
multidimensional complex
              Euclidean space.  In the third incarnation, the 
generalized Schur-class
              function is actually a contractive bundle map 
between two parahermitian
              bundles defined over an algebraic curve 
embedded in complex Euclidean space. 
              This analysis will lead to a 
discrete-time version of the Livsic
              multivariable system theory and a 
model theory for commuting tuples of
              nonunitary operators, as well as 
another multivariable scattering theory. 
              Finally, the project includes an 
application of some of these ideas to
              nonlinear settings, specifically, the 
development of a nonlinear H-infinity
              control theory for nonlinear systems 
with stopping cost, switching cost,
              and/or boundary state-space 
constraints.

The notion of an
              energy-conserving (or more generally, dissipative) 
system has long been a
              fundamental notion in a number of disciplines 
(e.g., classical and quantum
              mechanics and circuit theory).  A more recent 
generalization of this notion
              allows interaction of the system with an 
outside environment through input
              and output signals, and the enlargement 
of the energy bookkeeping to take
              into account energy exchange with the 
outside environment.  This notion in
              turn, together with the function and 
operator theory associated with it, has
              been fundamental in recent 
advances in the theory of robust control, where
              the engineer seeks to 
design a feedback control to guarantee satisfactory
              performance of a 
system even in the presence of unmodeled disturbances in the
              outside 
environment and/or modeling errors in the mathematical description of
              the 
system.  The goal of this project is to push these ideas in fundamental,
              new 
directions, namely: (1) new types of multidimensional systems and
              
scattering, and (2) nonlinear systems with discontinuities arising from (a)
              
instantaneous switching of the control setting, or (b) instantaneous jumps
              
in the state dynamics caused by boundary reflections. The first direction
              
has direct application to systems that evolve in both time and in a spatial
              
dimension, as well as to uncertain systems with a modeled
              parameter-
variation uncertainty and certain types of nonlinear systems.  The
              second 
direction is relevant to physical systems where instantaneous jumps
              occur 
between two or more continuous-model descriptions (hybrid systems)
              
(such as in the setting of a traffic signal at a highway intersection), as
              well 
as to systems where the set of admissible values for some physical
              
quantity has a boundary which leads to a boundary reflection in the system
              
description (such as the constraint that the queue lengths be nonnegative in
              
a queueing network).

