Title       : Novel Instrumentation For Direct On-Line Monitoring of Biological Samples in
               Real-Time With High-Speed Gas Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a9987063

Award Number: 9987063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318731             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather L. Holmes heather.holmes@emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Pernecky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lipid peroxides or their products have recently been cited as biological
              second
messengers in signal transduction pathways that induce cytoprotective
              enzymes, stimulate
protein kinases, mediate programmed cell death, and
              stimulate neutrophil adhesion and
smooth muscle cell proliferation in a manner
              similar to platelet activating factor.
Identification and quantification of
              lipid peroxidation products will enhance
understanding of the enzymology,
              biochemistry, and biodisposition of these biological
mediators. The current
              detection methods for these products in cells or subcellular
fractions include
              spectrophotometric assays and liquid chromatography, though none are
capable
              of generating data in real-time.

Instrumentation and methods to monitor
              biological processes in tissue cultures in real-time
will be developed in this
              project. Two full-time graduate students will assist in the research and
              implementation process.  The instrument will incorporate a cell incubation
              device with a 
cryofocusing inlet suitable for use with high-speed gas
              chromatography (HSGC), and will
be compatible with various platforms. Cells
              will be cultured in a 37 degrees C oven in
 standard tissue culture flasks
              fitted with specialized caps. The caps serve to isolate the
products within a
              flask while providing air and CO2. Direct monitoring will be accomplished 
by
              concentrating gaseous products on a cryofocusing trap for injection into a HSGC
              system. 
The long-term goal of this project is to develop an integrated,
              modular incubator/inlet that
 will provide new capabilities for monitoring
              biological systems in real-time. The instrument
 could be used to study many
              systems, although this work will focus on the characterization of lipid
              peroxidation products.

For inlet design testing and proof of concept work,
              lipid peroxidation will be stimulated
in the isolated microsomal fraction from
              rat liver, which generates relatively large
amounts of products. Detection
              will be accomplished with time of flight (TOF) mass
spectrometry. The high
              scanning rates of TOF instruments are compatible with high speed
GC, and the
              second dimension of data facilitates positive identification of
              peroxidation
products. This is a decided advantage for complex and dynamic
              biological systems. A
specialized incubator will be constructed in the second
              phase of the project for use with
cell cultures. Final valving configurations
              will be tested and optimized. The ruggedness
of the instrument will be
              examined in detail, in order to develop an instrument suitable
for patent
              application and marketing.  
