Title       : REU: Matrix Analysis and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9987803

Award Number: 9987803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151176             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Lutzer lutzer@math.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This REU project, "Matrix Analysis and Applications," will bring nine highly
              motivated and capable undergraduate students from across the nation to the
              Williamsburg campus of the College of William and Mary during each of the next
              three summers.  The students will spend eight weeks experiencing mathematical
              research first hand, under the mentorship of faculty members of William and
              Mary's Mathematics department, widely recognized as a national research center
              in matrix and operator theory.  Students will work in teams of two to three,
              each team supervised by one or two research mentors, on projects that are
              related to matrix theory and that are chosen by the faculty for their
              mathematical accessibility and appropriateness for well-prepared
              undergraduates.  The program will include seminars on mathematical topics and
              applications of matrix theory to other disciplines, and trips to nearby
              research institutions that employ mathematicians.  Informal discussions and
              interchange of ideas among the students will be encouraged, and communication
              of mathematics to peers will be strongly emphasized.  By the end of the summer
              project, each student team will have made several oral presentations and will
              present a final written report on its work.  In the past, about half of these
              reports have been the basis for refereed scholarly publication by students and
              advisors, and that will continue to be a goal of the project.  In the past, the
              vast majority of our REU students have gone to mathematical sciences graduate
              school, and that, too, will continue to be a project goal.
