Title       : 'After the Genome 5' Conference, in Jackson Hole, WY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9987488

Award Number: 9987488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Brent brent@molsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Molecular Sciences Institu
	      2168 Shattuck Avenue
	      Berkeley, CA  94704    510/647-0696

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9987488
Brent

This award is to support the fifth conference in a series
              called "After the Genome"  to be held October 6-10 in Jackson Hole,
              Wyoming.

The post genomic era is arriving faster than anyone had imagined. 
              Some time during 2000 we will have a large fraction of the human genome
              sequence, and the entire genome sequence of a flowering plant.  Heretofore, our
              understanding of function has come from experiments whose conclusions were
              largely framed in human language.  The advent of large amounts of sequence data
              and of "functional genomic" data types such as mRNA expression data, have
              changed this picture.  Such data is now being generated so rapidly that the
              amount of information contained in it will, before long, surpass the amount of
              biological information collected by traditional means.   Yet, we are very early
              in our understanding of how to "compute" using genomic information so as to
              extract biological knowledge from it.  We would like to achieve a quantitative
              and predictive understanding of biological functions, but building the bridge
              from knowledge of systems to the sets of abstractions that constitute
              computable entities is not easy.  The "After the Genome" meetings were started
              in 1995 to help the biological community think about and prepare for the
              inevitable changes in biological research in the face of the oncoming flood of
              genomic information.  Since then, many more biologists have become cognizant of
              the issues raised by this future, and, in response, the organizers of this
              meeting will bring together researchers and visionary thinkers from subject
              fields outside of conventional biology with the expectation that this will help
              focus, yet broaden thinking beyond the immediate future.  To this end, "After
              the Genome 5" will bring together industrial and academic researchers including
              physicists, chemists and engineers who are devising and using new
              data-gathering techniques, computer scientists who have experience moving from
              broad knowledge of systems to analysis that results in models and simulations,
              neurobiologists and computer scientists who combine physiological
              experimentation and computer modeling to understand single cells and small
              networks of cells, biologists who are trying to model genetic networks, and all
              around visionary thinkers.  The goal will be to suggest experimental and
              computational methods that will eventually lead to a quantitative and
              predictive understanding of biological function.

