Title       : Textual Information Access for the Visually Impaired
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9987944

Award Number: 9987944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry S. Davis lsd@umiacs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tapas Kanungo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramani Duraiswami  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An ever-increasing segment of the population suffers from low vision resulting
              from complications of disease and old age.   Surveys conducted by one of the
              Co-PIs as part of a previous project have determined, that the key information
              which is not available to people with low vision is textual information,
              usually of a directive or warning nature.  For example, shopping in a large
              department store in a mall might involve looking for signs indicating where the
              store is, reading aisle signs in the store, and looking at product names, at
              labels and prices.  This research will develop a "seeing-eye" computer to help
              people with low vision to observe and receive such information, so that they
              can participate more efficiently and comfortably in every day activities, and
              thereby lead more fulfilling and productive lives.  The system will be composed
              of a digital video camera, computer, user interface, and speech or magnified
              visual output that can detect textual information in the environment,
              understand it using OCR, and provide it to the user who either has low vision
              or is blind.   To achieve these goals, the PIs will in collaboration with
              colleagues at Johns Hopkins University build, over the first six months and
              then over the first two years, prototype systems using mostly existing
              technology and extensions to vision algorithms we have developed for
              identification of text regions in images and OCR, which can be evaluated on
              volunteer patients at the Wilmer Ophthalmological Institute and the National
              Federation for the Blind..  The functionality and range of applicability of our
              prototypes will necessarily be limited.   Simultaneously, the PIs will work on
              long-term research problems that must be addressed to develop next generation
              seeing-eye computers with greater scalability and capability.   In year three
              patient-volunteers at Wilmer and at the NFB will perform evaluations of the
              developed prototypes     Subsequently, successful results will be
              commercialized and brought to the larger patient body (as have previous
              developments at Wilmer).    Fundamental research problems to be addressed
              include:   real-time algorithms for detection and rectification of text on
              planes and cylinders subject to perspective distortions;   OCR from digital
              video, and OCR for text on textured backgrounds;   and more robust and
              efficient algorithms and systems for stabilization and super-resolution of text
              blocks from video streams.
