Title       : Bayesian Analysis of Sample Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a9987748

Award Number: 9987748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew E. Gelman gelman@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two key concerns in sample surveys are bias, caused by inability to reach all
              sections of the target population (noncoverage) or nonresponse on the part of
              selected subjects, and variance or lack of precision, caused by inadequate
              sample sizes.  One approach to increase precision is to fit statistical models
              to the survey response; however, practical application has been limited by an
              inability to fit sufficiently flexible models.  The plan of this research is to
              develop models that incorporate information about the design of the survey and
              other knowledge, such as population distributions of covariates, that is
              currently used in classical weighting methods to reduce the bias and variance
              of sample survey estimates.  A special concern of this approach is to account
              for the design of the data collection and to make our new methods "backward
              compatible" with existing design-based analysis methods for sample surveys. 
              Statistically, developing models to account for all the features in a survey
              design requires research in linear and logistic regression models with complex
              hierarchical structures among the predictor variables.

The research is
              intended ultimately to yield routine methods for sample survey inference that
              combine the flexibility of model-based inference with the reliability of
              design-based inference.  This work will potentially advance three areas: 
              statistical sampling inference, Bayesian methods, and the applications of
              sample surveys, especially in social science and public health.  The modeling
              approach allows the partial pooling of estimates between different structural
              levels in the population (for instance, school classrooms and individual
              students), and is particularly effective for estimating small subpopulations
              and for dealing with nonresponse that is caused by complex combinations of
              factors.  For example, in opinion polls a researcher may be interested in
              differences in opinion between different demographic groups or different
              regions of the country.  In a public health survey of children, one may wish to
              identify predictors of high-risk behavior.

