Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Interrogative Synthetic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9987409

Award Number: 9987409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandrajit L. Bajaj bajaj@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5919,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9987409
Bajaj 

Description:  This award supports the US-India Cooperative
              Research: Interrogative Synthetic Environments.  US PI Chandrajit Bajaj,
              University of Texas at Austin and Indian collaborator, Sanjiv Kapoor, Indian
              Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi will conduct research to develop new
              algorithms, data structures, and interaction protocols to support the creation,
              visualization, querying and shared interaction with large synthetic
              environments.  Research challenges include: accurate creation of a geometric
              description of the elements that form the 3D scene; visualization of the large
              amount of constantly changing geometric and physical information; support of
              fast queries for quantitative interrogation of the environment, and simulation
              of realistic physical behavior; and allowance of distributed access to multiple
              users.  The investigators will begin experiments with collaborative
              interrogation scenarios that allow users to walk through the human body,
              examine the details of the anatomy, and query quantitative information.        
                
The final product of the research will be a working prototype, not simply a
              concept or design. 

Scope:  Synthetic environments are useful for a range of
              applications, such as training, education, mission planning, visual exploration
              of complex data, computer-assisted surgery, drug design, drug screening, and
              virtual prototyping for manufacturing.  In most applications, the ability to
              interrogate in real time a large simulated three-dimensional environment is
              crucial to the achievement of a sufficient level of realism.  The IIT research
              team brings expertise in Image Processing, Computer Graphics and Computational
              Geometry, which are essential for the success of this joint project.  The
              principal researchers will lecture to graduates/undergraduates in their areas
              of expertise when visiting each other's institutions.  

