Title       : Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9987844

Award Number: 9987844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall H. Morse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia E. Anders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


ABSTRACT    Randall Morse      Proposal # DBI - 9987844


This proposal
              is a request for renewal of a summer REU program held at the Wadsworth Center
              of the New York State Department of Health in Albany, NY.  The research
              scientists who supervise the students in this program are also faculty in the
              Department of Biomedical Sciences (BMS) of the State University of New York at
              Albany's School of Public Health.  The Wadsworth Center is a unique scientific
              institution with state-of-the-art facilities, in which basic research programs
              have developed alongside service-oriented public health laboratories.  The
              research interests of the participating BMS faculty cover a broad range, with
              emphasis in molecular genetics, cell biology and structural biology.  Ten
              undergraduate students interested in research careers are recruited from
              institutions with limited research opportunities for undergraduates, including
              small colleges in the Northeast and Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities in the South.  Additional students participate in the program with
              stipend support from the Wadsworth Center.  Laboratory projects in basic
              biological research topics are chosen that are likely to engage students'
              interest, yield results within the time-frame of the program, and allow for
              some degree of student development and independence.  Weekly group meetings are
              used to discuss science- and career-related issues (including the proper
              conduct of science) and to monitor student progress.  The students give short
              oral presentations of their work in a symposium in the last week of the
              program, and also submit written reports before they leave, to stress the
              importance of communication skills within science.



