Title       : IGERT: Musculoskeletal and Neural Adaptations in Form and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9987619

Award Number: 9987619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2699998            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ji-Ping He hjp@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary W. Marzke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Hamm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Stelmach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987619
Ji-Ping He - Arizona State University
IGERT: Neural and
              Musculoskeletal Adaptation in Forms and Function

This Integrative Graduate
              Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research on neural
              and musculoskeletal adaptation in form and function. This theme is examined
              with integrated approaches from bioengineering, neurophysiology, physical
              anthropology, exercise sciences, computer and system sciences. The goal of the
              program is to introduce students with diverse biological and engineering
              backgrounds to the challenges of deciphering complex phenomena in integrative
              and computational neuroscience, motor diorders and rehabilitation. The program
              will foster interdisciplinary education and training in research efforts toward
              meeting these challenges. Graduate training will expand upon two related areas
              in which participating faculty have developed research and teaching
              collaborations: (1) mechanisms underlying neural control of movements,
              emphasizing hand function and locomotion, and (2) evolutionary morphology of
              the human hand and bipedality.  Three interdisciplinary courses built around
              core research laboratories (Biomechanics/Anatomy,
              Neurophysiology/Neuroengineering, and Computation/Visualization) will anchor
              the program. Research training will be enhanced by access to medical imaging
              resources and by basic and applied research projects in collaboration with
              leading medical institutions, biomedical enterprises and evolutionary research
              resources at the Institute of Human Origins. The program addresses the
              multidisciplinary needs of graduate education, creates a rich environment for
              generation of innovative ideas for leading edge research in neuroengineering,
              evolutionary morphology, motor control, stereo modeling and visualization.
              

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating
              Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards
              are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
              this specific award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Biological
              Sciences; Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; Computer and Information
              Science and Engineering; and Education and Human Resources.


