Title       : NSF Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9987010

Award Number: 9987010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Barker barkerds@buffalostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Favata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Kukulka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tom M. Giambrone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Four faculty from the targeted departments of Computer Information Systems,
              Engineering Technology, and Mathematics at Buffalo State College (BSC) seek a
              grant entitled CSEMS program from the National Science Foundation (NSF 99-121).
              The proposal seeks to fund two components: 1) scholarships for qualified CSEMS
              students, and 2) a colloquium series that will promote closer collaboration
              among the faculty and students of the three targeted departments while
              providing specialized instruction that is not usually included in the normal
              course work. Forty students are anticipated in the CSEMS program with a funded
              duration of two years. 

With this NSF award, BSC students who are juniors or
              seniors in the targeted departments will have the opportunity to receive $1250
              scholarships each semester if they are:  United States citizens, nationals, or
              aliens admitted as refugees at the time of the interview,  eligible for U.S.
              Department of Education Pell Grant,  full-time students, and  academically
              mature and talented.

 The most academically mature and talented students
              will be selected for the scholarships who have demonstrated many of the
              following professional attributes: good grades in all classes, demonstrated
              ability to manage time and resources, good communication skills, leadership
              potential, and high motivation. In keeping with the stated philosophy of the
              college, students may have diverse backgrounds and career goals. The
              student-selection process will use a numerical procedure that the Mathematics
              department has effectively used for years to select new faculty. This process
              of selecting the most qualified CSEMS students will involve an interview that
              results in a numerical rating from each member of the selection team. 

The
              four faculty who developed this proposal also commit to the success of the
              program. After selecting the best students, the four faculty will create a
              monthly colloquium series for the students of the targeted departments. The
              colloquium series will consist of problem-solving demonstrations, not from the
              individual perspective of each of the targeted disciplines, but simultaneously
              from all three. This coordination between the three departments is expected to
              increase articulation between the faculty and simultaneously provide students
              with a better understanding and appreciation of the issues in real technical
              problems. Some of the presentations will contain information that will be
              especially beneficial to the CSEMS students. 

The principal investigator
              (PI) will assume leadership of the CSEMS program by insuring that CSEMS
              recipients all have the required qualifications. The PI will also coordinate
              the colloquium series to insure that the program is a success. The PI will
              assume overall responsibility for the program administration, including the
              required NSF reports and the final report to be presented at a national
              conference. A small amount of money will be used for student infra-structure -
              primarily for the colloquium series. The project management and administrative
              expenses will be used primarily for travel - bringing guest speakers to campus
              and going to a national conference to present the results of the CSEMS program
              at Buffalo State College. The PI and Co-PIs will not receive any money for
              CSEMS activities. 

