Title       : Scholarship Program for Low Income Students in Computer Science, Engineering,
               and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987111

Award Number: 9987111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest M. Stokely stokely@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosalia N. Scripa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of the program is to provide educational opportunities to
              low-income, academically talented student through scholarships that promote
              full-time enrollment and degree achievement at the baccalaureate level. The
              program is designed to significantly increase the graduation rate of low-income
              students studying computer science, mathematics, and engineering by offering a
              comprehensive program of mentoring, advising, and financial support. Another
              goal of the program is to increase the graduation rate of low-income
              undergraduate students by at least 25% through a comprehensive program of
              faculty mentoring, mandatory advising, and financial support. The project
              directors plan to recruit at least 50% of the scholars from minority groups.
              The program will provide research and industrial internship opportunities to
              enhance the post-graduation success of low-income computer science,
              mathematics, and engineering undergraduates. It includes advising and job
              search services to CSEMS scholars in job placement after graduation, or
              selection of and enrollment in a graduate program. The program features the
              creation of an administrative structure that integrates the scholarship program
              and ensures that the infrastructure is in place to support the goals of the
              program. 

The proposed program takes advantage of the urban character of the
              university by targeting low-income transfer students for recruitment into
              computer science, mathematics, and engineering. A seminar series is provided
              that includes invited speakers from industry. Field trips to local industrial
              sites are offered. A number of resources to enhance retention and ensure
              success are provided such as drop-in rooms for minority students, mandatory
              advising, assignment of a faculty mentor to each scholar, and the CSEMS seminar
              series.


