Title       : Biomechanical Regulation of Architecture of Engineered Cartilage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9987353

Award Number: 9987353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sah rsah@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9987353
Sah
There is a need to extend the scientific basis for synthesizing
              articular cartilage tissue for treating arthritic joints.  Current approaches
              have been unable to produce tissue with the functional architecture and
              biomechanical properties of normal articular cartilage.  Such tissue is
              necessary for the repair of large articular defects or replacement of damaged
              joint surfaces.
 
Previously, we and others have found that cartilaginous
              constructs, formed using current tissue- engineering approaches, can contain
              the major components of normal cartilage; however, the overall matrix density
              and mechanical properties of  such constructs are markedly inferior to those of
              normal cartilage.  Recently we found in short-term experiments that certain
              strain and fluid-flow stimuli regulate the synthesis and loss of matrix
              components from such constructs.  Our other studies have experimentally
              measured and theoretically analyzed the depth-varying biomechanical properties
              of normal articular cartilage.  Based on these results, we hypothesize that
              application of certain dynamic mechanical stimuli to growing cartilage
              constructs will induce formation of a tissue that resembles normal articular
              cartilage in composition, structure, and function.  Further, we hypothesize
              that the mechanism of this will be through modulation of the synthesis and loss
              of specific tissue components in a spatially-varying manner.  The specific aims
              of the proposed study will be conducted  on  engineered  cartilage tissue.  We
              will determine  (1) how the density of seeded cells affects tissue thickness,
              mechanical function, and composition, (2) how long-term dynamic loading
              protocols, chosen to induce specific strain and fluid flow profiles, modulate
              the evolution of overall and depth-varying tissue function and composition, and
              (3) if this evolution can be explained by overall and depth-varying regulation
              of synthesis and loss of specific tissue components.

The  proposed work will
              emphasize quantitative experiments and analysis in the context of practical
              models for cartilage tissue engineering.  During the course of the study, human
              resources will be developed for tissue engineering through the training of two
              graduate students.

