Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9987543

Award Number: 9987543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Davis davis@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee B. Kats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jay L. Brewster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Vandergon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. M. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT            Stephen D. Davis        Proposal DBI - 9987543



The
              aim of this project is to facilitate the maturation of undergraduate students
              as young scientists in biology by immersing them in an interactive, 12-week
              summer session of original research activities.  The goal is to teach students
              the essentials of the scientific method, which are common to a spectrum of
              biological subdisciplines, and to expose students to the benefits of
              interaction, collaboration and interdependence across
              subdisciplines.

Recruitment of Pepperdine and non-Pepperdine students will
              target minority, physically challenged and female students.  Students will also
              be recruited from schools with limited research opportunities.  Each summer the
              program will begin with a 14-day research orientation workshop during which
              students will be introduced to specific research techniques and immersed in the
              research process (literature review, hypothesis formulation, and hypothesis
              testing).  Students will play a pivotal role in the conception and design of
              their personal research projects and will participate in a 2-day retreat to
              formally present, evaluate and refine their summer research
              proposals.

Students will pursue their projects under the supervision of
              faculty-mentors in either plant physiological ecology, conservation biology of
              amphibians, physiology of marine intertidal fish, molecular biology, mammalian
              cell biology or developmental biology.  Over the course of the summer visiting
              scientists will hold special research seminars and spend time critiquing
              student projects.  Each research group will hold weekly literature seminars to
              discuss journal articles pertaining to their research interests.  The program
              will conclude with a student research symposium bringing cohesion, celebration
              and closure to the summer experience.  Follow-through will include student
              participation at local and regional research conferences.  In cases of special
              merit, students will be encouraged to present their results at national
              meetings and to prepare their results for publication in a scientific
              journal.





