Title       : Aggregate Turnover Controls on Soil Organic Matter: The Influence of Management
               and Mineralogy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9987996

Award Number: 9987996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith H. Paustian keithp@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Soil disturbance from tillage is a major cause of organic matter and carbon
              loss from agricultural ecosystems, which contributes to the buildup of
              atmospheric CO2 and can lead to a loss of fertility.   No-till cropping
              systems, in which crops are planted without tillage, have been shown to
              increase soil organic matter (i.e. carbon) levels and improve soil physical
              properties.  However, the extent of soil organic matter improvement with
              no-tillage management varies between soils and the mechanisms of organic matter
              stabilization in no-tillage systems are unclear.  The investigators' previous
              research has suggested that the buildup and stabilization of carbon under
              no-till is closely linked to the dynamics of soil aggregates, conglomerations
              of primary mineral particles and organic matter which range in size from 50 to
              > 2000 microns.  The objective of the project is to develop a unified
              explanation of how aggregate dynamics control organic matter cycling that is
              applicable across domains of soil properties and soil disturbance regimes.  A
              tracer approach will be employed to measure rates of aggregate formation and
              degradation, along with physical fractionation techniques to isolate
              aggregate-associated organic matter fractions.  

Fundamental knowledge of
              aggregate dynamics and the turnover of associated soil organic matter is
              central to understanding ecosystem function because it explains basic controls
              on nutrient cycling and soil water relationships.  Further it will help in
              quantifying the degree to which no-tillage systems can be managed to sequester
              carbon, as a way to mitigate increasing CO2 in the atmosphere. This new
              understanding will also provide us the information needed to implement fully
              quantitative ecosystem simulation models with a new core concept for soil
              organic matter dynamics.
