Title       : A Catalogue of Vascular Plant Specimens from Eastern Brazil: a Tool for
               Conservation and Brazilian Floristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a9987500

Award Number: 9987500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacquelyn A. Kallunki jkallunki@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony P. Kirchgessner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is focused on databasing the current holdings of vascular plants
              from Eastern Brazil at the New York Botanical Garden (NYBG).  The Vascular
              Plant Herbarium of the NYBG has the largest and most representative collection
              of Brazilian plants in the US, about a half million specimens.  About 100
              thousand are from Eastern Brazil.  Distributional data about species in
              Brazil's critically endangered, highly diverse Atlantic coastal forests
              urgently are needed by scientists and conservationists in order to determine
              which areas of remaining forest deserve the highest priority.  Databasing this
              information will facilitate the repatriation of data on plant diversity in
              Eastern Brazil to the country in which the specimens orginated and in which any
              conservation decisions must be made.  The greatest impact of this project will
              be on conservation within the Atlantic coastal forest biome.  These data can be
              used to evaluate and refine the conservation priorities for the region, as well
              as providing information on the web in fully searchable databases to facilitate
              better understanding of the degree of endemism and anthropogenic impact.
