Title       : RUI: Enzyme Characterization and Gene Cloning of a Putative Drosophila Homolog
               for Mammalian Dipeptidyl Peptidase IV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9987556

Award Number: 9987556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Chihara chihara@usfca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University San Francisco
	      2130 Fulton Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941171080    415/666-6886

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Proline specific N-terminal processing is vital to both the activation and/or 
              degradation of many biologically important proteins and peptides. The N-
              terminal prolyl dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP IV ) has been identified in an
              impressive array of organisms. These include several species of mammal, from
              mouse to man,  frog, fungi, nematode, flies, sea anemone, and several species
              of bacteria.  DPP IV is involved in the metabolism of peptides during the
              intestinal digestion and renal transport of polypeptides. It functions in the
              activation of T-lymphocytes in the immune system of mammals,  and the
              regulation of DNA synthesis, cell proliferation and cytokine production in the
              hematopoietic system.  In some mammals,  it functions in signal transduction
              and cell adherence phenomena.  In the human nervous system, it regulates the
              activity of neuropeptide Y  and in the sea anemone is likely to play a role in
              the processing of at least one neuropeptide (metamorphosin A).
	In insects,
              DPP IV is presumed to function in the processing of several peptides, including
              the immune peptides of several species and the peptide melittin in honeybee
              venom. However, only a few natural substrates for the enzyme have been
              confirmed. 
	This laboratory recently reported on a mutant stock (omega) in
              the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster that has lost the enzyme DPP IV  and as a
              consequence displays several sublethal defects:  A larval developmental delay,
              a 40% decrease in male fertility and in the ability of males to successfully
              fertilize females, and a loss of post translational processing of a larval
              cuticle protein.  These defects point to a multiplicity of processes for which
              the enzyme is required in Drosophila, implying that there are several, as yet
              unknown, peptides that are processed by DPP IV in addition to the cuticle
              protein.   
	This research includes plans to clone the DPP IV  gene from
              Drosophila using the available genomic clones of the Berkeley Drosophila Genome
              Project, one of which has recently been identified as having an homologous
              sequence imbedded in it. This will allow comparison of its structure with the
              known DPP IV genes from other organisms. The enzyme will also be purefied. This
              will allow characterization of its biochemical properties.  The role of DPP IV
              in the processing of Drosophila peptides, in particular with respect to the
              cuticle proteins, the immune peptides and testicular peptides, will be
              clarified using available injection and PAGE procedures.  
	These data will
              lead to a further understanding of the DPP IV function in the innate immune
              system and in other peptide processing systems of Drosophila, thus further
              demonstrating the ubiquity of this important enzyme in eukaryotic organisms. 

