Title       : Relational Learning Systems as Collaborators with Human Experts in Knowledge
               Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9987841

Award Number: 9987841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341258             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. David Page page@biostat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Machine learning systems are proving to be useful tools for knowledge discovery.
                Their abilities to process large amounts of data and to consider large
              hypothesis spaces complement the abilities of human experts to analyze in great
              depth a few data points and a few potential hypotheses.  Nevertheless, except
              for the initial presentation of data and the final presentation of a
              hypothesis, current machine learning systems and human experts do not interact.
                The goal of this project is to explore ways to enable machine learning system
              and human experts to act more as a team, taking advantage of both the
              computer's speed and the human's knowledge and skills.   The PI will study the
              issues involved in building and using collaborative machine learning systems,
              through the development and testing of a system with capabilities to do the
              following: 1) Maintain, cluster, and summarize alternative hypotheses that
              explain the data, rather than providing a single answer based on a
              general-purpose heuristic; 2) Propose to human experts practical sequences of
              experiments to refine or distinguish between competing hypotheses, and justify
              these experiments to the experts; 3) Provide non-numerical justification for
              hypotheses, such as relating them to prior beliefs or  illustrative examples
              (in addition to providing numerical accuracy estimates); 4) Answer an expert's
              questions regarding alternative hypotheses; and 5) Consult the expert regarding
              anomalies or surprises in the data.   For focus, the developed system will be a
              relational learning system. Such systems already have advantages for use as
              collaborators in knowledge discovery, because they can utilize declarative
              background knowledge provided by an expert,  and return hypotheses in the form
              of human-comprehensible rules.  For further focus, the project will apply
              collaborative learning systems to a family of challenging scientific discovery
              tasks within the general area of drug design.   This research should impact the
              areas of knowledge discovery, machine learning, and data mining in bringing
              about a shift toward the development of systems that can be tailored by
              different users to application areas as diverse as genomics, logistics,
              education and economic forecasting, and which can then interact with human
              experts in these areas to make discoveries neither could have made alone.  
              More specifically, a collaborative machine learning system called COLLEAGUE
              will be made publicly available as a research testbed for use on tasks where
              large or complex data sets must be analyzed and human knowledge or skills are
              required for success.


