Title       : Increasing Participation In Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics
               Through Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987228

Award Number: 9987228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra H. Harpole sharpole@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59), Mathematical Sciences (21)
The Mississippi State
              University (MSU) program, "Increasing Participation in Computer Science,
              Engineering and Mathematics (CSEM) Through Scholarships" is providing increased
              CSEM educational opportunities for underrepresented students to help meet the
              demand for scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians and
              contribute to the growth of the economy of Mississippi, the surrounding region
              and the nation. Encouraging students to pursue degrees in CSEM and to provide
              financial support to CSEM majors are two of the major goals of the program.
              Specific project objectives include: 1) increasing participation and retention
              of academically-talented, low income students and underrepresented groups in
              CSEM; 2) improving the educational experiences of CSEM students through
              connections of academic content to the work environment; 3) increasing
              awareness of employment opportunities through strengthening existing and
              building new industry partnerships; 4) increasing enrollment of
              academically-gifted students from community colleges in CSEM at Mississippi
              State University; and 5) encouraging scholarship recipients to pursue advanced
              degrees in CSEM. Forty CSEM Undergraduate and Graduate Fellows are expected to
              be recruited from state and regional community colleges, Historically Black
              Institutions, and four-year institutions. The majority of the scholarships
              support undergraduates, with graduate student awards limited to those who
              provide evidence of economic hardship. The eight operating departments and two
              centers in the College of Engineering and the Department of Mathematics and
              Statistics in the College of Arts and Sciences are participating in the
              program. Each department has identified a representative to the CSEM program
              who is coordinating activities within the department. CSEM Fellows are mentored
              one-on-one by faculty and by their peers. In addition, they take part in
              research and design projects, present results of their research professionally,
              and interact with industry representatives. Departments are maintaining the
              following data on their Fellows: progress toward degree, research experiences,
              design projects, and industry involvement. Mentoring activities, professional
              development opportunities, job interviews, graduate school applications, and
              the change in the number of underrepresented students and transfer students in
              CSEM are also being documented for the purposes of program evaluation. 

