Title       : Engineering Excellence Awards for Low-Income Minority Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9987005

Award Number: 9987005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul E. Zapata zapata@ce.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack T. Allison  (Principal Investigator former)
              Guillermo Colon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerson Beauchamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel Artiles-Leon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra Coutin-Rodicio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              None n. None  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Frederick A. Just-Agosto  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez, UPRM, is an institution with
              approximately 12,900 Hispanic students, located in the western municipality of
              Mayaguez in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. It is characterized by a
              productive track record of awarding baccalaureate degrees in SEM disciplines as
              evidenced by, on the average, 200 science and math degrees and more than 650
              engineering degrees per year during the last five years. The Campus enrolls
              students with high academic credentials coming from both public and private
              schools, and from all economic levels.

The primary goal of the 'Engineering
              Excellence Awards' is to enhance the educational opportunities for low-income,
              academically talented students through scholarships. This project is improving
              education for students in engineering, increasing retention of students,
              improving professional development and motivating participating students to
              pursue graduate studies, and strengthening partnerships between UPRM and
              related employment sectors. This goal is being achieved by (i) providing funds
              to selected students so that they can enroll and maintain full-time student
              status; (ii) requiring selected students to become tutors in gatekeeper
              courses, to participate in team-oriented design projects, or undergraduate
              research; (iii) creating a mentoring process to help selected students enhance
              their study skills necessary for academic achievement in engineering so that
              they may become more independent and better prepared to meet the UPRM's
              academic standards and also successfully attain their long-term educational
              goals. These activities are advancing students' discovery and understanding;
              promoting teaching, training, and learning; motivating students to pursue
              advanced engineering degrees; and broadening the participation of low-income,
              talented minority students in engineering.


