Title       : Engineering Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a9987090

Award Number: 9987090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon K. Jensen jensenj@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Michaelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              OBJECTIVES:  Over a two-year period, Marquette University's CSEMS project is
              awarding scholarships to 80 low-income, academically talented students in
              Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical and Industrial Engineering,
              Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Biomedical Engineering.  Special
              effort in recruiting and selection is being given to individuals from groups
              underrepresented in engineering and those with disabilities.  The CSEM
              scholarships are complementing and not replacing existing resources. 
              

METHODS:  Recruitment includes the efforts of Marquette's nationally
              recognized Educational Opportunity Program, the Freshman Frontier Program, the
              Office of Disability Services, and the Student Financial Aid Office, as well as
              student organizations such as the National Society of Black Engineers, Society
              of Hispanic Professional Engineers, Society of Women Engineers, and the Alpha
              Omega Epsilon engineering sorority.  In addition, the scholarships are promoted
              in an orientation course required for all engineering sophomores.

The
              project is retaining scholarship recipients through academic support services,
              counseling, and mentoring activities.  Marquette's College of Engineering
              already enjoys a 5-year completion rate of 76% -- substantially above the 66%
              rate of comparable schools.  The project provides ample career development and
              placement services to prepare scholars for the workplace.  Marquette's
              scholarship recipients receives extensive application-oriented experiences to
              increase their understanding of workplace needs, and they are also advised to
              acquire engineering experience through co-op or internship experiences with
              business and industry, or by assisting in a faculty mentor's research. 
              Marquette's co-op program is among the longest established programs in the U.S.
               Post-graduate surveys document the success of our placement
              efforts.

IMPACT:  The impact of engineering scholarships to promote
              full-time enrollment, coupled with mentoring, advising, and placement
              activities, is significant.  There is a real need to promote entry by women and
              minorities into engineering programs.  Scholarships, coupled with mentoring and
              advising activities, are improving retention and completion.  Finally,
              scholarships at Marquette are prudent long-term investments:  Marquette is a
              significant baccalaureate origin of Ph.D.s in the sciences (including
              engineering), ranking second among private Doctoral I universities from
              1986-1995.


