Title       : Technology Tomorrow Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a9987027

Award Number: 9987027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sang-Shiun Chan sscgab@sweetwater.tstc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly Dobyns  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas St Tech Col W Texas
	      300 College Drive
	      Sweetwater, TX  79556    915/235-7333

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Abstract:  9987027

(99), (35), (59) The Technology Tomorrow Scholarship
              Program is designed to attract more students to two-year technical programs in
              the computer science and engineering technologies. The college is focusing on
              low-income, first time students who are not necessarily college directed or
              oriented but who have the talent to succeed in technical programs based in
              computer science and engineering technologies. The project is providing the
              opportunity for financial assistance to students in the West Texas region, an
              area marked by vast distances between metropolitan areas, and a large
              percentage of economically disadvantaged students. The program combines
              scholarship assistance with student services designed to promote (1) success in
              college, (2) success in obtaining employment commensurate with their education,
              and (3) success in the workplace. 

The Technology Tomorrow Scholarship
              Program objectives are: 
1. To increase the number of students enrolling in
              technical programs in the computer science and engineering technologies by 5%.
              2. To increase the number of women and minorities enrolling in technical
              programs in the computer science and engineering technologies by 3%. 3. To
              provide financial assistance to financially needy students with the ability and
              drive to succeed in the computer science and engineering technologies. 4. To
              retain at least 75% of students awarded NSF scholarship to graduation. 

The
              Principal Investigator has extensive experience both as an instructor and as an
              administrator. His experience coordinating grant programs, including services
              to economically disadvantaged students, and his role as Director of
              Institutional Planning and Research and Associate Dean of Instruction give him
              the experience to plan, administer and report on this project. A team of
              Program Chairs in the programs designated for the project, Financial Aid
              Advisors and Admissions Advisors join with the PI to identify and select
              scholarship recipients. The Financial Aid and Business Offices provide current
              information on the recipients and on the disbursement of funds for regular
              reports to the National Science Foundation. 

The college is coordinating
              financial aid such as the Pell Grant and additional scholarships from industry,
              civic organizations and individuals with the TT/NSF scholarship program to
              optimize the number of students who are receiving scholarships. The project is
              evaluated by team members and reviewed by the PI on a biweekly basis to
              determine whether scholarship students are progressing as expected. Information
              on the scholarship program is disseminated in print, in workshops and through
              the college web site. The college anticipates that over two years at least 33
              students will be awarded scholarships using grant funds in the total amount of
              $125,000.
 

