Title       : An Instrument for Sequencing of Proteins from 2-D Gels by Capillary
               Electrophoresis/Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9987220

Award Number: 9987220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333446             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lubman dmlubman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Lubman
	An instrument will be developed for rapid detailed
              sequence
confirmation of protein spots from 2-D SDS PAGE gel electrophoresis.
              The
basis for this work is that an important goal in the field of
              proteomics
involves the ability to rapidly identify and analyze the protein
              content
of cells. Proteins perform many of the functions in cells and
              small
changes in their structure may result in large changes in processes
              in
cells. The general method for monitoring the protein content in cells
              is
2-D gel electrophoresis;however, the determination of the
              protein
structure requires other methodologies, such as mass spectrometry.
              The
instrument to be developed for such sequence analysis will involve
              using
high resolution capillary electrophoresis (CE) for separation of
              tryptic
digests of selected protein spots from 2-D gels with analysis of
              the
peptide map by time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry. The method will
              be
unique in its capabilities in terms of providing information on
              the
changes in the detailed sequence of proteins at femtomole levels from
              2-D
gels, including the presence of phosphorylations,
              glycosylations,
deamidations, etc. Further the method will be developed to
              provide rapid
analysis (5 min) for each protein spot and will be automated to
              perform
analysis for up to 100 selected spots from a gel.

	The unique
              instrumentation to be developed involves
              capillary
electrophoresis/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (CE-TOFMS). The
              peptides
generated from enzymatic digestion of a protein will be separated
              using CE
to provide the resolution to resolve the large number of peaks that
              result
for proteins up to 100 kDa. The narrow bands (1-3 s) produced by
              these
separations, require the use of a nonscanning TOFMS to respond to
              the
speed of the method. The TOFMS provides analysis of the mass of
              the
eluting peptide peaks so that a detailed peptide map can be obtained.
              In
addition, an ion trap will be used as a prestorage device before
              the
TOFMS, so that ions can be stored and integrated before analysis. The
              ion
trap provides capabilities for selective isolation of ions and tandem
              mass
spectrometry (MS/MS) so that detailed structural analysis can be
              performed
on the peptides by collision induced dissociation (CID). This
              methodology
is being developed on-line for full structural analysis of
              tryptic
peptides for proteins up to 100 kDa. An initial identification of
              the
selected protein spots from a 2-D gel can be performed by
              MALDI-mass
spectrometry and database search. The peptide map obtained by the
              CE-TOFMS
can be automatically compared to the known sequence from the database
              and
peptides that do not match the expected sequence can be analyzed
              for
modifications by the MS/MS data. Using this method, up to 100
              selected
spots from a 2-D gel can be analyzed to identify
              posttranslational
sequence modifications.

	The problem to be studied by
              this method will involve monitoring
changes in protein expression in 2-D.  The
              focus will be on various proteins 
that have been over-
or underexpressed or
              where the presence of modifications has resulted in a
change of migration of
              the gel spot. The methodology being developed will
provide the ability to
              rapidly monitor detailed changes in protein
structure that are possibly
              related to various changes in the cell cycle.
The instrument to be developed
              will provide unique
capabilities for rapid detailed studies of these proteins
              for structural
changes and critical modifications.



