Title       : Vertex Operator Algebras and Their Automorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9987656

Award Number: 9987656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chongying Dong dong@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator will investigate vertex operator algebras
and their
              automorphism groups. Holomorphic orbifold theory, and
rational vertex operator
              algebras will be studied. Relation among
vertex operator algebras,
              automorphism groups of vertex operator
algebras, quantum doubles, dual pairs
              will be discussed.  The
automorphism group of a rational vertex operator
              algebra will be
determined. Certain rational vertex operator algebras will
              be
characterized and classified. Several fundamental problems in the theory
              
of vertex operator algebra are expected to be solved. The goal of
this
              project is to lay some further foundations of the theory of vertex
operator
              algebras and their representations. 

String theory at present is the only
              candidate for a theory combining all 
the fundamental interactions. Two
              dimensional conformal field theory
which is an important physical theory
              describing two-dimensional
critical phenomena in condensed matter physics
              provides a framework for 
string theory. Vertex operator algebras are symmetry
              algebras in conformal 
field theory. Physical theories, perhaps more often
              than mathematical theories,
typically start from particular structure, called
              the models. On the
other hand, mathematical theories abstract from the
              examples and predict
what happens in general.  This is a research that
starts
              out in the field of algebra but moves beyond that to touch
invariant theory,
              quantum groups, modular forms, and conformal and 
topological field theories.
              A successful study of this project will 
lead to new mathematical discoveries
              which will be important both in 
mathematics and physics.
