Title       : Development of the Scanning Electrochemical Microscope for Biological Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9987028

Award Number: 9987028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334422             (Estimated)
Investigator: David O. Wipf wipf@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Baur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Garris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SCANNING ELECTROCHEMICAL MICROSCOPE FOR BIOLOGICAL
              IMAGING
The scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) is a scanned-probe
              microscope with the unique ability to image both the topography and chemistry
              of a surface.  The SECM has been used primarily to examine inanimate objects
              but, with its potential for monitoring chemical secretion and examining
              morphology, holds great promise in biological investigations.  Indeed, the
              BioSECM will be used to image the topography and probe the chemistry of living
              cells.

A team of two chemists and a biologist will join forces to develop a
              new scanning electrochemical microscope for use with biological samples. The
              new BioSECM will have a combination of features not found in other existing
              microscopes.  Its role is to construct 3-d images of the surfaces of living
              cells while simultaneously producing sensitive maps and time-resolved analysis
              of selected chemical processes at the surface of the cells.  Unique to this
              scanning microscope is the ability to observe features as large as 1000 , 1000
              , 20 mm (l , w, h) with lateral resolution below 1 mm and to correlate
              topographic and chemical images for detection of morphological changes
              accompanying changes in cell secretion. The microscope will incorporate
              features not available in commercial instruments such as the ability to image
              surfaces at constant-separation by use of shear-force or impedance mode
              feedback controllers and the ability to acquire chemical information by
              employing voltammetric, amperometric, or potentiometric tips.  Probes will be
              developed that are suitable for amperometric and voltammetric detection of
              biologically important molecules released from sample surfaces. The utility of
              the BioSECM is minimized if use of an imaging probe perturbs or destroys a
              living sample.  Thus, imaging methods will be developed to avoid damage to
              samples.  Alternately, the probe can be used to intentionally alter or destroy
              biological structures by transiently generating toxic chemicals near sample
              surfaces.  The ability of the BioSECM to image living cells will be tested by
              using it to examine PC12 cells, a cell line used to model many aspects of
              neuron function.

The BioSECM will advance biological investigations of
              cultured living cells.  In the near term, the BioSECM will be an invaluable
              tool for investigations into nerve cell growth and death by allowing changes in
              morphology and neurotransmitter release to be simultaneously monitored. 
              Additionally, the BioSECM will be useful in many other biologically relevant
              areas.  For example, metallic corrosion investigations will be furthered by the
              ability to examine biologically induced corrosion processes and biofilms on
              medical and dental implants. BioSECM will also be an invaluable tool for
              investigations into neuron degeneration, as changes in cell morphology and
              chemical environment can be simultaneously measured. Moreover, it is felt that
              the SECM imaging community at large will appreciate the technological advances
              of the BioSECM and it is anticipated that other investigators will build one or
              be the basis of a commercial device.



