Title       : SGER: Gene Knockout Strategy for Functional Genomics of an Archaeon.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1999   
File        : a9987833

Award Number: 9987833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59736              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Krebs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research is to develop an efficient gene knockout
              strategy to facilitate the functional genomic analysis of an archaeon. 
              Although archaea constitute one of the three major branches of the tree of
              life, their molecular and cellular biology is not as well characterized as that
              of bacteria and eukarya.  Genome sequencing has provided significant insights
              into archaeal biology, but the function of many genes remains untested. 
              Further progress requires a method to systematically disrupt all genes in an
              archaeon.  As a first step toward this goal, experiments are described to
              develop a gene knockout strategy for the archaeon Halobacterium salinarum.  H.
              salinarum has many advantages as a model archaeon, including ease of culture,
              selectable markers, vectors and homologous gene replacement.  Its genome
              sequence is nearly completely determined.  To develop a strategy for functional
              genomics of this organism, a newly developed ura3-based gene knockout strategy
              will be modified to allow high-throughput disruption of open reading frames.  A
              gene implicated in bacteriorhodopsin biogenesis, brp, will be used as a target
              to develop the strategy.  PCR and both selection and counterselection with ura3
              will be used to replace the brp open reading frame with a small, unrelated open
              reading frame.  By this strategy, potential polar effects on expression of
              downstream genes may be avoided.  The gene knockout strategy in H. salinarum
              may provide the most rapid route to systematic functional analysis of an
              archaeal genome.  Major insights into the role of individual genes in molecular
              and cellular processes would be possible.  The methodology may also facilitate
              ongoing studies of H. salinarum transcription, protein biogenesis, phototaxis
              and chemotaxis.  
