Title       : Integrative Graduate Training in Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics--IGERT
               Full Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9987555

Award Number: 9987555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2485260            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Sherry bsherry@pop-in.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Weir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret F. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Sederoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebeca C. Rufty  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987555
Barbara Sherry - North Carolina State University
IGERT: Integrative
              Graduate Training in Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics

This Integrative
              Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the
              establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and
              research in bioinformatics and functional genomics.  The program builds on four
              strategic initiatives: (1) A new Genomic Sciences graduate program, beginning
              fall 1999; (2) Genome Research Laboratory, Forest Biotechnology Laboratory,
              Bioinformatics Research Center and Veterinary Medicine research tower, being
              completed 1999 through 2004; (3) Longstanding collaborations among researchers
              in statistics, animal sciences, plant genetics and forestry; and (4) Alliances
              with industrial partners in neighboring Research Triangle Park and on the
              University's Centennial Campus. As part of the new curriculum, 34 IGERT
              trainees will take a 15-credit common core of courses, followed by specialized
              offerings in functional genomics or bioinformatics.  The academic program
              emphasizes NC State University's unique strengths in agriculture, forestry,
              statistics and veterinary medicine.  Trainees also will have industry
              internships, a joint journal club and a seminar series. Currently no national
              genomics center focuses on agriculture, biostatistics, veterinary medicine and
              forestry.  NC State University is one of a very few institutions that can bring
              high caliber intellectual resources to bear in these areas.  The program is
              designed to create a community of university and private investigators working
              together at the frontiers of genomic sciences research.  New medicines,
              agricultural products, micro-scale technologies and methods of statistical
              modeling and analysis are among the expected results.

IGERT is an NSF-wide
              program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future. 
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards are being
              made to nineteen institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this
              specific award reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences, Computer and
              Information Science and Engineering, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and
              Education and Human Resources.



