Title       : CSEMS Scholars at New York City Technical College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a9987019

Award Number: 9987019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Soiffer SSoiffer@nyctc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Annette E. Schaefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise Squitieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY NYC Tech College
	      300 Jay Street
	      Brooklyn, NY  112012902    718/260-5173

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              New York City Technical College of the City University of New York (CUNY)
              requests $200,000 in National Science Foundation funds to sponsor a Computer
              Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) Program reaching
              talented, low- income associate degree and baccalaureate students. The purposes
              of the New York City Tech CSEMS Program are to: (1) promote full-time
              enrollment among students in computer science, engineering and mathematics; (2)
              improve retention of scholarship recipients toward completion of their
              associate or baccalaureate degrees; (3) strengthen the quality of education
              offered these talented, low-income students; and (4) expand relationships among
              other CUNY institutions and technology industries in the region. New York City
              Tech is one the nation's largest two-tiered technical colleges-offering both
              associate and baccalaureate degrees, including three baccalaureate degree
              programs in fields related to this NSF initiative. City Tech will recruit
              talented, low-income students from New York City high schools, among City Tech
              associate degree graduates and other students choosing to enter its four-year
              baccalaureate programs. 

New York City Technical College has a total student
              enrollment of 11,400. More than 70 percent of the student body (or 8,500
              students) is comprised of persons who have been historically under-served and
              under-represented in higher education and in mathematics, science and
              engineering. Almost all of these under-represented students also require
              financial aid to attend the College. African-American students comprise 46
              percent of the college student population. Hispanic students account for 28
              percent of the City Tech student population. A total of 67% of the City Tech
              student body have self-reported household incomes from under $10,000 to
              $29,999. Talented low-income students work part-time or full-time in order to
              attend City Tech. Too often, our talented students take jobs in technology
              industries prior to graduation. Scholarships will produce both additional
              funds, and will give CSEMS recipients greater opportunities for mentoring,
              research and consistent study.

Project Principal Investigators will include
              faculty from computer science, engineering technology, and mathematics as well
              as deans of undergraduate research, science and technology and the vice
              president for enrollment management. This leadership team will coordinate City
              Tech's CSEMS recruitment and selection processes, will identify other faculty
              members as mentors and research advisors. Two selection committees-one for
              entering freshmen and a second for associate degree graduates-will consist of
              discipline faculty and student counselors. The CSEMS Program will integrate its
              activities with the CUNY NSF AMP (Alliance for Minority Participation) Program,
              other research opportunities and industry internship and career exposure
              programs. Group and peer mentoring activities will help to stimulate
              scholarship recipients. Each CSEMS recipient will work with a faculty mentor
              and student counselor over the two-year grant period. The College will evaluate
              the NSF CSEMS Program in terms of student academic success and progress toward
              degree, extent of involvement by College discipline faculty and business and
              industry and number of recipients continuing their postsecondary education and
              obtaining employment in science and technology fields. 

