Title       : Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987262

Award Number: 9987262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Caretto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Belinda Acuna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karla Johnson-Majedi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (31), (59), (21) The university offers a NSF Computer Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) program as a collaborative
              effort between the College of Engineering and Computer Science, and the College
              of Science and Mathematics. The program is increasing the number of students
              who successfully graduate with higher education degrees in Computer Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics.  One of the primary problems affecting the
              retention and achievement of financially disadvantaged students is lack of
              financial resources. A lack of resources causes students to work excessive
              hours adversely affecting their study time, and contributes to a phenomenon of
              "stopping out" in which students leave campus for semesters at a time. The NSF
              CSEMS program is providing significant financial assistance to help address
              these problems. Coupled with comprehensive support services and monitoring by
              programs within the two Colleges, CSEMS fosters student success.  The principal
              goals of CSEMS are: 1) increasing the number of financially disadvantaged
              students, including under-represented minorities and women, who graduate in the
              fields of Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics; 2) enhancing the
              educational achievements and professional development of participating
              students. 

Over a two year period, 40 promising newly matriculated community
              college transfer students and/or continuing juniors each year who are majoring
              in Computer Sciences, Engineering, or Mathematics are selected. These students
              receive a full range of services throughout their academic career through a
              coordinated effort with existing support services provided by institutionally
              administered programs in each College--the Engineering & Computer Science
              Student Development and Equity Center (SDEC) and the Science and Math
              Advisement Center (SMAC). The CSEMS program in conjunction with SDEC and SMAC
              utilizes a variety of strategies and activities of proven effectiveness in the
              recruiting and retaining disadvantaged, underrepresented minority students and
              women.  CSEMS services include academic advisement, close monitoring of student
              progress, tutorial services, workshops, career advisement, graduate school
              information, mentoring, financial aid and scholarship assistance, recognition
              awards and linkage to appropriate student organizations. 

The objectives of
              CSEMS are: 
*to retain CSEMS students in Computer Science, Engineering, and
              Mathematics at a rate that is 20% greater than a comparable community college
              transfer cohort. 
*to retain CSEMS continuing students at a rate that is 20%
              greater than a comparable cohort of students. 
*after two years of
              participation, the GPA of CSEMS students will be 0.5 higher than those of a
              comparable student cohort. 
*to facilitate the personal and professional
              development of CSEMS participants by establishing partnerships with industry,
              co-op programs, and the Career Center. 
* to realize placement of students in
              scientific/technical careers or graduate school at a rate of 90%. 

