Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987267

Award Number: 9987267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony V. Sebald avsebald@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Remmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through the collaborative efforts of the Jacobs School of Engineering,
              Mathematics Department, National Partnership for Advanced Computational
              Infrastructure/San Diego Supercomputer Center (NPACI/SDSC), and the Division of
              Student Affairs, the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) will establish
              a Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) Program.
              This program will provide $2,500 scholarships annually for two years to forty
              low-income, upper-division undergraduates majoring in computer science,
              engineering, or mathematics. Due to their underrepresentation in CSEMS fields,
              priority for such scholarships will be given to low-income ethnic minorities
              (American Indians, Alaskan Natives, African Americans, Pacific Islanders, and
              Mexican American/Latinos), women, and persons with disabilities. 

Primary
              objectives of the UCSD CSEMS Program will be to (1) increase the number of
              professional development research activities, as well as internship
              opportunities, for participants; (2) provide services to support timely
              completion of degree requirements; (3) increase the numbers of low-income
              undergraduate ethnic minorities, women, and persons with disabilities who enter
              graduate school in CSEMS fields; (4) expand and further develop the capacity
              within existing alumni and private industry relationships/networks to provide
              career seminars and relevant job preparation experiences; and, (5) address the
              broader societal issue of low participation in CSEMS by the targeted
              populations through mentoring and role modeling activities for lower-division
              and pre-college students. 

To receive the scholarships, participating
              students must remain enrolled full time in a CSEMS major, maintain a GPA of at
              least 2.80, and participate in enrichment activities designed to facilitate
              their involvement with faculty and peers through mentoring and collaborative
              learning. Students will be required to attend a program orientation,
              participate in at least one career seminar per academic year, meet with their
              CSEMS Advisor minimally once each quarter, participate in research with a
              faculty mentor or in a CSEMS-related industry internship or on- campus
              employment activity, and serve as a mentor or role model for a lower-division
              undergraduate or pre-college student with demonstrated interest in CSEMS.
              Support provided to CSEMS Scholars will include a peer mentor during their
              initial program year, tutorial and peer study-group support, plus assistance in
              preparing for graduate school. 

With the financial assistance and enrichment
              activities provided through the CSEMS Program, it is anticipated that most
              students will graduate within two years of entry into the program and will
              either enter a graduate program with a CSEMS major or secure a position in a
              related field. 

Long-term, continuing benefits of program activities include
              establishment of new research and internship opportunities to be available for
              future CSEMS majors, increased networking and mentoring activities for future
              cooperative interactions among participating individuals at various stages of
              their CSEMS careers, development of student linkages within the university
              community itself as well as with local industry and agencies, pre-college
              encouragement to seek careers in CSEMS-related fields by underrepresented
              ethnic groups, low-income women and persons with disabilities, and expanded
              knowledge of research processes acquired by CSEMS Scholars working in
              conjunction with their faculty mentors. 

