Title       : A Feeling for the Organism: Undergraduate Summer Research in Organismal Biology
               at Baylor University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9987993

Award Number: 9987993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann E. Rushing Ann_Rushing@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy E. Sera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
	

           ABSTRACT         Ann E. Rushing       Proposal # DBI -
              9987993

	

	The Undergraduate Summer Research Program in Organismal
              Biology at Baylor University is designed to provide outstanding students the
              opportunity to conduct research in organismal biology under the guidance of a
              faculty mentor.  It will foster "a feeling for the organism" by introducing
              participants to the diversity of life and to the works of great naturalists
              such as E.O. Wilson and Barbara McClintock.  It will provide a nurturing
              research environment through direct faculty mentoring and peer reinforcement. 
              Students will be immersed in a specific research question in the conceptual
              area of their choice.  It will focus recruiting efforts on women,
              underrepresented minorities, and those whose home institutions do not offer
              research opportunities.  Ultimately, the goal is to give students the
              opportunity to experience inquiry-based science which may facilitate their
              entry into the larger research community and influence their professional
              goals.  During the ten-week summer program, six non-Baylor students funded by
              REU-NSF and four Baylor students funded by the University, will participate in
              weekly seminars, field trips, and hands-on workshops designed to provide both
              educational and social experiences.  Participants will spend most of their time
              designing and conducting a research project under the supervision of a faculty
              mentor.  Seminar topics will include topics such as: Science as a Process: Just
              What is Science Anyway?; Accessing the Biological Literature; Writing an
              Effective Research Proposal; Peer Feedback on Research Proposals; Responsible
              Conduct in Research; Creating Effective Scientific Presentations; Great
              Naturalists and Their "Feeling for the Organism"; and Careers in Biology:
              What's Hot and What's Not!  Workshops will include introductions to various
              tools of modern organismal biologists such as global positioning systems, the
              scanning electronmicroscope, or wildlife telemetry equipment.  Field trips to
              museums, zoos, herbaria, and other regional facilities will expose students to
              the diversity of life.  The summer will culminate in a Symposium where
              participants give formal poster and oral presentations of their research. 
              Faculty mentors will maintain contact with participants to facilitate
              presentations and publication of research results. Efforts will be made to
              regularly survey the participants to determine long-term career
              developments.


                                                        


