Title       : Femtogram Near-field Infrared Spectrometer for Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9987157

Award Number: 9987157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shyamsunder Erramilli shyam@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mi K. Hong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9987157
Shyamsunder Erramilli
Boston University
Femtogram
              Near-field Infrared Spectrometer for Biological Systems


     Biological
              molecules like proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids can be studied using
              infrared spectroscopy.  The peaks in an infrared spectrum are caused by the
              chemical structure of the molecules themselves.  The nature of the chemical
              groups in a molecule can often be recognized by its infrared spectrum.  That
              spectrum can also serve as a fingerprint.  Infrared microspectroscopy combines
              infrared spectroscopy with high-resolution imaging.  Because the technique uses
              an intrinsic property of the molecules, it is possible to get contrast in
              images without using radioactive or fluorescent labels.  One traditional
              shortcoming of infrared microscopy is that the spatial resolution is poor, due
              to the longer wavelengths involved (compared to visible light).  The use of
              near-field techniques makes it possible to overcome the diffraction limit and
              permits the study of sub-micron size samples in water.

     With support
              from the National Science Foundation, a table-top imaging spectrometer capable
              of acquiring the infrared spectrum of an aqueous biological sample is being
              developed.  The spectrometer will be built along the same general principles as
              an atomic force microscope.  To this basic design a tunable infrared laser and
              infrared collecting optics will be added.  The resulting microscope will be
              unique in that it allows for infrared imaging under water.  Once it is
              complete, single living cells will be examined using infrared radiation.	

  
                Development of the infrared spectrometer will provide a new window to study
              single living cells without requiring the use of either radioactive or
              fluorescent stains. Radioactive labeling is very sensitive, but the samples
              have to be handled and disposed of carefully, in order to avoid environmental
              problems.  Many fluorescent labels are carcinogenic, and may perturb the cells
              that are being stained.  In addition to allowing the imaging of single living
              cells, the near-field infrared spectrometer has the potential to identify the
              type of bacteria from its characteristic infrared signature.  If this
              application is successful, the instrument would provide a convenient method to
              detect pathogenic bacteria.




 


