Title       : Special Year in Computational Complexity Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a9987077

Award Number: 9987077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avi Wigderson avi@math.ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Avi Wigderson
9987077
This project will support three senior researchers to
              participate in a special year on computational complexity theory at the
              Institute for Advanced Studies.  These researchers will attract the
              participation of other top researchers in computational complexity.
              
Computational complexity theory has opened up one of the most exciting fields
              of scientific and mathematical research over the last 20 years, with dramatic
              achievements and fundamental understandings appearing at a high rate.  One
              obvious explanation for the recent progress in this field is that this research
              is guided by a few clear and focused questions, deeply motivated on scientific,
              practical and philosophical grounds.  The most central of these are:
P=NP?, or
              more generally, are the many natural computational problems we can't solve
              really difficult?
NP=coNP?, or more generally, what constitutes a difficult
              theorem to prove:
P=BPP?, or more generally, does randomization really help
              efficient computation?
BPP=QP?, or more generally, can quantum mechanics be
              efficiently simulated classically?
Resolving any of these questions is clearly
              very long term goal, but each has stimulated the development of concepts,
              problems, proof techniques and results which start paving a path towards a
              possible resolution.
But what really characterized the progress, and explained
              much of the successes so far, was the unveiling of many rich and beautiful
              connections between the sets of concepts and sub-problems each of these major
              questions gave rise to.  There is little doubt that such connections are, and
              will be, the foundation for understanding the major questions of complexity
              theory.  Indeed, these connections are what is making the complex world of
              computational complexity into a theory.  The focus of this special year at the
              Institute will be to better understand these connections and their
              implications, to unify and extend them, and to look for new ones.

