Title       : An Industry-Academia Partnership Model for Improved Retention, Accelerated
               Degree Completion, and Successful Placement of Women/Minorities/Other
               Financially Disadvantaged Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987066

Award Number: 9987066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl K. Stevens stevens@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Schlossberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop a sustainable and replicable
              industry-academia partnership model for helping talented but financially
              disadvantaged students complete their baccalaureate degrees in timely fashion
              and move successfully into the workforce. The intent is to demonstrate that
              significant improvement in retention, placement, and workforce throughput can
              be achieved for all students - including women, minorities, and persons with
              disabilities - through a unique combination of scholarships, professional
              development activities, intervention, and academic support.

Thirty qualified
              motivated junior-level students in engineering and computer science are
              participating in the two-year program as a cohort group. Program highlights
              include a summer industry or research internship between the junior and senior
              years of study. Other professional development activities designed to enhance
              student workforce "readiness" include industry mentors, shadowing programs,
              involvement in professional societies, and a one credit-hour Professional
              Development Workshop each semester created especially for this project. A
              Project Advisory Committee, with members from industry, is guiding development
              and execution of the project. One of their tasks is to assure that industry
              involvement provides real intellectual engagement with students. 

Academic
              support activities center on creation of a learning environment in which
              students feel empowered to take responsibility for their own success. Special
              orientation sessions held at the beginning of each project year, cooperative
              learning activities in the Professional Development Workshops, interactions
              with peer mentors, personal counseling and advising, inter- and intra - group
              communication, and tutoring are among the activities. Networking, mentoring,
              and social interactions are featured. Scholarships of $2,500 per year are
              enabling students to concentrate upon their studies and development activities.
              

Research objectives for the project focus upon five issues of national
              interest and importance, all associated with human resource development:
* The
              future engineering and computer science workforce. 
*Under-representation of
              women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in this workforce.
              
*Preparation of students for productive contributions upon entry into this
              workforce. 
*The increasing length of time required for students to earn
              degrees. 
*Increasing numbers of transfer students in engineering and computer
              science baccalaureate programs. 

Success of the project in addressing these
              issues is being systematically evaluated and reported. Of special significance
              to engineering education are the data that is being obtained on performance of
              upper division and community college transfer students, groups largely
              overlooked in previous studies of retention and academic performance. 

