Title       : Operator Algebras, Representations, and Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a9987777

Award Number: 9987777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Palle E. Jorgensen palle-jorgensen@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
DMS-9987777

OPERATOR ALGEBRAS, REPRESENTATIONS AND WAVELETS
PALLE
              E.T. JORGENSEN


Jorgensen's proposal research will involve several areas of
              mathematics and will be focussed on applications, spectral and tiling duality,
              and fractal iteration processes.  The basic methods derive from operator
              algebras and representation theory, and the connection to the applications is
              threefold:  wavelet theory, operators, and relations between operations in the
              discrete and continuos domains.  Wavelet theory concerns the mathematical tools
              involved in digitizing continuous data with view to storage, and the synthesis
              process, recreating the desired picture (or time signal) from the stored data. 
              The algorithms involved go under the name of filter banks, and their
              spectacular efficiency derives in part from the use of (hidden) self-similarity
              in the data which is analyzed.  Observations or time signals are functions, and
              classes of functions make up spaces.  Numerical correlations add structure to
              the spaces at hand, Hilbert spaces.  There are operators in the spaces deriving
              from the discrete data and others from the spaces of continuous signals.  The
              first ones are good for computations, while the second reflect the real world. 
              The operators between the two are the focus of Jorgensen's
              research.

Relations between operations in the discrete and continuous
              domains are studied as symbols, because symbols are programmable.  The
              mathematics involved in assigning operators to the symbolic relations is called
              representation theory.  The combination of the three areas opens up exciting
              new opportunities at the interface of mathematics and engineering.  A main
              point in the proposal is the study of intertwining operators between, on one
              side, the "discrete world" of high-pass/low-pass filters of signal processing ,
              and on the other side, the "continuous world" of wavelets.  There are
              significant operator-algebraic and representation-theoretic issues on both
              sides of the "divide", and the intertwining operators throw light on central
              issues for wavelets in higher dimensions.  The proposal describes how the tool
              from diverse areas of analysis, as well as from dynamical systems and operator
              algebra, merge into the proposed project on wavelet analysis.  The diversity of
              techniques is also a charm of the subject, which continues to generate new
              graduate student activity.  Jorgensen had several recent students complete
              theses in the subject.  


