Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987242

Award Number: 9987242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene F. Nededog anededog@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Colorado State University proposes a project of scholarship support and student
              services that will increase the number of low-income computer science,
              engineering and mathematics undergraduate majors who complete their
              baccalaureate degrees at Colorado State and prepare them to make a smooth
              transition into the workforce or graduate school.  Colorado State, a land-grant
              and Carnegie I Research university, will coordinate its existing science and
              engineering student services resources and its resources in the industrial
              sector in Northern Colorado to create a comprehensive program to support
              scholarship recipients. 

Low-income students graduate at much lower rate
              than their peers. They are less prepared for college, are less involved because
              they must expend time and energy securing the funds to attend, and often must
              slow or interrupt their schooling because of financial crises. Research
              indicates that there are two major elements that assist low-income students to
              persist to graduation: receiving aid that meets a high proportion of their
              expenses and working up to 10 hours a week. This project will provide these
              elements, as well as use best-practice strategies to furnish other types of
              support, with special consideration for the needs of women, underrepresented
              minority students, and disabled students.  

Forty low-income,
              academically-talented students will be selected to receive a scholarship of
              $2500 per year, an amount that covers 77% of resident tuition at Colorado
              State.  Each recipient will also agree to participate in one of several
              existing student support programs, through which they will receive academic
              support and preparation for career and/or graduate school.  These programs will
              also ensure that recipients engage in a work experience in their field on
              campus or in industry.  In addition, a financial aid specialist will advise
              students individually, and students will attend an intensive Professional
              Development Workshop conducted by campus career personnel and representatives
              of industry. Students will also have the unique opportunity to have a mentor
              from the ranks of professionals in their field anywhere in the country though
              the International Telementor Center.    

Project management will be through
              the Office of the Dean of the College of Natural Science.  A steering committee
              consisting of representatives of industry and each involved unit will ensure
              communication and integration with academic programs.  

Expected outcomes
              are that 1) scholarship recipients will graduate at higher rates and sooner
              than similar students in a control group, 2) that they will be well-prepared to
              enter the workforce or graduate education, and 3) Colorado State's connections
              with the private sector, particularly relating to placement of its engineering,
              computer science and mathematics graduates and involvement of employers in
              academic preparation, will be enhanced.  This project will not only impact the
              lives of scholarship recipients and strengthen Colorado State's ability to
              train its students.  It will also demonstrate that students from low-income
              populations, given appropriate support, can help to meet the critical need for
              well-prepared technology workers in the U.S.


