Title       : Towards MRI Microscopy of Biological Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9987079

Award Number: 9987079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Pennington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9987079
Charles H. Pennington
Ohio State University
Toward MRI
              Microscopy of Biological Cells

	Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a
              powerful and now widely available medical tool, routinely used to diagnose
              problems that in the past would have required exploratory surgery.  Typically
              MRI in a hospital setting can not distinguish features that are smaller than
              approximately 1 millimeter in size.  In contrast, MRI microscopy is the tool
              used to image smaller organisms.  To date MRI microscopy can resolve features
              as small as a few tens of micrometers.
	This award supports the development of
              instrumentation to extend MRI to an even smaller regime.  Such an instrument
              will make it possible to obtain meaningful images of single biological cells. 
              Cells have typical sizes of about 10 micrometers, and the PI aims to achieve
              MRI resolution of about 1 micrometer.  Two major problems must be overcome to
              achieve this goal.  First, as the resolution volume is smaller, the available
              MRI signal is also reduced, and one must reduce the size of the "noise"
              relative to the signal that one desires to measure.  This problem will be
              solved by using MRI "micro-coils" to greatly enhance this signal to noise ratio
              for the study of very small objects.  Second, in a small resolution volume, the
              objects of interest may move substantially during the time of the measurement. 
              This problem will be solved by using very strong MRI magnetic field gradient
              coils (triaxial, switchable gradients with strengths exceeding 20 Tesla per
              meter) which allow measurements to be made quickly.
	Magnetic resonance
              imaging is a large and rapidly growing field with applications in both clinical
              practice and biomedical research.  Because of this rapid growth, there is a
              great need for scientists and medical physicists who are trained and skilled in
              MRI.  This award provides graduate students and postdoctoral researchers with
              thoroughly challenging MRI projects.  Students supported under this award will
              have to find original solutions to important scientific and technological
              problems.  As a result it is anticipated that the students will proceed to
              become leaders in magnetic resonance imaging.



