Title       : NSF Scholarships for Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987039

Award Number: 9987039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith A. Lee malee@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Danziger  (Principal Investigator former)
              John C. LaRue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Kibler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Reilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed NSF Scholars Program at the University of
              California, Irvine, is to assist academically-talented, low-income third- and
              fourth-year undergraduates majoring in computer science, engineering, or
              mathematics to complete their baccalaureate degrees and to make a successful
              transition from college to work or graduate education. The two-year program
              will support 40 students a year with scholarships of $2,500 each. Scholarships
              will be linked to existing academic advising and other student-support
              services. 

To be eligible, students must be juniors or seniors, enrolled
              full-time and majoring in computer science, engineering, or mathematics, who
              are eligible for Federal Pell Grants and have a minimum GPA of 2.75
              (approximately the average GPA for these majors). Eligible students will be
              invited to submit a letter of application, which must contain evidence of
              interest and motivation, a description of career and graduate school interests,
              and an explanation of how the NSF scholarship would help them complete their
              degree. Scholars will be required to remain eligible each quarter and to meet
              regularly with their academic or faculty advisors.

 An Orientation Meeting
              will be held at the beginning of each academic year to acquaint scholars with
              each other and the many academic and career-related services that are available
              to them, such as those provided by the following units: ?Undergraduate Research
              Opportunities Program (UROP) ?McNair/STAR Program ??Career Center ??Center for
              Opportunities and Diversity in Engineering (CODE) ??California Alliance for
              Minority Participation (CAMP) ??Student Academic Advancement Services (SAAS)
              ??Department of Information and Computer Science ??Schools of Engineering and
              Physical Sciences 

Examples of such activities include resume writing and
              interviewing skills workshops, job fairs, faculty-mentored research
              opportunities, adjuncts for upper division courses, senior design projects with
              industry partners, industry roundtables, lunches with alumni and corporate
              representatives, information sessions presented by today's top technological
              firms, a graduate school prep course, and a Web-based resume book. 

Two
              types of evaluations will be conducted: 1) a formative evaluation designed to
              provide constructive feedback for the improvement of the program, and 2) a
              summative evaluation designed to assess the overall success of the program. A
              student tracking system will be implemented to monitor the academic progress
              and graduation rates of the NSF Scholars, plus a similar, matched group of
              students who are not scholars selected at random from the eligibility pool. A
              variety of data collection methods, such as focus groups, interviews, and
              surveys, will be used. Students will continue to be tracked one year after
              graduation. 

