Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematical Sciences Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9987211

Award Number: 9987211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew P. Swift swift@eng.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project establishes a program that will provide scholarships to outstanding
              undergraduate and graduate students in Computer Science, Engineering, and
              Mathematics. This is the largest university in the United States with a student
              population that is majority Mexican-American and a national leader in the
              preparation of Hispanic scientists and engineers. It is also a commuter
              institution that draws approximately 85 percent of its students from El Paso
              County, the fourth poorest Metropolitan Statistical Area in the United States
              in terms of per-capita income. Approximately 40 percent of this university's
              students are the first in their families to attend a university, and most
              students must work on- or off-campus to pay for their education and assist
              their families. 

Under the leadership of Principal Investigators, this
              project will offer 44 scholarships each year for two years, beginning in August
              2000, to 22 upper-division undergraduate students in computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics; 11 master's level students in those programs; and
              11 doctoral students in three programs (Computer Engineering, Environmental
              Science and Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering) who are at the
              dissertation writing stage of their graduate careers. 

All individuals
              selected as CSEM Scholars must: be United States citizens, nationals, or aliens
              admitted as refugees at the time of application; demonstrate financial need,
              defined as eligibility for U.S. Department of Education Pell Grants or Graduate
              Assistance in Areas of National Need fellowships; and enroll full-time in
              computer science, engineering, and/or mathematics degree programs at the
              baccalaureate or graduate level. 

CSEMS Scholars will complete outstanding
              and innovative undergraduate and graduate programs that will prepare them for
              the 21st century. They will receive mentorship from faculty who combine
              outstanding teaching with research programs funded by agencies such as NSF,
              NASA, EPA, the Department of Defense, and other federal, state, and corporate
              sources. In addition, through the Model Institutions for Excellence program,
              students will participate in innovative programs to support their retention in
              their degree programs and increase their professional skills. When they
              complete their degrees, they can expect to be highly competitive for major
              graduate schools and to be actively recruited by major industry employers.

