Title       : Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987040

Award Number: 9987040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen S. Hauer hauer@college.dtcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Hicks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela B. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen H. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel A. Guccione  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Del Tech&CC Stanton-Newark
	      400 Stanton Christiana Rd
	      Newark, DE  197021659    302/368-6900

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               (99), (31), (35), (59), (21) The college is using $180,000 for a two-year
              Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships (CSEMS) Program.
              Each year 36 talented, historically underserved students in the state who enter
              one of the college's campuses in 2000 and 2001 are being given these awards.
              Scholarship recipients are recruited from high schools in the state and the
              scholarships are awarded to low-income, academically talented students.  The
              overall CSEMS program accommodates applicants from diverse backgrounds who have
              diverse career goals. The CSEMS program is :(1) implementing a recruitment
              program throughout the state in cooperation with the college, local high
              schools and advocacy organizations; (2) meeting major costs of college
              attendance for 36 eligible students each year of the two-year grant; (3)
              bringing together college faculty and staff from academic and counseling
              departments to offer academic support and mentoring to the Scholars; (4) making
              use of the resources of college industry advisory boards to create internships
              for CSEMS scholars in technology industries related to CSEMS scholars fields of
              study; and (5) offering Scholars employment and educational placement
              assistance.

The college is the state's entry point for talented, low-income
              students. More than 80 percent of students enrolled in the college work while
              attending college -75% receive some form of financial aid. The college enrolls
              the largest number of low-income students of all state postsecondary
              educational institutions. The college emphasizes technological programs,
              offering academic programs directly related to the NSF CSEMS program such as
              mathematics, computer science, and a range of engineering technologies. Many of
              the low-income students take too long to complete their A.A.S. programs and the
              retention rate for these students is low. The CSEMS scholarships permits
              talented, low-income students to concentrate on their studies, to provide more
              time for study and acts to reduce their indebtedness as they progress toward
              advanced study or work. Scholars also need support from academic mentors,
              experience interning in industry and other enhancements if they are to graduate
              on time and in good standing. 

The college is building on recruitment
              networks developed through long-standing Upward Bound projects in state high
              schools serving low-income, diverse student populations. The college's Human
              Resources, College Relations and Marketing Offices coordinate the recruitment
              effort with the Principal Investigator. Accepted students receive free tuition
              and other assistance with direct educational costs. A team of college
              mathematics and engineering technologies faculty serve as mentors to the CSEMS
              Scholars over the two-year period, sponsoring enhanced learning experiences and
              making referrals to available campus academic support services. The college
              works with its industry advisory boards in disciplines related to the grant to
              establish industry internships for the Scholars. Exit counseling and job
              placement is being accomplished by the college and these advisory boards for
              Scholars in their second year. The President sponsors periodic special events
              supporting the CSEMS Scholars. 

