Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Municipal Solid Waste Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9987433

Award Number: 9987433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26397              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manoj B. Chopra chopra@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra R. Reinhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313030   Solid Waste Disposal                    
Program Ref : 5988,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9987433
Chopra 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Manoj Chopra, Department of Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, Dr. Debra R. Reinhart, Associate Dean for Research, College of
              Engineering, University of Central Florida (UCF) at Orlando, Florida and
              Professor Wa'il Abu-El-Sha'r, Director, the Center for Environmental Sciences
              and Technology (CEST), Jordan University of Science and Technology at Irbid,
              Jordan.  They plan to gather information and data related to landfill leachate
              and gas generation.  This will be used to assess the environmental impact of
              solid waste landfills, and to design and generate operational guidance to
              minimize future impacts.   Data to be collected in Jordan will include landfill
              design and operation, disposal capacity of landfills, history of waste
              disposal, complaints regarding air or water quality near landfills, waste
              characteristics, and climatic conditions.  Details of the geological and soil
              characteristics at various landfill sites also will be collected to determine
              the properties influencing leachate migration and potential for contamination
              of groundwater supply.  The data will be analyzed for the environmental impact,
              using readily available software, including Hydrologic Evaluation of Landfill
              Processes (HELP) to quantify leachate flowrates, EPA's Multi-Med and Composite
              Model for Leachate Migration and Transformation Products (EPACMTP) to evaluate
              risk to groundwater, and the EPA Landfill Gas Emissions Model to estimate gas
              volume and quality.  

Scope:  In this project the collaborators plan to
              combine their expertise in a study to assess management procedures for
              landfills to maximize conversion of waste biomass to energy, while minimizing
              adverse impact to the environment.  The scientists will study the use of US
              practices such as waste separation and other operating practices in the
              different environmental conditions in Jordan.  The fieldwork in Jordan will
              involve scientists from UCF and from CEST.  The data analysis and the
              evaluation of environmental impacts will be done at UCF with participation from
              two Jordanian scientists.  The project is mutually beneficial, is expected to
              promote research, teaching, training and learning in this field, and is
              expected to give US researchers a first hand understanding of the issues faced
              in other geographical regions.  It will help our understanding of operating
              landfills under bioreactor conditions where leachate and gas emissions are
              minimized.  The project meets INT criteria for support of cooperative projects
              that are mutually beneficial.
Funds for this project are provided by the
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Bioengineering and
              Environmental Systems.
