Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training in
               Urban Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9987612

Award Number: 9987612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2698493            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart G. Fisher s.fisher@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy B. Grimm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Graf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Redman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Hackett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987612
Stuart Fisher - Arizona State University
IGERT: Integrative Graduate
              Education and Research Training in Urban Ecology

This Integrative Graduate
              Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research in urban
              ecology. Urban ecology is a relatively new endeavor, thus fellows will have
              unparalleled opportunity to define the field with a diverse group of faculty
              members, students, and postdocs. Cities are not only important ecosystems to
              humans but are excellent laboratories for ecological research. The Central
              Arizona - Phoenix Long-Term Ecological Research project, one of only two urban
              sites in the NSF's LTER network, provides an established research
              infrastructure for frontier, multidisciplinary research and graduate training.
              Training will be built on a collaborative model emphasizing cooperation and
              teamwork. Fellows may earn degrees in six core departments in the life, earth,
              and social sciences and will participate in team research, courses, and
              seminars that emphasize integration among disciplines. Dissertations will be
              integrative and multidisciplinary and will include a substantial collaborative
              component beyond the student's home discipline. Collectively, these activities
              will afford skills that should be broadly applicable to careers in public and
              private sectors and in academia. The main objective of the program is to
              educate a new kind of scientist who is broader, more flexible, more
              collaborative, and more adept at linking science and social issues than
              heretofore.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
              educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds
              and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
              demands of the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change
              in graduate education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the
              program, awards are being made to nineteen institutions for programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The
              intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the Directorates for
              Biological Sciences, Geosciences, and Education and Human Resources.


