Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9987128

Award Number: 9987128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Zahorian   (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Keyes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Lasseigne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Stanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Irwin B. Levinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Old Dominion University has developed a scholarship program that is providing
              aid to capable, financially-disadvantaged students to complete the last two
              years of a Bachelor of Science program in Computer Science, Engineering,
              Engineering Technology, or Mathematics (NSF designated CSEM areas). Old
              Dominion University is an ideal candidate for such a program. The institution
              already has strong, active, and collaborative academic programs in each of the
              CSEM areas. The university has a diverse body of students, including a large
              percentage of women and minorities, and a large percentage of Pell eligible
              students. The university also has very active interactions with community
              colleges in the state, and high transfer enrollments from these schools.
              Candidate students in the CSEM areas are identified for scholarship
              consideration both from existing students and from community college students.
              The applications of these students, include not only prior academic
              performance, but also an essay describing career goals and letters of
              reference, are evaluated by a scholarship committee. The final step in the
              selection process is a formal interview of each candidate on campus. The
              scholarship awardees are then mentored and helped by faculty at Old Dominion
              University, further increasing the likelihood of successful graduation within
              two years. The CSEM scholarship has the immediate effect of improving the
              nation's technology workforce.

