Title       : IGERT: Teaching Craft for Macromolecular Creativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a9987603

Award Number: 9987603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Russo paul.russo@chem.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maciej Radosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry M. Bricker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9987603
Paul Russo - Louisiana State University
IGERT: Teaching Craft for
              Macromolecular Creativity

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research
              Training (IGERT) award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary
              graduate training program of education and research on the synthesis,
              characterization, processing and theory of macromolecules. Students in eight
              departments will participate in this IGERT experiment.  After research-driven
              formal training in the above topical areas, the students will join an
              interdisciplinary team including other students, faculty and off-campus
              participants.  The research mix includes engineering plus curiosity-driven and
              applied science.  An Apprentice-Artisan-Craftsperson ladder is adapted from the
              trade arts to develop skills, creativity, ethics, responsibility and
              philosophy.  Students will arrive early for a summer of research discovery and
              ethics training.  Based on demonstrated merit, they will be elected to
              apprenticeships.  Apprentices will work side by side with professors and
              off-campus "research master craftspersons" for 2 to 6 weeks-long enough to
              demonstrate first-hand the responsible and ethical conduct of research, but
              short enough that the student can still flourish independently.  Upon
              completion of a written report and advancement to Ph.D. candidacy, Apprentices
              become Artisans.  Among other privileges and responsibilities, Artisans may
              write minigrants in support of original ideas.  After a successful data
              defense, Artisans will be declared Craftspersons and become eligible for up to
              six months of "finishing school" at another university, government or
              industrial site.  Excellent opportunities have been pre-arranged, but
              Craftspersons might design their own based on preliminary data from their
              independent minigrants.  The core curriculum will be revised to serve a more
              interdisciplinary clientele.  Team-taught, integrated lab/lectures will pay
              special attention to practical skills, including those required for equipment
              building, programming and troubleshooting.  Training in the ethical conduct of
              science and technology, plus business issues, will be provided in two courses
              available to graduate and undergraduate students across campus.  Students must
              perform a community service project and participate in a new, interdepartmental
              seminar.  A strong reward structure will maintain student and faculty interest
              in this demanding experiment.  The member departments and off-campus
              participants will share their different strengths in gender, cultural and
              racial diversity.  More than 30 students will participate overall.  Successful
              aspects of the experiment will spread throughout the campus, guided by a new
              sociometrics project to assess its effectiveness.  

IGERT is an NSF-wide
              program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future. 
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the third year of the program, awards are being
              made to nineteen institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this
              specific award reside in the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences, Engineering, and Education and Human Resources.


