Title       : Computer Science and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987049

Award Number: 9987049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Ellis mary.ellis@hamptonu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the scholarship program in computer science and mathematics at
              Hampton University (HU) is to significantly increase the number of
              underrepresented minorities completing the baccalaureate degree and then
              pursuing graduate degrees in these fields. The Computer Science and Mathematics
              Scholarship Program (CSMS) provides an educational environment and support that
              prepares students for graduate studies. This is accomplished by exposing
              selected low-income students to a unique series of experiences during their
              final two years at Hampton University. A graduate component of CSMS provides
              tuition assistance for students who wish to matriculate in established Master's
              degree programs in Computer Science and Mathematics at HU.

The CSMS project
              is closely aligned with an on-going eleven-year program at HU (Student
              Enhancement in Mathematics and Science (SEMS)) funded by the Office of Naval
              Research that has proven successful in meeting its goals of preparing minority
              students for graduate school and subsequently, the nation's workforce. The
              primary focus of the CSMS project is the student- providing the student with
              all the tools, personal assistance, and skills needed to successfully
              matriculate at any graduate degree granting institution in the nation.

The
              specific components of the CSMS program are: (1)A Scholarship Program for
              current high performing students that are able to establish financial need; (2)
              A Research Participation Program; (3) An Academic and Mathematics Tutorial
              Program; (4) A Student Assessment Program; (5) Summer internships; and (6) A
              Visiting Lecturers Program.

CSMC graduate students work closely with the
              undergraduate component of the program. Their duties are to serve as tutors,
              advisors, and research mentors to augment the experiences provided by faculty
              researchers for the undergraduates.


