Title       : The Mechanisms of the Massive Transformation; St. Louis, MO; October 8-12, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9987125

Award Number: 9987125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5510               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hubert I. Aaronson aaronson+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9987125
Aaronson

This project is the partial support of a symposium on "The
              Mechanisms of the Massive Transformation", to be held during the Fall, 2000
              TMS/ASM Meeting (Oct. 8 - 12) in St. Louis, MO. under the sponsorship of the
              ASM Phase Transformations Committee. The principal issues to be considered
              during this symposium are whether the T zero temperature or the solvus
              temperature serves as the upper temperature limit of the massive transformation
              and whether the structure of massive/matrix boundaries is incoherent or
              partially coherent. Experimental and theoretical studies on the massive
              transformation in a wide range of alloy systems will be reported in both
              numerous metallic alloy systems as well as alumina and in bismuth oxide-based
              ceramics. Additionally, a central aspect in the analysis of massive growth
              kinetics, namely, the diffusivity in interphase boundaries, will be the subject
              of a set of four papers. Three of which will be experimental and concerned with
              measurement of the diffusivities along interphase boundaries. The fourth will
              be based upon computer simulations, in which attempts will be made to compare
              diffusivities across interphase boundaries (which cannot yet be determined
              independently and is instead presently evaluated from growth kinetics data)
              with diffusivities along the same boundaries. During the last session of the
              symposium, a General Discussion will be held. Financial support covers: (i) the
              airline travel and accommodations of a particularly important participant,
              Prof. Emeritus Mats Hillert (Royal Inst. of Technology, Stockholm), (ii) the
              expenses to be incurred in connection with the General Discussions session and
              (iii) partial support for attendance at the symposium by five graduate
              students. 
%%%
Several metal alloys can undergo massive phase
              transformations, which affect the structure and properties of the alloy. The
              symposium will highlight features of this transformation and attempt to resolve
              several outstanding issues.  The session will be recorded, transcribed and
              edited by both the discussers and the symposium organizers (V. K. Vasudevan and
              H. I. Aaronson). Permission has been secured from Metallurgical and Materials
              Transactions A to publish the symposium papers and the General Discussion paper
              in this journal, following passage through the journal's peer review system
              under the supervision of the Editor, Prof. D. E. Laughlin.
***

