Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a9987256

Award Number: 9987256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Finston dfinston@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (21), (59) This project administers financial, academic, and non-academic
              support to a cohort of low income students whose academic merit is high. The
              project includes a new one credit Mathematics/Engineering Laboratory course
              being offered for at least the duration of the award. It is designed to provide
              support, including research experience, professional development, career
              planning, and counseling, to junior and senior undergraduate students majoring
              in mathematics and engineering disciplines. A small group of advanced graduate
              students have mentoring functions, enhancing their preparation for careers as
              researchers and educators. The lab is open to all students in selected courses,
              but registration in every semester is required of scholarship recipients. The
              application mechanism for scholarships solicits information on students'
              academic merit, professionalism, and financial need, and ascertains the nature
              of the academic and non-academic support that enhances students' prospects for
              graduation within two years. 

Scholarships to approximately thirty six
              undergraduates each academic year remedies, to some degree, the financial need
              that forces many to take part time employment during the academic year. Since
              such employment inhibits their participation in ongoing support activities in
              the College of Engineering, these students have not previously formed networks
              with other students and faculty. One of the primary functions of the laboratory
              is to provide all math and engineering undergraduates the opportunity to form
              peer working groups. 
Laboratory activities evolve each semester, although
              some course support for all registered students is provided by graduate student
              mentors in every semester. The first semester of activity is devoted to program
              orientation. Students whose application indicates the desire for non-academic
              support services are identified and directed to campus programs such as the
              Counseling Center, Student Support Services, the Center for Learning
              Experience, and other appropriate services. Math/Engineering faculty make
              presentations in the lab to recruit students to work on current research
              projects. During the second semester, scholarship students are required to
              prepare a research proposal to join an active research group. During the third
              and fourth semesters, scholarship students engage in research. Lab activities
              prepare students for their postgraduate careers through career planning,
              development of interview skills, and graduate school advisement. The laboratory
              serves as a forum for students to meet with representatives of industries that
              employ Math/Engineering graduates. 

