Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987171

Award Number: 9987171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Lee Leemi@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program enables low income, scholastically well-suited students to pursue
              undergraduate degrees in computer science, engineering or mathematics. It also
              serves to establish support systems that will maximize the students' ability to
              achieve and maintain a 2.5- 3.0 minimum grade point average during their
              undergraduate years. In addition, this program provides a mechanism that
              involves the students with the concepts of cooperative work education and
              research experiences for undergraduates. This results in increased numbers of
              engineering and science students who will consider science, engineering or
              technology as potential professional career choices and motivates them to
              pursue advanced study and research, leadership and academic careers in
              engineering, science, or technology-related pedagogy. There also exists an
              opportunity for students to participate in an "incentive" program that offers
              them a semester at a partnering Diversity in Engineering (DEP)/Heartland's
              Alliance for Minority Participation (HAMP) institution through the National
              Student Exchange (NSE). 

The principal goal of this program is to increase
              the pool of highly qualified engineering and science students from economically
              disadvantaged (underserved) and underrepresented group backgrounds. Then to
              address the growing, critical national concern for the quality of engineering
              and computer science education and the demand for a diversified workforce in
              the fields of computer science, engineering and mathematics. Moreover, the
              program will help ensure an adequate, well-prepared workforce of scientists and
              engineers that can maintain U.S. leadership in science and technology, both now
              and in the future. In addition, the project will help all students to acquire
              the mathematics and science skills needed to thrive in an increasingly
              technological society. The University of Missouri-Columbia (MU) is in an ideal
              and unique position to increase significantly the utilization of an untapped
              source of American talent, that being the economically disadvantaged and
              historically underrepresented student. 

This opportunity allows MU to build
              a more dynamic relationship with two-and four- year colleges. Additionally, it
              helps to ensure the successful transition of transfer students from underserved
              and underrepresented groups into the engineering computer science and
              mathematics undergraduate programs at MU. This pool of students has been
              under-recruited in the past and need to be in the current and future SEM
              pipeline. This recruitment effort will be enhanced through coordination with
              the Heartland Alliance for Minority Participation transfer scholarships
              programs. 

