Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematic Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9987343

Award Number: 9987343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline A. Smith jasmith@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides educational opportunities to low-income academically
              talented students through scholarships that promote full-time enrollment and
              degree achievement. The scholarship program leads to a bachelor's degree in
              computer science, engineering, engineering technology, and mathematics in two
              years. 

The program provides financial support, personal and professional
              development assistance for transfer students from area community colleges, and
              dual degree transfer students in math, science, pre-engineering programs from
              one historically black college. The students are pursuing careers in computer
              science, computer technology, engineering, engineering technology, and
              mathematics. 

The selected twenty-five scholars each receive an annual
              stipend and personal and professional development assistance from two mentors.
              This includes one mentor from industry and one faculty mentor. These two
              mentors closely monitor the progress of the student both in school and
              professionally. They offer advice, encouragement, and academic assistance. The
              mentors advise the student concerning course selection, personal and
              professional issues, and encourage participation in professional technical
              societies. The program manager monitors and tracks the academic progress of the
              students, maintains contact with the mentors, and as necessary, arranges for
              individual tutorial assistance. Following the first year the scholar
              experiences the excitement of work or research at a local industry, with
              faculty, or a national enterprise. The employment or research experience will
              strongly complement their academic progress and enhance learning. The project
              will increase the number of low income students, women and minorities pursuing
              full time undergraduate engineering and science studies, thereby increasing
              graduates to help meet the future work-force needs of the nation's
              technological enterprise. 

