Title       : Collaborative Proposal: REU:An Integrated Field-Laboratory Experience for
               Undergraduates: Constraints on Evolution of Southern Blue Ridge
               Mafic-Ultramafic Massifs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9987985

Award Number: 9987985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97447              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia L. Peterson peterson@wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan L. Burr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Yurkovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Peterson
9987985

This REU project provides undergraduate students with an
              integrated field and laboratory research experience. Students will tackle
              questions about the origins and evolution of mafic and ultramafic rock units in
              high-grade metamorphic rocks of the Southern Blue Ridge in North Carolina. 
              Detailed field observations, geophysical and structural analysis and
              compositional information will provide some new constraints on the origins of
              these rocks, and on their tectonic history.  The first 4 weeks of the program
              will involve field mapping, collection of geophysical and structural data, and
              sampling for geochemistry using facilities of the University of South Florida
              to process and interpret geophysical data and to chemically analyze rock
              samples collected in the field.  The faculty will participate in research
              activities as instructors and guides, providing students with a detailed
              overview of the relevant geologic issues and with direction and training in
              field techniques, laboratory protocols, and the use of analytical
              instrumentation, and helping them identify and formulate research questions. 
              Students will work in teams with frequent, but not constant instructor
              interaction, allowing them to develop research tools and problem-solving
              skills.  This research environment allows students to increase both skill and
              independence as investigators, and at the same time learn to function as part
              of a research team.  Students will define individual or small group research
              problems within broader research goals for each summer.  Group projects will
              include both a field and a lab component and be completed during the 7-week
              program.  Students will present their results at the Spring GSA Southeastern
              Section meeting.  Participants will gain experience in detailed geologic
              mapping experience of a metamorphic terrane, digital map and data compilation,
              geophysical data collection and interpretation, geochemical analysis
              techniques, and in carrying a scientific investigation from initiation to
              fruition.

