Title       : Calcium and Phosphate Regulation in Avian Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1993  
File        : a9117779

Award Number: 9117779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy B. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the first half of development, all calcium utilized by the              
              chick embryo is derived from yolk.  At mid-incubation, the                     
              chorioallantoic membrane grows out and comes in contact with the               
              shell membrane; thereafter it functions in mobilizing calcium from             
              the shell.  Excess calcium resorbed from the shell that is not                 
              utilized by the chick embryo is deposited in the yolk. Thus while              
              the chorioallantoic membrane transports calcium in one direction               
              (from shell to embryo), the yolk sac membrane is apparently able               
              to transport calcium both into and out of the yolk, by mechanisms              
              that are not well understood.  Chick embryos can be raised in                  
              shell-less culture, in which the only source of calcium is the                 
              yolk.  After about mid-incubation, shell-less embryos deplete their            
              supply of calcium from the yolk.  These embryos have low blood                 
              calcium values, poorly mineralized bones and fail to hatch.  Shell-            
              less embryos provided an excellent system for study of yolk sac                
              membrane calcium transport, since their supply of shell calcium is             
              absent.  In these embryos, all calcium transport of calcium across             
              the yolk sac membrane is from yolk to embryo.  The transport of                
              calcium across the yolk sac membrane and chorioallantoic membranes             
              will be measured in normal and shell-less cultured embryos.  The               
              effects of inhibitors and various calcium-regulating hormones on               
              these transport processes will be investigated.                                
                                                                                             
              Another possible site of calcium regulation in the chick embryo is             
              the kidney.  There is almost nothing known about the function of               
              the kidney during development in vertebrate embryos. Birds offer               
              easy access to such studies, since the embryo is separate from the             
              mother.  The function of the kidney is filtering, reabsorbing and              
              excreting various ions will be studied at several developmental                
              ages in normal and shell-less chick embryos. Additionally kidney               
              function will be studied in embryos treated with several calcium-              
              regulating hormones. //
