Title       : RUI: Energetics and Biomechanics of Formation Swimming in Ducklings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1991  
File        : a9117274

Award Number: 9117274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank E. Fish ffish@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                A number of animal species are known to travel in organized                  
              formations, such as fish schools and the V-shaped formations of                
              migrating geese.  It is believed that moving in such formation may             
              allow energy conservation during swimming or flying.  This would               
              benefit individual animals in the group by allowing them to travel             
              at higher speeds or over longer distances than if they traveled                
              alone.   A similar situation is observed for human cyclists or race            
              cars which use a technique called "drafting" to increase fuel                  
              economy and overall speed.  Past attempts to measure such benefits             
              for animal formations have met with limited success, because the               
              size and complexity of animal formations has prevented researchers             
              from directly measuring any energy economy derived from formation              
              travel.                                                                        
                This project will attempt to measure energy economy by formation             
              swimming in mallard ducklings.  The advantages of studying                     
              ducklings are that ducklings swim in a simple, straight line                   
              formation, and the formation is small enough to be easily studied              
              in the laboratory.  Groups of imprinted ducklings will be trained              
              to swim at various speeds in a water channel while following a                 
              decoy.  Comparisons of energy expenditure per animal will be made              
              by manipulating group size, presence or absence of decoy, and age              
              of ducklings.  The metabolic rate, measured from oxygen                        
              consumption, will indicate any energy economy by swimming in                   
              formation.  Simultaneously, video recordings will be made to detail            
              the paddling motions of the ducklings.  Analysis of these motions              
              can be used with a hydrodynamic model to compute the energy                    
              expended during swimming and to determine if particular positions              
              in a formation provide energy economy.  In addition, experiments               
              will be conducted in which a dye injected into the water around the            
              ducklings will show the pattern of water flow. This can provide                
              insight into the physical causes for increased energy economy.                 
              The results of this study will provide empirical data as to the                
              extent of energy that can be saved as animals move in formation.
