Title       : Studying Scale Invariance in Remotely Sensed Rainfall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1992     
File        : a9117866

Award Number: 9117866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efi Foufoula-Georgiou efi@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                   Rainfall is produced by atmospheric processes which are highly            
              nonlinear and operate and interact at a wide range of scales.  One             
              of the main challenges to hydrologists, meteorologists and                     
              climatologists is to measure, model and predict the nature of the              
              extreme variability exhibited by rainfall at different scales.                 
              Recent research has indicated the exciting possibility that                    
              rainfall may exhibit scaling/multiscaling characteristics, i.e.,               
              small scale fluctuations are statistically similar to large scale              
              fluctuations except for one or more factors related to scale.  The             
              presence of such a hidden structure in the highly irregular                    
              patterns of rainfall at different scales will improve our                      
              understanding of the rainfall process and will significantly                   
              influence our approach to rainfall modeling, measurement and                   
              prediction.  The goal of the proposed research is to develop a new             
              theoretical framework for identifying and studying the presence of             
              scale invariant relationships in remotely sensed rainfall.  Our                
              approach, based on multiresolution wavelet analysis, is different              
              from contemporary approaches.  It is more general and has the major            
              advantage of being able to handle non-stationarity/inhomogeneity               
              and anisotropy efficiently, all of which are important                         
              characteristics of space-time rainfall fields.  Preliminary                    
              implementation of our approach to spatial rainfall has given very              
              promising results and has pointed out new directions for data                  
              analysis which have the potential of unraveling simple structures              
              from the complex non-homogenous anisotropic spatial rainfall                   
              fields.  Also, as part of this research, the possibility of using              
              scaling concepts for subgrid scale parametrization and resolution-             
              independent rainfall estimation, will be explored.
