Title       : Acquisition of an Elemental Analyzer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1991   
File        : a9117056

Award Number: 9117056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyriacos C. Nicolaou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scripps Clinic & Res Fdn
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92037    /   -

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program                 
              will help the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation acquire an                
              Elemental Analyzer.  This instrument will provide fundamental                  
              analytical support for researchers in the Department of Chemistry              
              including synthetic, bioorganic and analytical chemists involved               
              in research projects that include: synthesis of complex natural                
              products, design and synthesis of complex organic and                          
              organometallic compounds, catalytic antibodies, design and                     
              synthesis of enzyme inhibitors, synthesis of peptides,                         
              oligonucleotides and their analogs, isolation of enzymes,                      
              modification of natural enzymes, synthesis of artifical enzymes,               
              and the development of new synthetic technology.  Departments at               
              Scripps (Immunology, Molecular and Experimental Medicine,                      
              Molecular Biology and Neuropharmacology) and outside of Scripps                
              will also have access to this facility through an already                      
              established mass spectrometry user facility.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Elemental analysis combined with mass spectrometry, nuclear                    
              magnetic resonance and x-ray crystallography can provide                       
              sufficient information to allow for the unequivocal determination              
              of molecular structure.  The distinctive characteristics of this               
              technology include its ability to provide unambiguous                          
              compositional data consistently and quickly for virtually all of               
              the numerous classes of organic materials, independent of the                  
              physical characteristics of a sample (i.e., crystal size and the               
              stability of the molecular ion).  In addition, elemental analysis              
              is the only method that can evaluate sample purity.  The unique                
              and fundamental information provided by elemental analysis                     
              facilitates research in the chemical and biological sciences.                  
              This is particularly true in structural, synthetic and bioorganic              
              chemistry.
