Title       : Lipid Transformations of Euchaeta antarctica, a Carnivorous Marine Copepod
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1992     
File        : a9117991

Award Number: 9117991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27387              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeannette D. Yen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research will address the ecology of an Antarctic predatory               
              copepod, Euchaeta antarctica, a biomass dominant and important                 
              macroplanktonic carnivore in Croker Passage, a deep basin off the              
              Antarctic peninsula.  Previous work has shown that size-selective              
              feeding on crustacean prey more than adequately covers respiratory             
              costs so excess dietary input could be stored by this large                    
              lipid-rich copepod.  With the onset of winter, feeding stops,                  
              respiration and excretion rates decline and oxygen/nitrogen ratio              
              increases, indicating  a shift from a protein and lipid based                  
              metabolism to a lipid-dominated metabolism, corroborating summer               
              feeding activity and winter reliance on lipids.  During winter,                
              nearly all females are reproductively mature, producing multiple               
              clutches of lipid-rich eggs from their maternal stores.  Early                 
              stages mature slowly so the first feeding stage appears in                     
              the plankton in synchrony with the active bloom in southern                    
              waters.  The extreme seasonality of food availability in this                  
              polar region enforces the separation of 2 processes:  feeding in               
              summer and reproduction in winter.  This project will complete the             
              lipid analyses, an essential component of this research.  Samples,             
              previously collected, permit an analysis of total lipid content,               
              lipid class composition and production rates by different copepodid            
              stages during three different seasons, and by different                        
              reproductive states of the adult female in the winter.  This work              
              will allow for an evaluation of whether the stored reserves are                
              sufficient to provide energy to support winter metabolic rates and             
              reproductive demands and will provide an understanding of the                  
              linkage between lipid content/composition and life history                     
              strategies.
