Title       : A Comparative Study of U.S. and Japanese Government R&D Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9117126

Award Number: 9117126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17806              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria C. Papadakis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Bozeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 5921,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a collaborative research project between               
              Maria Papadakis and Barry Bozeman of the Technology and                        
              Information Policy Program, Syracuse University, and Yukihiro                  
              Hirano, Director of the 1st Policy-Oriented Research Group,                    
              National Institute of Science and Technology Policy (NISTEP),                  
              Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, Japan.  The project is the               
              third stage of a multi-year project comparing the government R&D               
              laboratory systems of the United States and Japan.  The objective is           
              to provide detailed data and information on the characteristics of             
              the U.S. and Japanese government R&D laboratories with respect                 
              to their structure, outputs, research agendas and dynamics, inter-             
              organizational relationships, and technology transfer among                    
              laboratories.  It is expected that this research will provide practical,       
              policy-relevant information on these two government R&D systems                
              as well as pre-theoretic models on the role of government-                     
              performed R&D in national innovation systems.                                  
                                                                                             
              The first stage of the project, a study of U.S. R&D labs, has been             
              completed.  The second stage, which involves administering                     
              detailed questionnaires to Japanese laboratory personnel, is in                
              progress.  The third stage, which will begin with this award,                  
              involves in-depth semi-structured interviews of laboratory personnel           
              and rigorous analytical comparison (statistical and qualitative) of            
              the U.S. and Japanese responses.  The investigators will publish               
              their results for widespread dissemination.
