Title       : Drosophila Molecular Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9117222

Award Number: 9117222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taber D. Allison                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $468000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Langley chlangley@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   The three experiments to be conducted address basic                       
              questions about the forces that shape genetic variation in                     
              populations.  Drosophila is the model organism because it is will              
              studied and highly suitable for molecular approaches.  Recent                  
              work has revealed that there is remarkably little molecular                    
              polymorphism in regions of the genome that have relatively little              
              genetics recombination.  The most promising theory to account for              
              this is that favorable mutants occasionally move through the                   
              population, removing polymorphisms in a large region that lacks                
              recombination.  The proposed experiments attempt to test some of               
              the quantitative predictions of this theory.  Another experiment               
              investigates whether polymorphism is a "process pseudogene."                   
              Since this type of gene is thought to have no function, the study              
              of such a gene will give important baseline data on a part of the              
              genome that is "free" from the force of natural selection.  The                
              third experiment is designed to test a prediction of a  theory                 
              that accounts for the containment of copy numbers of transposable              
              elements (DNA parasites) in natural populations.  This theory and              
              the observed distributions of transposable elements predicts that              
              there will be high levels of unequal crossing over near the tips               
              of the X chromosome in Drosophila.  The proposed experiments will              
              directly measure the frequency of unequal (ectopic) exchange in                
              this region of the genome.  The results from these experiments                 
              should advance our theoretical understanding of the impact of                  
              various recombinational and mutational processes on standing                   
              variation.  This theoretical area of knowledge is often the                    
              foundation for the interpretation of practically important and/or              
              theoretically interesting genetic variation in humans and other                
              organisms of economic or basic interest.
