Title       : Paleontological Society Trace Fossil Short Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1992   
File        : a9117492

Award Number: 9117492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. Maples   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The main objective of Paleontological Society Short Courses               
              is to provide up-to-date summaries of the "state of the art" of                
              selected paleontological topics especially for the use and                     
              dissemination by those teaching paleontological topics at the                  
              university level.  Additional, these short courses provide timely              
              summaries for all paleontologists in areas that are peripheral to              
              their main areas of interest.                                                  
                   Within this overall purpose, this short course will focus on              
              an, until now, largely overlooked aspects of trace fossils, namely             
              the biological significance and meaning of traces.  Individuals                
              invited to contribute to this short course are well known for their            
              sedimentological studies of trace fossils hey are also extremely               
              competent to address the biological components and this has been               
              clearly conveyed in the invitations and subsequent discussions we              
              have had with them.  They have all strongly endorsed our approach              
              and will emphasize what is known about the biological aspects of               
              their topic (see enclosed course outline).                                     
                   Our approach to the trace fossil short course will diverge                
              somewhat from the format used in so many of the past short courses.            
                                                                                             
              In addition to the talks and short course notes, we will conduct               
              a field trip in the Cincinnati area in order to demonstrate methods            
              of applying trace fossil information to paleoecological                        
              interpretations of ancient rocks.  In addition, we have arranged               
              for Mark A. Wilson (College of Wooster, Wooster, Ohio) to conduct              
              a one-day course in paleobiology of marine hard substrates.
