Title       : Genetic and Biochemical Factors in Urease Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1993      
File        : a9117678

Award Number: 9117678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69586              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Polacco PolaccoJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The urease isozymes of soybean are relatively well-characterized               
              genetically, biochemically and at the molecular level.  From                   
              previous work, several promising areas for advancing our                       
              understanding of plant biology have emerged, and they have lead to             
              three hypotheses which form the bases of our reserch plan.                     
              Accessory genes Eu2 and Eu3, which are necessary for the maturation            
              of the soybean urease apoenzymes, and involved in plant (and                   
              commensal bacterial) nickel metabolism.  We aim to clone these                 
              genes and to characterize their products with a goal of                        
              understanding metal utilization in plants and an aspect of plant-              
              microbe interaction.  The central physiological role of urease in              
              plants is in the mobilization and turnover of stored protein                   
              reserves which occurs during seed germination.  We will test                   
              germination signals on urease expression and will thus also address            
              the paradox of the tissue-ubiquitous distribution of urease and its            
              apparent non-essentiality.  The seed urease-null mutation, eu1-sun,            
              is caused by a movable genetic element in soybean.  While genetic              
              data suggest that this is so wel will work at the molecular level              
              to confirm this hypothesis.  Goals are two-fold; to elucidate the              
              molecular basis of the mutation, and to isolate a mobile DNA                   
              element for soybean.
