Title       : Dynamics and Structure of Arabinogalactan-Proteins at the Plasma Membrane-Cell
               Wall Interface in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1994   
File        : a9117747

Award Number: 9117747
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Nothnagel nothnagl@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The abundance of arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) and other                   
              glycoconjugates at the interface between the plasma membrane and               
              the cell wall of rose cells suggests that these molecules serve as             
              mediating agents between the surfaces of these two distinct                    
              structures.  This hypothesis will be tested on whole cells and                 
              model systems by analyzing the effect of perturbations of AGPs on              
              both lateral diffusion of plasma membrane components and on linear             
              motion between the plasma membrane and cell wall.  Characteristics             
              of these types of motions will be determined as a function of                  
              turgor or applied pressure.  Perturbations of AGPs will include                
              aggregation, enzymatic cleavage, and altered synthesis.  Such                  
              characterization will provide further information on the effects               
              of both turgor and AGPs on membrane dynamics.  Enzymes capable of              
              cleaving plasma membrane AGPs on live protoplasts will be further              
              purified and their mode of action elucidated.  Analysis of the                 
              biochemical structure of plasma membrane AGPs and molecules that               
              copurify with plasma membrane AGPs during isolation will also be               
              conducted.  Structural analysis of plasma membrane AGPs will                   
              include determination of glycosyl linkage composition, predominant             
              anomeric configurations, and amino terminal sequence. The                      
              biochemical studies will provide important information towards                 
              understanding the role of AGPs as mediating agents or/and as                   
              specific recognition molecules during development.                             
                                                                                             
              The cell walls of plants are complex extracellular matrix                      
              structures containing protein and polysaccharide components, the               
              detailed organization of which is largely unknown.  As a result of             
              the cellular high water pressure state known as turgor, the plasma             
              membrane must be tightly appressed to the wall by about 7                      
              atmospheres of pressure.  However, the components of the membrane              
              must be free to undergo rapid lateral diffusion, even while                    
              appressed against the wall.  This is particularly true during cell             
              growth.  A number of protein-linked glycoconjugates have been found            
              in the plasma membrane, the carbohydrate portion of which is                   
              external to the cell and extends between the membrane and the wall.            
              Some of these are analogous to proteoglycans of animal cell                    
              membranes.  The functions of these are totally unknown.  This                  
              project will explore functional and structural aspects of one group            
              of these glycoconjugates, the arabinogalactans, with the hypothesis            
              in mind that the arabinogalactans may serve as physical mediators              
              or cushions between the membrane and the wall of plant cells.
