Title       : US-Hungary Joint Fund Physics Research on Two-Electron Processes Involving
               Continuous States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9117501

Award Number: 9117501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : July 15,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Denes Berenyi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute of Nuclear Rsch
	      
	      Swierk, PL  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5965      U. S. - HUNGARY JOINT FUND
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Hungary research project                      
              under the Hungary Joint Fund between Dr. Denes Berenyi,                        
              Institute of Nuclear Research of the Hungarian Academy of                      
              Science, and Dr. John Tanis, Western Michigan University,                      
              is to investigate fundamental two-electron processes in                        
              ion-atom collisions.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Two-electron processes involving continuum states can play                     
              an important role in the dynamics of ion-atom collisions,                      
              and, therefore, provide insight into the few-body problem.                     
              This project will work to determine the mechanisms                             
              responsible for continuum-electron emission and to                             
              evaluate the role which the electron-electron interaction                      
              plays in giving rise to continuum electrons.  Studies will                     
              be conducted for several ions colliding with neutral gas                       
              targets over an energy range from a few keV/u to several                       
              MeV/u.  Individual processes will be isolated and                              
              investigated using coincidence techniques in which                             
              continuum electrons are recorded in coincidence with                           
              projectile ions emerging from the interaction region in                        
              specific charge states.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project in nuclear energy fulfills the program                            
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                        
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to                     
              combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas                      
              of strong mutual interest and competence.
