Title       : U.S.-Singapore Cooperative Research on Local Buckling of Stiffened Plates in
               Offshore Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9117062

Award Number: 9117062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19016              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Arockiasamy rocky@transquest.ed.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 5927      EAST ASIA, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1442,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to permit Dr. M. Arockiasamy,                        
              Department of Ocean Engineering, Florida Atlantic                              
              University, to pursue with Dr. N. E. Shanmugam,                                
              Department of Civil Engineering, National University of                        
              Singapore, for a period of 24 months, research on the                          
              behavior of stiffened steel plates subjected to the                            
              combined action of in-plane and lateral loading in                             
              offshore structures.  Simplified methods will be                               
              developed for predicting the behavior of ultimate load                         
              carrying capacity of stiffened plates supported in the                         
              longitudinal direction or both in the longitudinal and                         
              transverse directions.  Orthotropic plates will be                             
              analyzed using the energy method with an approximate                           
              deflection function.  The effects of parameters such as                        
              plate width to thickness ratio, flexural and torsional                         
              properties of stiffeners, aspect ratio of stiffened                            
              plates, and the relative magnitudes of lateral and in-                         
              plane load on the behavior of stiffened plates also                            
              will be studied.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The proposed analytical and experimental investigations                        
              will lead to a greater understanding of the behavior of                        
              stiffened plates under various load conditions and will                        
              contribute to the formulation of improved design                               
              recommendations for offshore structures.  These                                
              recommendations, based on experimental and analytical                          
              work, will replace the empirical formulae currently                            
              being used for stiffened plates commonly adopted in                            
              ship and offshore structures.  This project will                               
              provide for the PI access to ongoing research at the                           
              National University of Singapore, where the                                    
              experimental research will be done.  Both collaborators                        
              will be engaged in the analytical investigations which                         
              will be carried out at Florida Atlantic University.                            
              The collaborators are highly respected engineers who                           
              have published extensively in the field of the                                 
              research.  The present project will allow them to                              
              combine their talents and the resources of their                               
              respective laboratories in cooperative research on a                           
              problem of mutual interest and potential benefit to the                        
              United States and Singapore.  This project is relevant                         
              to the objectives of the Science in Developing                                 
              Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of                         
              cooperation between U.S. and developing country                                
              scientists and engineers through the exchange of                               
              scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques                          
              and through collaboration on problems of mutual                                
              benefit.
