Title       : U.S.-Japan Seminar: Implications of Contemporary BehavorialResearch on Language
               Pragmatics & Derived Stimulus RelationsJuly 1992: Yamanishi, Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1992       
File        : a9117055

Award Number: 9117055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hayes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda J. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 1130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support the participation of eight U.S. scientists in          
              a U.S.-Japan Seminar on Implications of Contemporary Behavioral                
              Research on Language Pragmatics and Derived Stimulus Relations.                
              The co-organizers of the seminar, which will be held July 13-18,               
              1992 in Yamanishi, Japan, are Professors Steven Hayes and Linda                
              Hayes, both of the Department of Psychology, University of                     
              Nevada, and Professor Masaya Sato, Department of Psychology,                   
              Keio University, Tokyo.  Researchers in both the United States and             
              Japan have made major contributions to the growing literature on               
              the impact of these research developments on behavioral                        
              approaches to the analysis of complex human behavior more                      
              generally.  This U.S.-Japan seminar will be the first conference to            
              examine the topic.  Participants will consider the implications of             
              these new research findings for the analysis of such topics as                 
              problem solving, reasoning, choice, self-control, lying,                       
              superstition, and imagining.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Japanese psychological scientists have long had a particular interest          
              in complex human behavior, and they are especially sensitive to the            
              theoretical implications of these research developments.  There is,            
              in addition, a great deal of innovative work on artificial language in         
              primates going on at the Institute of Primate Research at Kyoto                
              University.  This work bears on the distinction between human and              
              animal language of considerable interest to U.S. researchers.                  
              Conversely, much of the basic behavioral research literature is                
              published by researchers in the United States.  By bringing together           
              notable researchers from both countries, the seminar should                    
              encourage better coordinated efforts and collaborative research.
