Title       : Computer Simulation of Fluids, U.S.-Pakistan Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1992     
File        : a9117025

Award Number: 9117025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sohail Murad murad@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5943,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description: This project supports participation by Dr. A. Saeed               
              of the Government College, Lahore, Pakistan, and Dr. S. Murad of               
              the University of Illinois at Chicago in a research project                    
              dealing with the method of nonequilibrium molecular dynamics                   
              (NEMD).  The research at U. Illinois involves the use of NEMD                  
              simulation methods to evaluate and develop techniques for                      
              predicting transport properties, including viscosity and thermal               
              conductivity, of dense fluid mixtures.  At the Government College              
              it will involve the use of the same methods for study of the                   
              structure of solids.  Dr. Saeed will spend several weeks each                  
              summer during the next two years to acquire sufficient experience              
              with NEMD techniques to develop the research at his home                       
              institute in Lahore.  Dr. Murad will travel to Lahore to work on               
              the research plan, to give seminars at the three main                          
              universities in that city, and to participate in a one-week                    
              workshop on computer simulation techniques.                                    
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project addresses an area of science which is                     
              gaining increased importance by utilizing high speed computers                 
              for simulating complex engineering and scientific problems.  The               
              area is particularly suitable for developing countries where the               
              cost of sophisticated experimental equipment is often                          
              prohibitive, and the use of computer simulation is an attractive               
              alternative.  The project fits the Science in developing Program               
              well by allowing for the training of a scientist from Pakistan                 
              and to have him participate in research in the U.S.
