Title       : Barnacle Adhesion and Adhesives: Biomechanical, Molecular and Cellular Aspects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9117220

Award Number: 9117220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Dougherty   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Draughn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1148,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The value and applications of adhesives are almost limitless in                
              daily human existence. The bioadhesives synthesized and secreted               
              by barnacles, unlike most man-made adhesives, forms bonds under                
              water. This characteristic may prove useful in dental, medical,                
              mariculture, building and construction, and other industrial                   
              applications. We have collected samples of an adhesive secretion               
              from local barnacles held in sea water culture in our laboratory.              
              The application of both standard and innovative adhesion tests will            
              advance our knowledge of the mechanical and chemical interactions              
              that occur at the interface of various substrates and this adhesive            
              secretion under water. Electrophoretic and chromatographic                     
              components of the barnacle adhesive secretion that exhibit adhesive            
              properties. Microscopic studies of barnacles will pinpoint the                 
              cells that synthesize and secrete adhesive macromolecules.                     
                                                                                             
              Isolation and purification of the macromolecules will allow                    
              additional studies and applications of these important materials.              
              In the future, it is reasonable to expect that genetic engineering             
              methods will produce synthetic barnacle bioadhesives in sufficient             
              quantities to satisfy dental, medical, household, and industrial               
              needs. Moreover, after determining the chemical basis of adhesion              
              of barnacle "glue", could be synthesized. The incorporation of such            
              anti-adhesives into marine surface coatings could minimize                     
              environmental pollution and the economic impact of barnacles on the            
              boaters, shippers, and navies of the world.
