Title       : Isoenzymes of Soybean Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9117837

Award Number: 9117837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans J. Bohnert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice C. Harmon harmon@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Calcium-dependent protein kinase from soybean is the prototype for             
              a new class of protein kinases having regulatory domains that are              
              similar to calmodulin.  The biochemical properties of this enzyme              
              indicate that it plays a role in signal transduction pathways                  
              employing calcium as a second messenger.  Recent evidence suggests             
              that several isoenzymes of CDPK are present in soybean.  Supporting            
              this conclusion is the observation that the sequences of two cDNAs             
              encoding soybean CDPK are approximately 70% identical.  Isoenzymes             
              having differing sensitivities to calcium, substrate specificities,            
              and tissue distributions could provide the basis for differences               
              in cellular responses to calcium.  The objective of the proposed               
              research is to identify and characterize isoenzymes of CDPK.  The              
              techniques of molecular biology, biochemistry, and immunology will             
              be used to study the structure, function, regulation, and                      
              distribution of the CDPK isoenzymes.  The cDNAs encoding the                   
              isoenzymes will be identified and expressed in Escherechia coli.               
              The expressed isoenzymes will be purified and biochemically                    
              characterized.  Antibodies that recognize specific isoenzymes will             
              be made.  Antibodies and cDNA probes will be used to determine the             
              distribution of the isoenzymes in the plant.  In addition the                  
              function and interaction of the catalytic and regulatory domains               
              of CDPK will be studied through the expression in E. coli and                  
              subsequent characterization of the individual functional domains.
