Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Biological Response Associated with Mesoscale
               Hydrodynamical Structures in the Western Mediterranean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1994     
File        : a9117150

Award Number: 9117150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tommy D. Dickey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1670,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports cooperative research between T.D.                 
              Dickey of the University of Southern California and Isabelle                   
              Taupier-LeTage of the Center for Oceanography in Marseille,                    
              France.  The investigators will study biological responses                     
              associated with the mesoscale hydrodynamical features in the                   
              western Mediterranean Sea.  The objectives of their research are to            
              develop two types of moored, interdisciplinary instrumentation,                
              which will be utilized in studies of western Mediterranean                     
              mesoscale features, and to initiate joint field measurements.  Dr.             
              Dickey and his research group bring to the collaboration innovative            
              approaches to moored instrumentation development and its                       
              application to multidisciplinary questions in oceanography.  They              
              have considerable expertise in the collection, analysis and modeling           
              of bio-optical and physical data sets.  This is complemented by the            
              French group's experience with physical and biological                         
              measurements and theory relevant to the western Mediterranean                  
              Sea.                                                                           
                                                                                             
              Recent advances in interdisciplinary oceanic measurement systems               
              now make it possible to collect physical and bio-optical data                  
              concurrently.  Problems concerning the physical and biological                 
              processes, the carbon cycle, and global climate change  require                
              simultaneous and complementary moored measurements, ground                     
              truth and remote sensing observations.  The further development of             
              sensitive and accurate moored instrumentation will advance                     
              capabilities to collect information about these processes.
