Title       : Late Paleozoic (Stephanian) Terrestrial Floras in Offshore Marine Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9117700

Award Number: 9117700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Royal H. Mapes mapes@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene K. Mapes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Late Carboniferous (Stephanian B-C) collections at Ohio                   
              University include over 7,000 three-dimensional, cellularly                    
              preserved plant fossils from North American midcontinent                       
              cyclothems.  This is the best preserved and most stratigraphically             
              complete collection of Stephanian plant fossils in the world.  The             
              plants from each cyclothem are preserved in offshore marine shales             
              and constitute an assemblage from a diverse suite of terrestrial               
              environments.  Systematic analysis using thin sectioning, peel                 
              techniques and scanning electron microscopy to document the                    
              cellular features will determine which Stephanian plant groups are             
              present and identify new taxa.                                                 
                   Typically, very few offshore marine units contain well                    
              preserved terrestrial plant debris.  The taphonomic constraints                
              influencing preservation of these Stephanian plants deposited in               
              cyclothem beds of middle to outer shelf offshore marine                        
              environments have not been fully determined.  Marine organism                  
              interaction with the transported plant debris and an understanding             
              of the depositional conditions will resolve the taphonomic pathways            
              involved.                                                                      
                   This combined research on plant systematics and marine                    
              taphonomic constraints is significant because it allows the first              
              extensive documentation and analysis of terrestrial floras in the              
              offshore marine environment.  This data base will allow detailed               
              comparison with rare Stephanian floral communities from coal swamps            
              and the drier  upland environments.
