Title       : Ultrastructure of the Extracellular Matrix During Early Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1994      
File        : a9117509

Award Number: 9117509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185755             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Chandler dchandler@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Animal eggs and embryos from a variety of organisms including                  
              mammals, amphibians and echinoderms exhibit extracellular                      
              matrices which play and important role in early development. In                
              the sea urchin, sperm first contact a layer of egg jelly, which                
              contains fucose sulfate-rich glycoconjugates (FSG) that induce                 
              the acrosome reaction. Acrosome reacted sperm proceed to bind to               
              receptors in the vitelline layer (VL), an extracellular coat, and              
              then fuse with the egg plasma membrane. Sperm fusion elicits                   
              cortical granule exocytosis which releases enzymes and structural              
              proteins that modify the VL to produce a chemically toughened                  
              fertilization envelope (FE). Exocytosis also results in                        
              polymerization of hyalin forming an extracellular coat                         
              responsible for adhesion of blastomeres in the early embryo.                   
              Finally, in a later secretory process the blastula secretes a                  
              basal lamina which lies at the interface between the blastocoel                
              and embryonic epithelium. In this proposal Dr. Chandler aims to                
              study the structure of egg jelly, its interaction with sperm, and              
              the conversion of the VL to the FE. To accomplish this he will                 
              prepare high resolution platinum replicas of eggs that have been               
              quick frozen at functionally distinct stages of early                          
              development, then freeze-fractured and deep etched. His aims are               
              1) to visualize by SEM and TEM of platinum replicas the structure              
              of whole egg jelly, 2) to fractionate egg jelly into constituent               
              glycoconjugates and to determine by rotary-shadowing the                       
              architecture of egg jelly macromolecules, 3) to localize FSG                   
              within whole egg jelly by immunocytochemistry, and 4) to                       
              characterize two assembly domains within the fertilization                     
              envelope as to their different complements of assembly enzymes                 
              and substrates. In addition, he intends to study the                           
              ultrastructure of the hyalin-based matrix at the apical surface                
              and of the basal lamina at the basal surface of the blastular                  
              epithelium in regards to 1) secretion and assembly during normal               
              development as well as during reassociation of dissociated                     
              embryonic cells, and 2) immunocytochemical localization of                     
              vertebrate-like extracellular matrix proteins.
