Title       : Electronic Structure of Condensed Matter on the CM-5
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1993  
File        : a9117822

Award Number: 9117822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $655000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ceperley ceperley@.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 0000,9162,9216,9218,9256,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Electronic Structure of Condensed Matter - The proposed research is            
              aimed at the development of computational methods for studying                 
              electronic states in condensed matter and the use of those methods             
              to study the electronic properties of solids and liquids.  The                 
              primary techniques to be used are quantum Monte Carlo and density-             
              functional theory.  Two primary improvements for QMC are                       
              contemplated: finding accurate and efficient representations for               
              the many-electron wave function and development of pseudopotentials            
              suitable for elimination of the effects of core electrons.  Such               
              improved QMC techniques can be used to provide an improved                     
              exchange-correlation energy for DFT which would include the effects            
              of structural inhomogeneity.  These improved DFT methods can then              
              be directly compared to the QMC results for tests of accuracy.                 
              When the new DFT methods are tested, they can be used to generate              
              trial functions to make QMC analysis more efficient.  This coupling            
              between different computational approaches is seen as central to               
              the proposed research.  The potential benefit of using massively-              
              parallel computers on this class of problems will also be                      
              investigated.  Concurrent with their development, these techniques             
              will be applied to the study of a wide range of condensed systems,             
              ranging from jellium to highly correlated materials                            
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed research is part of a long-term effort to understand              
              and to predict the properties of real-world materials.  They                   
              propose to develop complementary computational methods for                     
              determining the electronic structure (and hence the physical                   
              properties) of a wide range of solids and liquids.  The emphasis is            
              to refine and simplify existing techniques, so that the resulting              
              methods are practical for use on complex materials.  This research             
              will include development and evaluation of algorithms for massively            
              parallel computers.  As improved computational techniques are                  
              developed, they will be applied to problems with direct connections            
              to experimental physics and materials science - both to test the               
              methods and to understand and predict experimentally relevant                  
              properties.  Such materials as silicon, condensed states of                    
              hydrogen metal surfaces, and liquid and amorphous systems will be              
              studied.
