Title       : Effects of Compositional Differences on Early Diagenetic Pathways of Carbonate
               Biominerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9117905

Award Number: 9117905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Gaffey gaffem@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Gaffey  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed work will investigate the sequences, rates,                  
              timing, and environmental controls of diagenetic changes in two                
              types of mineral controlled alteration:  1.  Preneomorphic                     
              mineralogical and compositional changes in biogenic aragonites, 2.             
              The stabilization of biogenic high Mg calcites to low Mg calcites.             
              Materials for the work will be obtained from San Salvador Island,              
              the Bahamas, where Holocene and Pleistocene sediments of reef,                 
              shallow subtidal, tidal delta, lagoonal, beach and dune facies                 
              exist in close proximity to modern analogs occupied by the same                
              genera and species of organisms.  Prior and ongoing work by others             
              on the stratigraphy and depositional and diagenetic histories of               
              these sediments, and age dates determined by a variety of                      
              techniques, provide and excellent framework for the proposed study.            
              Tools (reflectance and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy) and            
              techniques are now available for non-destructive characterization              
              of H20-, OH- and organic-containing phase in skeletons.  Because               
              abundances of these unstable phases in skeletons are taxonomically             
              controlled, work will focus on a small number of important                     
              sediment-producing taxa.  Comparisons of modern skeletons with                 
              suites of fossil skeletal material of the same genera and species              
              whose ages and diagenetic histories are well-known, and whose                  
              mineralogy, chemical composition, and micro- and ultrastructure are            
              thoroughly characterized will clarify the roles of several                     
              important mineral and compositional phases in the early diagenetic             
              alteration carbonate skeletons.
