Title       : Dissertation Research: Protohistoric Faunal Exploitation in Western Brong-Ahafo
               Region, Ghana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1991   
File        : a9117306

Award Number: 9117306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8679               (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Black  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Ann Stahl, Mr. Andrew Black will                    
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will pursue                    
              combined ethnographic and archaeological research in the Brong-                
              Ahafo region of central Ghana.  The area is interesting because                
              it spans the transition from forest in the south to dry savannah               
              in the north and this ecotonal quality allows residents to                     
              exploit a wide range of resources.  Taken together                             
              archaeological, historic and ethnographic data allow the                       
              reconstruction of settlement and subsistence over a ca. 500 year               
              period.  Mr. Black will examine food utilization and the study                 
              will consist of two phases.  He will conduct four months of                    
              ethnographic and ethnoarchaeological research to learn how wild                
              and domestic animals are integrated into contemporary diet and                 
              how diets can be reconstructed from faunal remains.  Secondly, he              
              will analyze collections from at least three different                         
              archaeological sites which span the period from 1400 AD to 1930                
              AD.  The ethnographic data will be used to help interpret the                  
              archaeological material, serve as a basis for comparison, and                  
              help to model the essential components of prehistoric subsistence              
              patterns.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The late prehistory and history of this region is complicated                  
              because it witnessed the development of complex polities as well               
              as the imposition of a European colonial system.  Local groups                 
              relied not only on domestic animals which they raised, but also                
              on hunted and gathered wild resources.  Given the significant                  
              changes in social organization over this period, Mr. Black                     
              hypothesizes that subsistence practices changed as well and he                 
              wishes to understand how local residents changed their hunting                 
              and herding strategies to adapt.                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  While it has                  
              long been assumed that such Western African peoples have been                  
              solely dependent on domestic resources for hundreds of years,                  
              anthropological data suggests otherwise.  Understanding                        
              successful adaptations such as this may be useful in developing                
              strategies in this drought ridden and rapidly changing part of                 
              the world.  The project will also assist in the training of a                  
              very promising young scientist.
