Title       : CALCRUST NORTH: Tectonics of the California Coast Ranges in the San Francisco
               Bay Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1992       
File        : a9117994

Award Number: 9117994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas V. McEvilly tom@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This research program is an investigation of the present                  
              crustal tectonics and the evolution of the central California coast            
              ranges in the San Francisco Bay region, where the San Andreas fault            
              system splays eastward through a complex of successive bifurcations            
              into the Calaveras, Hayward and Greenville faults, a process                   
              readily visible in the seismicity maps of the area.  Competing                 
              hypotheses for crustal accommodation of the plate boundary motion              
              will be tested.  Evidence will be sought on the compelling modern              
              paradigm for the crustal dynamics of this system, in which upper               
              crustal blocks along with their bounding faults move eastward,                 
              above a mid-crustal decollement, creating the regional complex of              
              east- and west-vergent thrust faults, tectonic wedges and fold                 
              belts.  The proposed research is an integrated investigation of the            
              crust's third dimension eastward from San Francisco Bay to the                 
              western boundary of the Great Valley.  Modern seismological methods            
              and geological/geodetic constraints will be combined in the study.             
              Reflection seismic profiles, natural-event P- and S-wave                       
              tomography, ongoing geological studies of East Bay faults, and new             
              data on crustal deformation in the Bay Area will be interpreted                
              jointly within a common geometrical framework for the plate                    
              boundary in central California.  Reflection data are key to this               
              study, and a primary focus in this project.  160 km of high-                   
              quality industry "spec" data in the area are available for purchase            
              and can be reprocessed for deeper imaging.  The new BASIX (Bay Area            
              Seismic Imaging eXperiment) marine/land profile, shot in the Bay,              
              River and offshore waters with USGS support in September 1991,                 
              provides additional valuable coverage of the region, and the data              
              are in hand at Berkeley.
