Title       : RUI: Analysis of the Post-Paleozoic Replacement of Cyclostome by Cheilostome
               Bryozoans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1992   
File        : a9117289

Award Number: 9117289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80318              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank K. McKinney mckinneyfk@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   One of the conspicuous large-scale changes in the Mesozoic                
              marine fossil record is the decline of the stenolaemate order                  
              Cyclostomata and the rise of cheilostome bryozoans to the same                 
              approximate level of dominance in marine faunas that had previously            
              been occupied by stenolaemates.  Such large-scale turnovers between            
              taxonomically related and/or ecologically similar groups may be due            
              to competitive replacement, to accumulated "small-scale" chance                
              events that by happenstance favor one group over the other, or to              
              the destruction of the formerly dominant group during a mass                   
              extinction, followed by the radiation of the second into the                   
              vacated ecospace.                                                              
                   Timing of the cyclostome-cheilostome turnovers does not                   
              correspond with a major mass extinction.  Competitive interactions             
              between recent cyclostomes and cheilostomes favor cheilostomes,                
              suggesting that competitive replace is a viable hypothesis.  The               
              hypothesis will be tested through predictions of the effects of                
              competition between the two clades as seen in the Mesozoic to early            
              Cenozoic fossil record.  Implications of the study are much larger             
              than better insight into this one pattern.  If tests of the                    
              predictions support the predicted changes, this should provide                 
              strong evidence for the importance of organic interactions in                  
              determining macroevolutionary patterns.
