Title       : Fundamental Studies of Polymerization Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1994     
File        : a9117313

Award Number: 9117313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Harmon Ray ray@chewi.che.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Approximately 60 billion lbs/year of synthetic polymers are                    
              produced in the U.S., in a wide variety of polymerization                      
              reactors.  The ultimate use of the products from these reactors                
              ranges from synthetic clothing to latex paints.  Polymers are                  
              manufactured in batch, semibatch, and continuous reactors.                     
              Polymerization reaction engineering attempts to improve the                    
              production of polymers through innovations in process design and               
              control.  Three areas of importance include (1) a need to                      
              understand the dynamics of the reactors in which large heat                    
              release, high viscosity, and difficult heat removal contribute                 
              to difficulties in designing effective control mechanisms; (2)                 
              the development of continuous liquid and gas phase processes for               
              polyolefin (polyethylene, polypropylene, etc., - commodity                     
              polymers) production; and (3) developing new processes for                     
              polymers made by polycondensation (fibers and engineering                      
              plastics, for example are produced by this method).                            
                                                                                             
              The PI plans to continue experimental and theoretical research                 
              on batch, semibatch, and continuous polymerization reactors in                 
              order to develop an understanding of the chemical and physical                 
              phenomena occurring, and use this understanding to:                            
               (1) Devise improved reactor designs which provide better                      
                   control control of polymer properties and also minimize                   
                   difficult dynamics.  By quantitatively determining the                    
                   ranges of operating conditions and system parameters for                  
                   which oscillations and stability problems arise, design                   
                   procedures can be developed which satisfy the polymer                     
                   product specifications and have good economics but which                  
                   avoid those parameter combinations that lead to difficult                 
                   dynamic behavior.                                                         
               (2) Develop new types of on-line sensors for the reactor and                  
                   polymer particles which allow closer quality control of                   
                   the product and the combination of these new on-line                      
                   polymer property sensors with feedback strategies to                      
                   provide control schemes which lead to safe dynamic                        
                   operation and close control of product quality.                           
               (3) Devise new reactor designs for existing and emerging                      
                   classes of polymer products.
