Title       : Theoretical Investigation of Geochemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9117393

Award Number: 9117393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506699             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold C. Helgeson brogie@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   It has become increasingly apparent in recent years that                  
              understanding the organic/inorganic interface and the                          
              geobiochemical role of bacteria and clay minerals in sedimentary               
              basins is crucial to development of accurate, comprehensive models             
              of equilibrium and mass transfer in diagenetic processes.  A myriad            
              of reversible and irreversible reactions occur in these processes,             
              all of which are in principle amenable to thermodynamic analysis.              
              For example, thermodynamic calculations can be used together with              
              compositional data to identify stable and metastable equilibrium               
              states in diagenetic systems and assess kinetic constraints on                 
              reaction progress.  Calculations of this kind can be carried out               
              with the aid of equations of state developed in this laboratory                
              over the past several decades.  These equations make it possible               
              to investigate the chemical and thermodynamic consequences of                  
              reactions among a wide variety of minerals, gases and aqueous                  
              species at elevated temperatures and pressures.  The purpose of                
              this proposal is to request long-range support for continuation of             
              this research in the context of diagenetic processes with emphasis             
              on organic/inorganic reactions and those of geobiochemical                     
              interest.  The goals of the project over the next five years                   
              include comprehensive calculation of the thermodynamic properties              
              of organic liquids, solids, gases and aqueous species as a function            
              of temperature and pressure, investigation of the extent to which              
              metastable equilibrium prevails among organic molecules in                     
              petroleum, aqueous species in oil field brines, and authigenic                 
              mineral assemblages in hydrocarbon reservoirs and source rocks,                
              quantification of thermodynamic constraints on the role of bacteria            
              in diagenetic processes at elevated temperatures and pressures,                
              and calculation of mass transfer involving organic/inorganic                   
              reactions and clay minerals in sedimentary basins.
