Title       : TEM Studies of Weathering Reactions: The Importance of Mineral Structure,
               Microstructure and Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9117386

Award Number: 9117386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jillian F. Banfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Chemical weathering is of fundamental importance because it is the             
              process by which silicate minerals formed at high-temperatures and             
              pressures are converted to the constituents of sediments and soils.            
              Despite this, the structural and compositional controls on the                 
              mechanisms and rates of transformations of many reactions are still            
              poorly understood.  This proposal describes two research projects              
              designed to use high-resolution transmission electron microscopy               
              to investigate the microscopic characteristics of weathering                   
              reactions where significant structural exists between the parent               
              and product minerals.  The first of these involves hydration and               
              oxidation of amphibole-group minerals.  The second project focuses             
              on perovskite weathering, where hydrous minerals are not formed and            
              oxidation does not occur.                                                      
              The weathering reactions of a selection of microstructurally                   
              complex amphiboles with close to end-member compositions,                      
              intergrown and exsolved amphiboles, and amphiboles containing                  
              chain-width defects will be examined.  Intergrown amphiboles offer             
              the opportunity to compare weathering rates and mechanisms under               
              the same physiochemical conditions and to evaluate the degree to               
              which reactions are focused by coherency strain, defects, and grain            
              boundaries.  The Weathering of perovskite will also be examined.               
              Hydrothermal dissolution of perovskite, a possible component of                
              nuclear waste storage ceramics, has been studied extensively, but              
              the natural weathering reactions have been largely ignored.  The               
              chemically simple transformation to TiO2 minerals may involve                  
              considerable structural inheritance.  The aims these projects are              
              to clarify the crystal chemical details of the natural weathering              
              processes, thus enhancing our understanding of the mechanisms by               
              which these reactions occur.
