Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Feynman Diagrams in Topology and Non-Commutative Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9322519

Award Number: 9322519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maxim Kontsevich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9322519  Kontsevich       The project deals with interrelated subjects in
              differential  topology, homotopical algebra and perturbative methods of quantum
               field theory.  The central model is the quantum Chern-Simons  theory with
              various generalizations to higher-dimensional and  non-commutative settings. 
              The method of Feynman diagrams gives  new invariants of knots, manifolds and
              new cohomology classes of  classifying spaces of diffeomorphism groups.  A
              non-commutative  version of the Chern-Simons theory produces cohomology classes
              of  moduli spaces of complex algebraic curves.  It will be applied to 
              algebraic construction of Gromov-Witten invariants of symplectic  manifolds and
              to mirror symmetry.       The project applies a computational scheme developed 
              several decades ago in particle physics and thermodynamics  (Feynman diagrams)
              in various domains of modern mathematics.   Feynman graphs (visualized as
              spider webs) turn out to be a very  powerful tool which relates many abstract
              algebraic structures to  geometric and topological objects of different
              dimensions.  One  of the recent applications was a new series of knot
              invariants  (i.e. quantities distinguishing closed lines in the space without 
              self-intersections).  These new invariants are the first ones  which are really
              computable via fast working algorithms, and  they can be applicable in
              hydrodynamics and chemistry of long  molecules. In general, the project gives a
              unified view on  several parts of mathematics.  There are many strong evidences
               that it leads to an understanding of so called "mirror symmetry,"  one of the
              deepest discoveries of recent years in string theory,  which is a mathematical
              theory treating gravitation in a quantum  mechanical setting.  ***
