Title       : CRB: An Experimental Test of Minimum Viable Population Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1994     
File        : a9322576

Award Number: 9322576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary E. Belovsky belovsky@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9322576  Belovsky   In this Conservation and Restoration Biology research, the
              PI will examine Minimum Viable Population (MVP) concepts experimentally to
              evaluate quantitatively their validity and the precision of predictions from
              particular theoretical formulations. experimental studies will use laboratory
              populations of the Great Basin brine shrimp (Artemia franciscana) to examine
              MVP processes in a hierarchical design. First, the persistence of isolated
              populations will be examined with only demographic stochasticity operating and
              then with environmental stochasticity added. Second, metapopulation dynamics
              will be examined: 1) using a large number of constituent populations, whose
              dynamics are uncorrelated, providing migrants (deterministic dynamics), (2)
              then using a limited number of constituent populations, whose dynamics are
              uncorrelated, providing migrants (stochastic dynamics), and 3) finally using
              autocorrelation operating between the dynamics of the constituent populations.
              This simple experimental system permits comparison of the observed mean
              persistence times and their probability distributions with predictions from MVP
              models in the literature. Furthermore, Artemia occurs naturally in small
              hypersaline springs in the Great Basin. These simple ecosystems without
              competitors and predators for Artemia permit extrapolation of laboratory
              results to a natural system. If the laboratory observations agree with the MVP
              model predictions and the presence/absence of Artemia in these small habitats
              is in agreement with laboratory predictions, the validity of existing MVP
              formulations would be indicated, strengthening their value for conservation
              management.  %%%  The idea that there must be a minimum number of individuals
              in a population to ensure its persistence for a given time period with a given
              probability (Minimum Viable Population, MVP) is one of the cornerstone concepts
              of conservation biology and a major reason for Population Viability Analysis in
              conservation management and policy.  Existing examinations of MVP concepts have
              either relied on theoretical considerations or biogeographical correlations
              with few experimental tests. Furthermore, most of the concepts to validate MVP
              have been qualitative rather than quantitative. Validating MVP concepts in a
              quantitative fashion is critical if their use is to be justified in the
              contentious area of conservation management and policy, as well as in answering
              more basic scientific issues regarding the forces controlling biodiversity in
              nature.  ***
