Title       : Applications, Algorithms and Theory of Mathematical Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9322479

Award Number: 9322479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olvi Mangasarian olvi@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
               Highly promising mathematical programming techniques   applied to medical
              diagnosis and prognosis as well as to   machine  learning  in general. Five
              years of experience with a highly  accurate   system for breast  cancer
              diagnosis, in current use at  University of Wisconsin   Hospitals, is  drawn
              upon to develop  a linear-programming-based prognostic   system.  Parallel 
              algorithms for the solution of large-scale constrained    optimization problems
               are developed, by distributing  ingredients of the problem   (constraints, 
              gradients, or/and  variables) among parallel processors.    Each processor  
              has complete responsibility for varying its own problem   ingredients,  while 
              allowing the other ingredients to vary in a restricted    fashion.  The
              processors  share new information computed, then a  fast synchronization   is
              performed and  the process is repeated.  Preliminary algorithm prototypes  
              have been tested  successfully  with some high parallelization efficiency on  
              publicly available  test problems and significant real-world applications. 
              Error    bounds are  developed for possibly inconsistent systems of 
              inequalities,   programs and complementarity problems.  The novel idea here  
              is that the system  may be unsolvable, and the  bounds are meaningful whether
              the   system is  solvable or not.  In the latter case, it bounds the distance  
              between the  point  under consideration, and the set of least error   solutions
              of the  system.  New mathematical programming approaches to some machine   
              learning problems are  studied.  In particular a new quadratic  programming
              model   for a cascade  architecture in neural networks is being studied, as is 
               another one for the  inherently difficult  problem of minimizing the number of
                misclassified points  by a  separating plane.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
