Title       : Dissertation Research: Combining Physiological and Ecological Approaches to
               Decision and Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9322188

Award Number: 9322188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3853               (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Sih   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy C. Sparkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              A central goal in behavioral ecology is to understand factors that explain
              variations in mating  systems.  The role that ecological variation plays in
              structuring mating systems is poorly understood.  In Mr. Timothy Sparkes'
              doctoral-dissertation research, he will use a combination of physiological
              techniques and laboratory experiments to examine the role that ecological
              factors play in affecting mate-choice decisions.  The focal organism is a
              freshwater crustacean, Lirceus fontinalis.  Completed work has documented that
              variation in ecological factors (in particular, predation risk) among
              populations results in population-specific optima for life-history traits. 
              Population differences in life histories, in turn, influence the optima for
              other traits, e.g., mate choice.  The research will test hypotheses about the
              role that ecological variation plays in determining mate-choice decisions. 
              Overall, this research program should provide an usually complete synthesis on
              the effects of ecological factors on a suite of interrelated prey adaptations. 
                There are 3 components:  (A.)  Behavioral experiments to determine
              mate-choice criteria for individuals of  each sex.  (B.)  A combination of
              physiological and behavioral experiments to examine variation in mating
              behavior as a consequence of physiological state.  (C.)  A behavioral
              experiment to determine the role that predation plays in explaining variations
              in mate-choice decisions.
