Title       : CRB: Restoration & Preservation of Native Fish Populations: Use of Retrospective
               Data to Couple Life History, Recruit- ment, & Population Dynamics with
               Environmental Vicissitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9322618

Award Number: 9322618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315430             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Radtke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Kinzie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9322618  Radtke  A pressing problem for conservation and restoration of
              freshwater resources is the lack of sound biological and population
              information.  To approach this problem it is proposed to utilize amphidromous
              fishes (gobies and eleotrids) which are predominant elements of the freshwater
              fauna on tropical and subtropical oceanic islands worldwide.  Information
              gathered for one species will have implications for amphidromous fishes and
              freshwater habitats elsewhere.  The proposed research relates to such topics as
              island colonization, life cycles, reproduction cycles, amphidromy, and
              recruitment.  %%%  A plan of research is proposed which applies novel
              analytical techniques to evaluate the critical periods in the life history of
              fishes that may be affected by altercation, reduction or fragmentation of
              habitats.  Recruitment from a planktonic larval stage to a more sedentary adult
              stage is a common life-history pattern in many fishes and invertebrates. 
              Because of the disparate nature of environmental conditions in planktonic and
              benthic systems, the interplay of these two modes of existence strongly
              influences population structure of species with this life-history pattern; as
              well as communities in which such species are common.  It is essential to
              identify which life-history stages and environmental events are significant to
              recruitment into adult population.  %%%  Otolith techniques have the potential
              to provide such life-history information.  Both micro structure and chemical
              composition of otoliths will be investigated, to determine the causative agents
              involved in otolith formation.  It will then be possible to interpret past
              environmental histories of field-captured gobies.  Otolith increment analyses
              and elemental composition techniques will be applied to investigations of
              recruits, juveniles and adult fishes collected from their natural habitats. 
              Age, growth rate and environmental perturbations will be determined from
              otolith analyses.  Otolith analyses will provide a chronologic ally fixed
              history of each individual study.  Otolith techniques are particularly
              appropriate where large numbers of individuals can't be used.  Also it will be
              possible to use any specimens stored in alcohol, thus extending the technique
              to museum material.  These data sequences will be of great importance to the
              management of endangered species since specimens that are in existing
              collections could be examined to evaluate past life histories.  As a result,
              the proposed research will contribute to the development of effective
              strategies for the preservation and restoration of populations and thus
              biodiversity.
