Title       : Intelligent Structures Group Research Experiences for Undergraudates Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1995      
File        : a9322248

Award Number: 9322248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harry G. Hedges                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Thomas Miller t miller@unhh.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9218,9250,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9322248  Miller  A Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site is being
              formed by the Intelligent Structures Group based within the Department of
              Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of New Hampshire for a
              two year period starting in May, 1994. This REU site supports six students on a
              full-time basis during each summer and six students on a part-time basis during
              each academic year, allowing them to participate in research within the group. 
              Activities of the group include all system aspects from theoretical analysis to
              prototype hardware implementation and evaluation. Basic research is performed
              in the areas of distributed fault-tolerance, neural networks, synthetic vision,
              and learning systems in control and signal processing.    The organization of
              the Intelligent Structures Group provides a combination of structure and
              diversity to enhance the student experience. Group members often collaborate on
              research, and meet to discuss research objectives, organize workshops for
              industry, and to coordinate equipment proposals and acquisitions. Through such
              interaction, student participants become familiar with the research programs of
              a number of faculty and graduate students as well as general issues of research
              administration. The diversity of the group's research offers a wide range of
              projects from neural network based learning in robotics to machine vision to
              VLSI design and implementation. This diversity makes it possible to stimulate
              students with a broad spectrum of professional interests.    u     Miller  A
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site is being formed by the Intelligent
              Structure s Group based with                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          x  
              z                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     !           !           !           !   
                   !                G                                                        
                                       Times    Symbol  " Helvetica    Chicago    Times New
              Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New    Palatino    Arial Narrow    Book Antiqua   
              Bookman Old Style    Century Gothic    Monotype Corsiva    Monotype Sorts   
              Century Schoolbook    Wingdings    MT Extra                                 "  
                                  $   #                       #        me Tracey Zeigler     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
