Title       : Group Travel to International Geographical Union Meetings; Prague, August 1994
               and The Hague, August, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9322558

Award Number: 9322558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Abler rabler@aag.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9322558  ABLER       Because of dramatic changes in both human and natural 
              processes around the world, greater attention has focused on the  value of
              high-quality geographic research conducted by  researchers from different
              nations who maintain strong  communications networks and who frequently
              collaborate with each  other.  The International Geographical Union (IGU)
              brings  together geographers from 94 nations for a wide range of  purposes, the
              most important of which are (1) promotion and  coordination of research on
              geographic problems, (2) involvement  of geographers in the work of relevant
              international  organizations, and (3) facilitation of the collection and 
              diffusion of geographic data among scientists in different  nations.  The most
              important forums for the work of the IGU are  its regional conferences and
              international congresses, which  alternate every two years.  This award will
              provide group-travel  support to increase participation of American geographers
              at two  upcoming meetings of the IGU.  Twenty scholars will receive  awards to
              assist their travel to the regional conference to be  held in Prague, Czech
              Republic, in August 1994.  Twenty-five  American scholars will receive funds to
              assist facilitate their  participation in at the International Geographical
              Congress to be  held in The Hague, Netherlands, in August 1996.  Travel awards 
              will be made following review by a screening committee of  applications
              submitted in response to an open solicitation.  The  most important criterion
              to be used in evaluation of applications  is the scientific merit of the
              applicant's contribution to the  conference.  Emphasis also will be given to
              increasing  participation of American geographers who are at early stages of 
              their independent research careers.       This award will facilitate
              involvement of more American  geographers in two major meetings sponsored by
              the IGU.  As a  result of their participation, these scientists will conduct a 
              broader range of higher-quality research.  Some  will become  involved in
              collaborative research projects with leading foreign  scientists.  Greater
              participation will enable some Americans to  assume important leadership
              positions in the IGU and its  subsidiary committees.  By giving special
              emphasis to younger  scientists, these travel grants should also hasten the 
              involvement of productive young researchers in international  activities.  ***
