Title       : Atmosphere-Ocean Radiative Interactions in the Arctic: A Shipboard Measurement
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9322700

Award Number: 9322700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Lubin dlubin@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9322700  Lubin  Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
              Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
              sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs. 
              The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
              research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
              extensively studied.  The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
              collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
              on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994.  NSF-funded projects
              will focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies.  Data
              collected will be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic
              Ocean and will be highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the
              Arctic is an indicator of changing global climate conditions and how it affects
              the physical, chemical, and biological features of the more temperate oceans
              and regions.    This component of the program involves shortwave and longwave
              measurements of the surface flux and optical properties of clouds, haze, and
              the clear atmosphere in the Arctic.  The CalSpace FTIR spectroradiometer will
              be installed on the U.S. icebreaker to measure zenith emission spectra in the
              longwave.  These data will be used to compile a climatology of cloud
              emissivity, optical depth, and effective radius of droplet size distribution. 
              Shortwave measurements will be taken using a four-channel solar radiometer
              system.  A zenith sky camera will be included, along with a standard Eppley
              Pyranometer and Pyrgeometer for monitoring purposes along the ship track. 
              Satellite data from the NOAA Polar Orbiters and the Defense Meteorology
              Satellite Program will be recorded using the on board TereScan facilities such
              that Arctic radiative processes can be studies from "both sides" of the
              atmosphere.  This will allow for refining cloud detection and radiation budget
              algorithms.  These integrated measurements have direct  bearing on our
              understanding of how clouds affect the transfer of heat between the atmosphere
              and the Arctic, which in turn impact on our ability to understand and predict
              climate  variability.  ***
